S. P. LAW CLASSES
C R I M I N A L P S Y C H O L O G Y A N D

CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY
R E N O C O N T E N T S PAGE NO.

SYLABUS 2

MODULE 01 CRIME, CRIMINAL, CRIMINOLOGY 5

MODULE 02 PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIME 35
MODULE 03 PSYCHOMATRIC TEST-ITS USE IN

CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR MESUREMENT
OF CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR 60

MODULE 04 FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY-CONCEPT
AND IMPORTANCE 74

MODULE 05 SOCIOLOGICAL THEORIES CRIME
AND SOCIALSTRUCTURE 86

MODULE 06 SUBCTURAL THEORIES 96

MODULE 07 CRIME AND SOCIALPROCESS 100

QUESTION PAPER 119

Price - Rs. 140/-

-



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S .P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 2 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

LO 0507 Criminal Psychology and Criminal Sociology
Objectives of the Course: The cou
so rs

c e
io  
lo s
g i
y  d
 a e

n s
d ig
 n
p e
s d
yc  

h ot
ia  
tr a
y cq
 ni ua

 i
u n
n t
d  
e s
r tu
st d
a e
n n
d t
i s
n  
g w
 h it

u h
m  

a advances made by
of th

n
e  

c b
o e
u h
rs a
e v
 i
s o
i r
o ,
t  
 p
pr a
o r
v t
i i
d c
e u
 la
in r
- l
d y
e ,
p  d
th e

 v
u ia
n n
d t
er  

s b
ta e
n h
d a
in v

g io
 r
of . 
 c T

rim he
e  
 o
c b
au je

s c
a ti

i  hte science of psychiat t v
r i
y o e

n n
 a  

n an
d d
  
s i
o ts
c  
io p
l r
o ev
g e
y n
 tio
ha n
s .
  
c A
ha d

n v
g a
e n
d ce
 m
hte e

 nt
understa

At n
the end of the course students would be able ot  understand thed incgau osfa ticornim ionfo lcorgimye a sn ia  ascbi enecttee.r

, scientific and rational manner.
Module 01 Crime, Criminal and Criminolog

W y
ha  

t is :
 crime? Who is the criminal?

What is Criminology?
Schools of Criminology :-

The Pre-Classical School
The Classical School
Neo-Classical School
Positivist Approach - Radical Positivism and Liberal Positivism
Cesare Lombroso??
Enrico Ferri??
Raffaele Garofalo??
Gabrial Tarde??

Module 02 Psychology and Crime :
Meaning, purpose and scope of criminal psychology
Psychological vs. Psycho-analytical approach to crime
Behaviorist approach to crime
Definition of criminal behavior - Psychodynamics of criminal behavior.
Mental illness and crime
Human aggression and violence to crime

Module 03 Psychometric Test - Its use in Criminal behavior :
Measurement of criminal behavior - Psychological test ot  measure criminal
behavior
Criminal profiling: Definition and process of profiling criminal personality
Factors underling criminal profiling
Merit and demerit of criminal profiling

Module 04 Forensic Psychology - Concept and Importance :
Definition, meaning and scope of forensic psychology
Historical background of forensic psychology ni  India and abroad
Role of forensic psychology in the investigation of crime
Psychology and the police
Application of psychology in court
Application of psychology in prison



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 3 (C la s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Module 05 Sociological Theories - Crime and Social Structure :

1) Social structure theory
2) Social disorganization theory
3) Merton, anomie and strain

Module 06 Subcultural Theories :
1) Cohen's theory of the delinquent subculture
2) Miller's lower class gang delinquency

Module 07 Cr ime a n d Social Process :
1) Socialization and Crime- Differential association theory
2) Differential reinforcement theory
3) Neutralization and rift theory
4) Hirsch's Social Control or Social Bond Theory
5) Becker's Labelling theory
6) Self-Control and Self Esteem as related to crime

Recommended Readings:
1) Akers, Ronald.L. and Sellers, Christin, S. (2004) Criminological Theories (4th Edition) Rawat

Publication, New Delhi.
2) Void, George B,. Benard Thomas J., and Snipes, Jeffrey B. (2002), Theoretical Criminology,

Oxford University Press, Oxford.
3) Siegel, L.J (2003) Criminology, (8th Edition) Wadsworth, USA.
4) Schmalleger Frank, Criminology Today, (1996) Prentice Hall, New Jersey.
5) Dennis Howitt, 2002, Forensic and Criminal Psychology, Prentice Hall

Encyclopedia of Criminal and Deviant Behaviour, 2001, Cliffon D. Pryart, Editor-in Chief,
Burunner Routledge Taylor & Frances Group

7) Bartal, Curt R, 1999, Criminal Behaviour : A Psychosocial Approach, 5th edition, Prentice
Hall, New Delhi.

8) Hollin, Clive R Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1989, Psychology and Crime: An introduction to
Criminal Psychology, London.

9) Dartmouth Aldershot, 1987, Criminal Detection and Psychology of Crime,
10) Harvard LPC Forensic Psychology, 1981, Professor of Clinical Psychology, University of

Surrey, Batsford Academic & Educational Ltd. London.
11) Adman Raine, 1983, The Psychopathology of Crime, Criminal Disorder, Academic Press, Inc.
12) Navin Kumar, (2015), Criminal Psychology, Lexis Nexis, New Delhi.
13) Shukla Girjesh, (2013), Criminology, Lexis Nexis, New Delhi.
14) McLaughlin Eugene & Newburn Tim (Ed) (2010), The Sage Handbook of Criminological

Theory, Sage Publication Ltd, New Delhi.
15) Prof. N.V. Paranjape, Criminology And Penology With Victiomology, Central Law Publications.
16) S.M.A. Quadri, Criminology And Penology, Eastern Book Company
17) D.r Krishna Pal Malik, Penology, Victimology And Correctional Administration In India,

Allahabad Law Agency
18) J.P. Sirohi, Criminology And Criminal Administration, Allahabad Law Agency



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 4 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908,
.3 Medium of Instruction and Division of Marks :

(1) The medium for instruction and for examination of all subjects in B.A.
L  LL
L .B.,
.  B
B .B.A.

. and LL.B. courses shall be English.
(2) Each subject of BA. . LL.B., B.B.A. LL.B. and LL.B. courses shall eb 
(3) of 100

Th  
e m
 di a

v r
i k
si s
o .
n of 100 marks for al hte subjects, except 

s for 
h prac

a tica
l l t
l r
 b ain

e ing
  sub
a jects
s ,
 under:

(a) University Written Examination: 80 marks.
(b) Internal Assessment by College : 20 marks.

6. Question Paper Pattern for University Written Examination (80 Marks):
The question paper for University written examination of each sub

T je
r c
a t,
i  
n e
i x
n c
g ep
 t
P  
a fo
p r 
e P
r r
 a
VI ctic

 a
- l
 Moot Court Exercise and Internship, shall be as under :

(1) Part A Questions (45 marks) : Part Ao f question paper shall consist of essay type
questions or questions of critical comments depending on the nature of subject. Astudent
has to answer the questions with critical evaluation. There shall be five questions and
hte student has ot  answer any three questions. Each question shall eb for 15 marks.

(2) Part B Questions (20 marks) : Part B of question paper shall consist of short essay type
questions depending on the nature of subject. A student has to answer the questions
explaining concepts with illustrations. There shall be four questions and the student has
to answer any two questions. Each question shall be for 10 marks.

(3) Part C Questions (15 marks) : Part C of question paper shall consist of short answer
questions or solving of hypothetical problems, ete. There shall be five questions and
the student has to answer any three questions. Each question shall be for 5 marks.

Note: The question paper pattern given herein may be changed or altered depending on the
nature of subject e.g. non-law subjects. The question paper pattern given herein may also be changed
or altered by the University at any time without prior information to the students.
7. Internal Assessment by College (20 Marks) :

( 1 )The division of 20 marks for each subject, except for practical training subjects, for
internal assessment shall be as under:

(a) Written Submissions: 10 marks.
(b) Class Performance: 10 marks.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 5 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

1 MODULE - 01
CRIME, CRIMINAL, CRIMINOLOGY

CRIMINOLGOY

Discuss the concept of crime, who is a criminal and Classification of Criminal?
Define crime? Do you agree with the view that crime si  anti-social behaviour?

SYNOPSIS
1) Introduction

Definition of crime
a) Crime as apublic wrong
b) Crime as a moral wrong
C) Crime as a conventional wrong
d) Crime as social wrong
e ) Crime as procedural wrong

Crime as legal wrong
3) Characteristics of Crime
4) Classification of Crime

Who is a Criminal
6) Classification of criminal

• 7) Conclusion

1) INTRODUCTION-
Crime is one of the most burning problems of human society. There

p  
ro is 

b n
l o
em  so

 of c c
r ie
im ty

i  
n w
al i

i t
t h
y o
. ut

T  th
he e

 concept of crime is not new. Infact, criminal activities h
w av

ith e 
 t b

h e
e e
 n
d  a
e s
v s
e o
l c
o ia
p t
m ed

ent of society. But ni  our present society the problem
m  

a of
g  
n c
i r
fi im
e e
d  
. C ha

o s
n  
s b
e e
q co
u m
en e

t  
ly m

, ore
there has been increasing incidences on the s

w tu
e d
 s y

tu  
dy of

  
t c
h r
e i
 m
sc e

ie . 
nc In

e  
 s
o o
f c

s i
o o
c l
i o
et g
y y
 ,
which includes the positive as well 

p as
o  n
s e
i g
ti a
v ti
e a

v
s e
p  
e as
c p
t, e
 cts

w  
e of
  
t s
ry oc

 ie
to ty

 .
u  
n nI
derstand the s

t o
o cia
 l 
u or
n de
d r. 
e On
r  
s th
t e
a  o
n the
d r h
 a
t n
h d,
e  ni
  
a the
s  
p ne
e ga
c ti
t ve
  
o a
f sp
 ec
s t 
o we
c  tr
i y
al disorganization.

Crime and social norms - In every society there are cert
th a

e in
 no  

rm pe
s r
 s
l o
a n
id s

  
d w
o h
w o

n  d
 o
by  

 no
th t
e  
 c
s o
o n
c f
i o
et r

y m
.  

H to
ence, in the study of sociology, we are also interested ni

negatives of man. In other words, these negative activities which do not conform ot  the rules t hoef
society are called anti-social activities. The anti-social activities which a man can commit are of two
types, namely, an offence against an individual and an offence against the State. The o
in f

d fe
iv n

i c
d e
ua  a

l is g
c a
a i
l n
le s

d t
  a
a n
 civil offence. On the other hand. offence against the State is called criminal

offence.
Crime is an act against the State - In sociology, when we ta

w k
e e-
 u
a p
r  
e st
 ud
m y 

o o
r f
e  s
 o
i c
n ia
t l
e  p
r a
e th
s o
te lo

d g
 y,
in the criminal offence. As crime is an act done against the State because it is

the State which declared a particular act as criminal act. An act to be considered a crime solely depends
upon the ideas, philosophies and culture of each society separately.



CRIMINAL PSICHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, P u n e . Page: 6 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908

Concept of crime dynamic - tI si ot  be noted that na act may be a crime ni  one society at one
time and may not be a crime at another time. It si because the society ni  which man lives is dynamic.
nI  other words. our attitudes towards crime cannot remain constant when our society itself is dynamic.
Thus crime si neither stable nor homogenous. tI varies from time ot  time and place ot place. A particular
act may not be considered crime ni  the same society. Therefore universal preposition cannot be made
regarding the problem of crime.

2) DEFINITION OF CRIME -
Number of the jurists tried to define what crime is? But it si adifficult task. It is not possible

to give any precise and comprehensive definition of crime. In fact, criminal offences are basically the
creation of criminal policy adopted from time ot  time yb the legal system of the country. A crime may
be described sa ar esult of active or passive conduct of human being, which si prevented by the policy
of the governing power ni  hte state. tI si better ot  discuss and examine some of hte definitions
propounded yb various jurists ni  order to understand the meaning and the concept of crime ni  its
correct perspective.
a ) Crime as a public wrong:

Blackstone - nI  his classical work "Commentaries on Law of England" defines crime ni  two
ways-

a. Crime si an act committed or omitted in violation of a public law forbidding or
commanding it.

b. Blackstone afterwards modified this definition slightly and said that -
"A crime si a violation of public rights and duties due to the whole community;
considered as a community."

According to Blackstone crime is anti-social act and thus becomes a violation against the
community. But ti is criticized that there are certain crimes which offend only rights of the individual
and not of the community as a whole, e. g. murder, grievous hurt, etc.

Sir James Stephan slightly modified the definition of Blackstone and reconstructed it.
According to him, a* crime is a violation of rights, considered in reference to the evil tendency of
such violation as regards the community at large." The above definitions given by Blackstone and
Stephan stressed upon that the crimes are branches of those laws, which injure the community. However,
all the acts that are injurious to the community are not necessarily crime.
b) Crime as a moral wrong:

According to some jurists, the word crime si applied ot  those acts that go against social order
and are worthy of serious condemnation. An eminent criminologist Garafalo defines crime ni  terms
of immoral and anti-social acts. He says crime is an immoral and harmful act that is regarded as
criminal by public opinion because it si an injury to some much of moral sense.
c) C r i m e as a convent iona l wrong:

A great criminologist Edwin Sutherland defines crime in terms of criminal behaviour. He
says, "Criminal behaviour is the behaviour ni  violation of criminal crime unless it is prohibited by the
criminal law. The criminal law, is defined conventionally as "a body of specific rules regarding
human conduct which have been promulgated yb political authority, which apply uniformly to all
the members of classes. " This body of the rule are rules regarding human conduct, which are different
from other rules like politically specificity, uniformity and penal sanction."



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 7 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Sutherland merely enumerates hte characteristics of a crime instead of giving a definition of
crime. He only says that crime si a violation of the criminal law.
d) C r i m e as social wrong -

John Gillin gives a sociological definition of crime as legal concept of crime does not go
deep enough ot  satisfy the demands of developing social science.

According ot  him, "Crime is an act that has been shown to be actually harmful to society or
that si believed ot  be socially harmful by a group of people that has hte power ot  enforce its
beliefs, and that places such act under hte ban of positive penalties."
e ) Crime as a procedural wrong -

Some jurists define crime ni  terms of nature of proceeding adopted ni  such cases. Austin
while making a distinction between civil and criminal wrongs observes that "wrong which si pursued
yb the sovereign or his subordinates si a crime. Awrong which si  pursued at hte discretion of the
injured party and his representatives is a civil injury."

It si criticized that there are number of offences ni  which the prosecution could be initiated
only at hte instance of injured party as ni  torts. No court will take cognizance of the offence of
adultery unless a complaint is made by husband of the woman.

According ot  Kenny, "Crimes are wrongs whose sanction si  punitive, and si  ni  no way remissible
yb any private person, but si  remissible by the Crown alone, if remissible at al." But there are also
some lacunas in the definition of always true because there are number of compoundable offences
that are remissible by some gratification from the accused.
f) Crime as a legal wrong -

When a penal statute prescribes punishment for an act or illegal omission ti becomes crime.
But as regard the definition of the term "Crime", there is no satisfactory definition acceptable to all
and applicable to all situations. Even the Indian Penal Code is salient on this issue, though it has
codified the bulk of criminal law of the country. S. 40 of the IPC simply states that the word "offence"
denotes a thing punishable by this Code or under any special or local law. This provision is nothing but
a statement of the fact and cannot be regarded as a definition of crime.

According to some of the jurists, the chief characteristics found in every crime are -
(1) the offender or accused is a human being
(2) there should be an external act committed by the offender
(3) it should be done with some criminal intent i.e. a guilty mind (mens rea) of the

offender accompanies his act
(4) ti should be prohibited conduct under the existing law i.e. the act is prohibited by law.
(5) there must be some kind of punishment for the act done.
3) CHARACTERISTICS OF CRIME -

There are certain characteristics of crime which make an unlawful act or omission punishable
under the law of the land. The main characteristics of a crime are as follows-
(1) External consequences - Crimes always have a harmful impact on society may it be social,

personal, emotional or mental.
(2) Act (Actus) - There should be an act or omission to constitute a crime. Intention or mens rea

alone shall not constitute a crime unless it is followed by some external act.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 8 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
(3) Mens Rea or guilty mind - Mens Rea is one of the essential ingredients of a crime. It may

however, be direct or implied.
(4) Prohibited act - The act should be prohibited or forbidden under the existing law.
(5) Punishment - The act, ni  order ot  constitute crime should not only be prohibited by law but

should be punishable yb the State.
4) CLASSIFICATION OF CRIME -

The existence of crime ni  a society si  a challenge ot  its members due to the adverse effect on
the ordered social growth. Therefore with the advance in the field of criminology and behavioral
science, efforts are being constantly made ot  work out commonly acceptable classification of crimes
and criminals for providing a rational basis of punishment for various categories of offenders.

There are variety of crimes such as violent personal crimes, occasional property crimes,
occupational crimes, political crimes, public-order crimes, conventional crimes, organised crime,
professional crimes, white collar crimes, sexual crimes, crimes against property, person, decency,
public-order, etc. Some of the criminologists are of the view that these crimes may be categorised
into three heads, namely -
(1) Offences falling under Criminal Procedure Code,
(2) Offences under Indian Penal Code, and
(3) Offences under Local or Special Laws or Enactments.

Some criminologists prefer ot  classify crimes into legal, political, economic, social and
miscellaneous crimes.
(1) Legal crimes can be termed sa traditional crimes such as theft, robbery, dacoity, rape, hurt, and

rioting, etc.
(2) Political offences are those which are motivated politically or committed in violation of election

laws or norms set out for the politicians ni  the course of their political activities.
(3) Economic crimes include white-collar offences such sa tax evasion, smuggling, prostitution,

gambling, etc.
(4) Social crimes are those which are committed under social legislation such as Child Marriage

Restraint Act, 1929, Civil Rights Act, 1976, Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1986, Indecent
Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986, Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act,
1987, the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1963.

(5) All other remaining crimes which are committed under local or special acts are termed as
miscellaneous crimes, for e.g., offences under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954,
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1948, the Consumers Protection Act, 1986, Prevention of Narcotic
and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1974.

Classification of Offences under Indian Penal Code -
(1) Offences against person.
(2) Offences against property.
(3) Offences relating to documents.
(4) Offences effecting mental order.
(5) Offences against public tranquillity.
(6) Offences against State.
(7) Offences relating to public servants.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof . Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 9 I (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Different Criminologists gave different classifications of the crimes. According ot  Hayes
there are three chief categories of crime as -

(1) Crime concerning property like theft, robbery, dacoity, pick pocketing and misuse of public
fund.

(2) Crime against person - these crimes involve physical hurt or bodily pain like assault, murder,
rape, etc.

(3) Crime against social order - It includes violation of traffic laws, non-payment of government
dues, public nuisance, malicious propaganda and communal riots, etc.

Bonger - Classified crimes into four categories as -
(1) Political crime,
(2) Economical crime,
(3) Sexual crimes,
(4) Miscellaneous crimes.

5) WHO IS CRIMINAL?
A criminal is a person who si  ni  the habit of committing crime. Repetition of crime is the

special feature of the criminal. Besides repetitiveness, deliberation is another characteristics o
c f
rim  

in t
a h
l. e
 A criminal therefore chooses to commit a crime and will do so whenever there is suitable

opportunity. Accordingly, a criminal takes to crime not out of any com
a p
n uls
d ion
  
a bu
d t ou
o t of
p  fre
t e
s  ch
 oi
i c
t e
 as his valid profession.

Who commits crime is a criminal. But in the eyes of law a person who 
c a
o d
m m

m its
it  
te of

d  
 a h

 c a
r v
im in

e g
 is not regarded as criminal unless his crime has been pro

S v
e e
th d

n . 
a A
 "in s

  o
th b
e s
 e
e r
y v
e e
s d
 o  

f by
 la  

w M
 .J
a .
ny person who is seven years of age or of such age

c  
o as
n  
c by
er  

n la
e w
d is  

 o
d f
e  
e th
m e 

e la
d n
 d
to be an age of sufficiently matured understanding. 

co c
m an

m  b
it e
s  
 a h

cr e
i l
m d

e  
, l
 ia

in b
 l
t e
h ,
a  
t if

c  h
a e
se he may be termed as criminal except in cases of insan

c i
l t
a y
ss ."

 of  
ac A

ts  c
is e
 d r

e ta
fi i
n n
ed as a criminal. Any person who commits an act of this class si called criminal.

According to Dr. Ellis, a criminal is a feeble and distorted person, Dr. M.J. Sethn
c a
r  
i h
m as

i  
n ob
a s
l e
 is a rv

 m ed
e  
n "
t th
a e
lly defective or emotionally disturbed person. a malad

v ju
i s
c t
t e
i d
m o

 
f b
 e
u i

n n
f g
a , 
v m

ou o
r st
a  
b o

l f
e te
 n
ci  a

rcumstances of lack of cultural and moral education. In some cases, he acts
like an untamed animal and si  out ot  assault even with a dangerous weapon, on the slightest provocation."
6) CLASSIFICATION OF CRIMINALS

There are numerous types of criminal. Various scholars have made the classification of criminals
from their respective standpoints and theoretical orientation. According to Lombroso following 
t ar
h e

e classification of criminals based on traits and features of the criminals -
(a) B o r n c r i m i n a l -

Such persons belong to families which have adopted crime as a profession. They inherit the
criminal mentality and commit crime without any objective provocation.
( b ) C a u s a l c r imina l -

Some persons do not commit crime often but under certain circumstances they feel the impulse
to crime which si not always successfully resisted. The casual criminals may be further sub-divided ni
three categories -



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 10 I (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

(i) Habitual criminal - These persons do not inherit bad influences but ni  course of their
life develop some dirty habits which force them into criminality.

(ii) Criminoloid - means like ac riminal or having resemblance with the criminal. They
are not original criminal but non-criminal who has adopted criminal activity. Such
persons usually commit crimes due ot  pressure of circumstances and nature of their
crimes si not very grave.

(i11) Pseudo criminal - These persons aer  not true criminals. They have neither any inborn
tendency towards crime nor they are under hte influence of any bad crime inducing
habits. But on account of acute pressure of circumstances which leaves them with no
choice. For eg. many army men during long wars may feel compelled ot  rape or commit
some other sex offence.

(c) Sex criminals - Those who commit outrageous sex act or outrage the modesty of others
under the overpowering sex impulse.

(d) Epileptic criminals - These criminals are mental patients. They commit crimes due ot  mental
imbalance and loss of self-control on their own impulses.
Sutherland's classification of criminals - Sutherland classified criminal on the basis of
economic status of the individual -
(a) Economically indigent criminals - These persons are from low class of the society.

These persons usually commit crime under compulsion of extreme economic pressure.
Being poor they are unable to defend themselves effectively ni  Court of law.

(b) White-collar criminals - The persons belonging ot  upper class of the society commit
crime during their profession who cannot be easily detected. Black marketing, tax
evasion, hoarding and profiteering and offences committed by businessmen and
politicians. They are more dangerous than traditional criminals.

7) CONCLUSION -
Crime is one of the most important problem of human society but there is no unanimity about

its definition from legal point of view crime refers ot  an act which si  prohibited by the existing law.
From social point of view crime refers ot  an act which si against social interest. Crime is not
homogenous. Hence, efforts have been made ot  classify crimes. nI past, criminologist gave emphasis
on biological, mental and psychological fact of crime but modern criminologist give emphasis on
social condition of criminals.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 1 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
O n . Define criminology and discuss its scope? OR

Define criminology and discuss its nature & scope?

SYNOPSIS
1. Introduction
.2 Definition of criminology
.3 Nature of criminology

a) Hubert Johnson
b) Prof. Sutherland
c) Elliott and Merrill
d) Prof. WA.. Bonger
e) Dr. Kenny

Theoretical or pure criminology
g) Applied criminology
h) Criminalistic branch

4. Scope of Criminology
5. Conclusion

1. INTRODUCTION
Criminology is a scientific study of crime, criminality and justice. It is a study of law making,

law breaking and responses ot  law breaking. It is a scientific, methodical and academic research of
crime, criminality and criminal justice enforcement. It studies the nature, extent, cause, consequence,
control and prevention of criminal behaviour. Criminology seeks to study the phenomenon of
criminality in its entirety.

The word criminology is composite of two words, criminal and logy. Literally, it means a
systematic study of criminals i.e., persons who break or offend the social law. However, since the
offences committed by criminals are crime and as crimes occurs in the society, the term criminology
means study of crime as well as criminals in relation to society. It also tries to determine 
o t
f h
 e
th  
e c
 a
c u
r s
im es

es and thereby recommends preventive measures. The science of 
a c
n r
d im
 s i

y no
s l
t o
e g
m y 

a is
ti  
c a 
 sc
st i
u en
d t
y ifi
 c

f o
o f so
r cial 
 ph
h e
t no
e menon
 . Vario

s us 
t sc
u ientifi
d c tec
y hnique
 s an
o d 
f meth
 ods 
t ar
h e em
i pl
s oyed
 phenomenon. . .



CRIMINAL PS) CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 21 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

THE SPHERE OF CRIMINOLOGY

CRIMINA SOCIOLOGY CAUSE REMEDIES EVALUATION PENOLOGY VICTIM
LISTICS O F  L AW OF OT OF OLOLGY

CRIME COMBAT CRIMINAL
CRIME LAW

Frensic Formulation Policing Correctional Victim
Science of Laws Law techniques ization

(Deterrence) Theories

Ballistics Laws and Social of Crime Remedies
Ethics Policing Deterrence

Processing Social
Physical Restructuring
Evidence and Education

2. DEFINITION OF CRIMINOLOGY
There is no universally acceptable definition of criminology. Criminologists differ in their

own views. tI is obvious that no one can overlook the sociological aspect of crime. From this point of
view, criminology si  that branch of "sociology" which deals with scientific study of crime as a social
phenomena. tI includes within its scope the process of making laws, of violating laws and the reaction
towards the breaking of laws.

In order to appreciate fully the nature of criminology it is essential to examine closely some
of the definitions given by learned sociologists and eminent criminologists. Some of the important
definitions are as under -
i Edwin Sutherland - "Criminology si  the body of knowledge regarding crime as a social

phenomenon."
ii) Elliot - "Criminology may be defined as the scientific study of crime and its treatment." This

definition stresses the practical or utilitarian nature of this body of knowledge, namely devising
ways and means to prevent or reduce the incidence of crime and rehabilitate criminals as
normal members of the society.

iii) Donald R. Taft - "Criminology is the study which includes all the subject matter necessary to
the understanding and prevention of crimes together with the punishment and treatment of
delinquents and criminals." This definition si considered ot  be comprehensive and describes
theoretical as well as practical aspect of the study. tI brings out clearly that criminology is
concerned not with the offences committed by adults only but also deals with juvenile offences.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNF. 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 13 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

iv) Webster - Science of criminology may be described ot  be "scientific study of crime as a
social phenomenon, or of criminals and their traits, habits and discipline. This definition has
the merit of providing equally the psychological as wel as sociological aspect of hte crime
and criminal."

V) Sellin - Crime which is the subject matter of criminology, is neither stable nor homogenous
concept. He rightly remarks that crimes are that other social criminology which have no stable
unit. According ot  him a study of law making, law breaking and reactions ot  law breaking from
the point of view of efficiency of the law as a method of control si  the useful objective of
criminology.
Sutherland and Sellin have defined hte criminology ni  its narrow sense as they have ignored hte
modern clinical methods and the institutions like those of probation, parole, indeterminate
sentence, open prison camps and other correctional measures which are the outcome of
criminological researches conducted during the century.
According ot  Mannheim "in its narrower sense, criminology involves hte study of crime, ei..
the forms of crime, their extent and the causative factors responsible for them. In its wider
sense ti also includes penology, hte study of punishment and of similar methods dealing with
crime, and the problem of preventing crime by non-primitive mensures."

vi) Dr. M.J. Sethna - "Criminology may be defined as scientific phenomenon or criminal and
mental traits, their habits, their discipline etc.

vii) Hubert Johnson - "Criminology is the scientific and practical application of findings ni  the
areas of: (a) crime causation, criminal behaviour and etiology, (b) the nature of the social
reaction as symptom of the characteristics of the society and (c) the prevention of crime."
Criminology analyses the human behaviour using sociological, political, biological,
philosophical, psychological, psychoanalytical, genetic and many other catalysts seemly or
synthetically.
Modern criminologists seem to be seriously concerned with the problem of crime to protect
the society from such anti-social activities of criminals. It is for this reason that the two sister
branches of criminal science, namely, criminology and penology, should work hand ni  hand to
appreciate the problem of criminality in its proper perspective.
Thus, in criminology we study crime, causation of crime and prevention and treatment of

crime. Sutherland has classified criminology into three categories. He observes; "Criminology consists
of three principle divisions as follows:
(a) the sociology of law which is an attempt at scientific analysis of the conditions under which

criminal laws developed and which is seldom included in general books of criminology.
(b) criminology, which si  an attempt at scientific analysis of hte causes of crime; and
(c) penology which is concerned with the control of crime."
3. NATURE & SCOPE OF CRIMINOLOGY -

From the above discussed definitions of criminology it is crystal clear that the nature of the
criminology is science. Fundamentally speaking, the task of criminology is scientific, systematic,
statistical, structural and functional in depth study of crime. Besides having a theoretical understanding
of crime, criminal and his behaviour, the object of criminology is also to devise effective tools to



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 14 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
minimize hte incidence of crime, reform and rehabilitate the criminal. Lastly, criminology also tries
to suggest reform in penal code.

Criminology, ni  general deals with the criminal behaviour, its causes and treatment. It si difficult
ot  discover a single alw which explains al hte behaviourial patterns. Criminology sa a chavioural
science or study faces an almost unsolvable difficulty because of the extreme diversity of types of
behaviour. It si very difficult ot  confine the scope of any science permanently. Like other social
sciences, the scope of criminology si also quite vast and extensive. tI si  related ot  each and every
social class and structure. Some of the criminologists have tried ot  limit its scope in order to be able
ot  study the subject scientifically, systematically and exhaustively. However, we may simply refer the
various spheres included ni  the study of criminology.
a) Hubert Johnson -

According ot  Elmer Hubert Johnson, we may classify the scope of criminology into the
following categories: -

i) Crime causation, criminal behaviour and etiology (investigation).
ii) The nature of the societal reaction as a symptom of the characteristics of the society.
iii) The prevention of crime.
According to Sutherland, the science of criminology includes within its scope, the process of

making laws, of breaking laws and of reacting towards the breaking of laws.
b) Prof. Sutherland

According to Sutherland, criminology has three distinct aspects-
i) The Sociology of Law,
ii) Criminal Etiology, and
iti) Penology
Though these aspects are distinct, they are inter-linked

The Sociology of law - nI  this aspect or department, we study the nature of crime from
legalistic point of view, and also investigate into the effects of present laws upon them
and study the possible reforms ni  hte laws ni  order ot  prevent and control the occurrence
of the crime. The major concern of sociology of law is to critically examine the impact
of various legal systems upon crime. This study can go a long way to evolve suitable
changes in the laws to curb crime.

ii) Criminal Etiology - nI  this department a systematic investigation into the various
causes of crime is made. Here we study the social and personal factors responsible for
the occurrence of crime and growth of criminals.

ili) Penology - Besides knowledge and determination of the causes and factors which
generate or encourage crime, it si  equally, fi not more essential to know the ways and
means of controlling and preventing the crime. This aspect is studied systematically
and in a scientific manner to achieve control over crime. The facts and the theories in
this regard form the scope of Penology, which si  an important department of criminology.

c) Elliott and Merrill - According to Elliott and Merrill, the scope of Criminology, includes
the following: -
i) The Nature of crime,
ii) Investigation into causes of crime,
iri) Individualized Study of Criminals,



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

P r o f . Pathan 's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 15 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
iv) Study of prevention of Crime & Reform of Criminal.

The Nature of crime - What are the features of crime? What type of action is crime?
In what respect does a criminal act differ from a social or moral act? Is it just the action
which may be considered criminal or can the motive make difference to our description
of a crime? For example, the theft committed for personal gain and the theft committed
for impersonal reasons or social gain are both cases of theft. Can we make any distinction
between the two? The answers to these questions tell us the nature of crime.
Investigations into the causes of Crime -Under this aspect of Criminology we study
the reasons of criminal behaviour. The different types of crime have different causes.
Are these differences apparent or real? Can we come by a general theory of crime
which will be adequate to explain all types of crime? Are there relations, inverse or
direct, between various crimes. These questions are investigated under this head.
Besides, we also study the question of responsibility of crimes. If criminals are made
and not born, who is responsible for encouraging criminality? Is ti present education or
social system that is responsible ni  conjugation or one of these alone? Al these questions
form the subject matter of this aspect of criminology.

iii) Individualized Study of Criminals - How and when does one turn into a criminal?
What particular event or series of events happen which turn man towards criminality?
In order to know all these facts we have to study in detail the personal; lives of the
criminals. Also we have ot  study the life of a person in totality for understanding the
nature of crime and criminal. For this purpose we make use of what has come to be
known as the technique of case-history method.

iv) Study of Prevention of Crime & Reform of the criminal - Most obviously crimes
are unfavorable to the interests of the society. They not only disturb the social
equilibrium but make life hell for the criminal as well as his relatives. Even more, due
to crime the normal law abiding citizen lives in fear. Therefore it is most essential to
devise ways and means to prevent crime and reform the criminals. Should the system of
punishment be deterrent, preventive, reformative or expiatory? What type of
is  
 a p

d u
e n
q is
u h
a m
te e

 n
f t
or each type of crime? Such que

P stion
r s a
o re stu
f di
. ed
  u

d) nd
W er this he

. ad
A .

. Bonger
Prof. W.A. Bonger prefers to study theoretical criminology in the following sub
i) jects -

Criminal Anthropology,
ii) Criminal Sociology,
iii) Criminal Psychology,
iv) Criminal Psycho-neuro Pathology,
V) Penology

c) Dr. Kenny -
is of the view that criminology is the branch of criminal science which deals with time-causation,

analysis and prevention of crime.
The science of criminology is split into two, namely -
a) Theoretical or pure criminology; and

Applied or practical criminology.

bj 



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 16 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

1) Theoretical or pure criminology -
Criminal Anthropology - It secks ot  understand hte personality of the offender ni
physical terms. Cesare Lombroso was the first criminologist who emphasized that
criminals were different physicaly from normal persons and possesses inferior physical
characteristics.

ii) Criminal Sociology - It si based on Sutherland's theory of "differential association"
which explains the criminal behaviour sa a process of learning through association with
other criminals. This theory, however, does not adequately take into account hte
personality traits or psychological variables ni  criminal behaviour:

ill) Criminal Psychology - tI secks ot  co-relate criminality to the emotional aspect of
human nature.

iv) Criminal Psycho-neuro Pathology - This branch of criminology attributes criminality
ot  functional deviation and mental conflict ni the personality of the offender. The factors
such as inferiority complex, frustration, depression, anxiety, etc may lead ot  a person
to commit crime.

V) Penology - tI concern itself with various aspects of punishments and penal policies.
The various mechanism of punishing the offender are also studied under penology

g) Applied Criminology -
includes the study of criminal hygiene and criminal policy which si founded on solid derivative
conclusion.

h) Criminalistic branch -
Besides these two sub-heads, yet there si another branch of criminology called criminalistic.

This branch connotes the police-techniques of crime investigation and detection. It provides very
useful material for the study and understanding of criminal administration of justice.

4. SCOPE OF CRIMINOLOGY -
Criminology is a very broad subject which knows few boundaries and becomes involved in all

the sciences which deals with man and his social organisation. Criminology is concerned with the
study of delinquent and criminal behaviour, besides crime controls and prevention of crime, criminal
treatment and their rehabilitation. The folowing major aspects sa thought by various eminent
criminologist relate to certain scope of criminology which si  as follows -

Criminology deals with reporting of law violation, criminal identification, arrest of
criminals.
It deals with the comparative study of criminal law ni  various countries relating to thesocial.
economical and political system of that country.

C) The characteristics of Juvenile and adult offenders.
d) The theories of crime and theories of punishment which attempt to explain crime and

delinquency ni  general.
e) The study of recidivism and habitual criminals.

The study and control of problems of deviancy which have close connection with crime such
as abnormal offenders, suicides, narcotic drug addiction, addictive gambling etc.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 1 7 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
The study of effectiveness and measures for treatment and rehabilitation of offenders by penal,
correctional institutions, probation, after care service.

h) The evaluation of programmes for prevention of delinquency and crime.

.5 CONCLUSION
There si  no universally acceptable definition of criminology. Criminologists differ in their

own views. Criminology si  that branch of "sociology" which deals with scientific study of crime as a
social phenomena. It includes within its scope the process of making laws, of violating laws and the
reaction towards the breaking of laws. Criminology is scientific, systematic, statistical, structural and
functional ni  depth study of crime. Besides having a theoretical understanding of crime, criminal and
his behaviour, the object of criminology si  also to devise effective tools to minimize the incidence of
crime. reform and rehabilitate the criminal. Lastly, criminology also tries to suggest reform in penal
code.

Criminology, in general deals with the criminal behaviour, its causes and treatment.

Que. Explain the inter relation between Criminology, Penology and Criminal Law? Explain the
nature of extent of crime in India?

SYNOPSIS
1) Introduction
2) Inter relation between Criminology, Penology and Criminal Science
3) Nature and extent of crime in India
4) Conclusion

1) INTRODUCTION-
Criminology is one of the branches of criminal science which is concerned with social study

of crimes and criminal behaviour. It aims at discovering the causes of criminality, the effective measures
to deal with crimes. It also deals with the custody, treatment, prevention, control of crime which for
hte purpose of this study si called as penology. The criminal policies provided yb these wto branches
i.e. criminology and penology si  implemented through hte agency of criminal law.
2) INTER RELATION BETWEEN CRIMINOLOGY, PENOLOGY AND CRIMINAL

SCIENCE -
Criminal Science

Criminology Penology Criminal Law

Criminal Criminal Penology this include It seeks ot  implement
Biology Sociology study of custody, olicies envisage
(it investigate (inquired into the effect reatment, preventio
into various causes of surrounding and nd control of crim enrmi nioolgy na
of criminality) environment on criminals)



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 18 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Criminology Penology and Criminal Law are inter related with each other and one can not
function without the other. tI si rightly observed yb Prof: Sellin that the object of Criminology si ot
study the areas of alw making, alw breaking and reaction ot  alw breaking from the point of view of
effect of alw sa method of control. nI  his view hte development of criminology has been much later
than that of Penology because ni  earlier periods hte emphasis was on treatment of criminals rather
than scientific investigation into the causation of crime.
3) NATURE AND EXTENT OF CRIME IN INDIA-

Crime in India as ni  most other parts of the world si gradually increasing ni  proportion to the
population. There was an over all increase ni  cognizable crimes and non-cognizable crimes with the
increase ni  population. Information about crime si collected through police station by the Police
District Office of the Superintendent. The crime statistics aer then compiled at State level on the
basis of crime report given by each District and made available ot  the public as a part of annual police
administration report. These reports contain detailed tables of all crimes under Indian Penal Code,
Special Laws and Local Laws. Asummary for al India si published each year by the Ministry of Home
Aflairs under the title, "Crime in India"

The Criminal Statistics si  collected with different objective depending upon the intended use
contemplated by individual or the agency doing the work. This crime statistics helps to explain the
nature and extent of crime in India.

This crime statistics fall into four categories.
a) The crime statistics are gathered and complied by Government Departments. They

indicate the kind, extent of various kinds of crime at agiven time ni  particular Geographical
Area, the characteristics of person committing the crime.

b) The statistics are often collected by Researchers.
Statistics based upon the work of police i.e. the offences coming ot  their knowledge and the
extent of their clearance by them.

d) The statistics based on Judicial disposal of cases brought before the court.
Irrespective of differences ni  social, cultural, political systems there has been increase ni

crime among all societies ni  the world. Increase ni  population result ni  greater number of youngsters
who indulge ni  various kinds of crimes. The fast pace of urbanization and industrialization are important
factors to cause a wide gap between peoples material expectation and reality. Efficient means of
communication lead ot  much more psychic mobility which along with widening gap between rich and
poor class lead to frustration, socially and legally disapproved behaviour:

Some of the recent trend of crimes are as follows.
There has been Internationalization of certain crimes like drug trafficking.

ii) Rural areas or also witnessing the phenomenon of crime. These rural areas provide good base
and recruitment grounds for terrorist.

ili) Criminality is no longer confined to lower and poor class. tI also includes white collar criminals
i.e. professional, businessmen, politicians etc.,
The total cognizable crimes ni  the country has been steadily rising over the past fourty years.

The position of white collar crime under Indian Penal Code has been rather steady around 3% over
the last few decades. Iheft and rioting though showing some decline recently but with 19.7% and

ご



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan 's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 1 9 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
5.8% respectively still top the recorded IPC crimes. While prohibition and gambling take the lead
under the local and special laws with 15.8% and 4.3% respectively.

4) CONCLUSION-
The practical role of criminology ni  shaping and influencing social and penal policies is a

subject of debate. Unhappily, both public sources, state reports and crime in India are flawed. The
centre's published reports regarding crime rates do not agree with those of the state. The problem in
respect of crime statistics is technical problem with regard to collection, transmission, computation
of data. There is inadequacy in criminal data collected by police, reporting agencies. Basically is
collected is not properly presented. Whatever the country may be the basic problem is that crime is
not self authenticating.

SCHOOLS OF CRIMINOLOGY

SYNOPSIS:-
Introduction

2) Origin of schools of criminology
Major Schools of criminology
a. Classical school

.i Cesare Beccaria
ii. Jeremy Bentham
iii. Feue rbach

b. Neo-Classical School
c. Cartographic School
d. Socialist School

i. Karl Marx
ii. William Bonger

e. Typological School
.5 Positive School

i. Cesare Lombroso
Enrico Ferri

ii. Raffaele Garofalo
Psychiatric

h. Sociological School
і. Gabriel Tarde
ії. Edwin H. Sutherland

i) Contribution of the theory
4) Conclusion

₽:

ois



CRMI NIAL PSICHOLOGS AND CRININAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION UJNE 202)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 20 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

INTRODUCTION -
nI the history of primitive societies little attention was given ot the motive, environment and

psychology of the offender ni  the causes of crime. There was on principle for the guidance of those
who were concerned with criminal administration of justice. tI was found that punishments were
oten arbitrary and irrational. nI  the beginning of 18th century, with the change ni  human thinking and
evolution of modern society, certain social reformers took up the cause of criminals and devoted
their attention ot analysis of crime-causation. This finally led ot  hte emergence of criminology as a
branch of knowledge through development of different schools of criminology.
2) ORIGIN OF SCHOOLS OF CRIMINOLOGY -

As ystematic study of criminology was first taken up by the Italian scholar, Cesare Beccaria
who si known sa hte. 'Founder of Modern Criminology.' He made a greatest contribution ot  the
science of criminology because for the first time eh proceeded with hte study of criminals on scientific
basis and reached to certain conclusion from which definite methods of handling crime and criminals
could eb worked out. This was the origin of theories of criminology or schools of criminology.
According to Sutherland school of criminology denotes a system of thought which consist of an
integrated theory of causation of crime and of policies of control implied ni  the theory of causation.
Each school of criminoiogy explain crime ni  its own manner and suggests punishments and preventive
measures to suit its ideology. It could be seen that each of the schools represents the social attitude of
the people towards crime and criminal ni  a given time. Some of the major schools of criminology are
as under -
(a) Pre-classical
(b) Classical
(c) Neo-classical
(d) Positive
(e) Cartographic
(t) Socialist
(g) Typological
(h) Psychiatric
(i) Sociological and social psychological
(j) Clinical
(k) Modern School

3) MEANING OF SCHOOL OF CRIMINOLOGY -
According to sutherland schools of criminology means the system of thought which consist

of an integrated theory of causation of crime and policies of control implied in the theory of causation.
The advocates of each school try to explain the causation of crime and criminal behaviour in their own
way relying on the theory propounded by the exponent of that particular school. Therefore, each
school of criminology explain crime ni  its own manner and suggest punishment and preventive measures
to suit its ideology.

=



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 21 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
2) MAJOR SCHOOLS OF O F -
(a) Pre-class ical -

The period of 17th& 18th century ni  Europe was dominated by the scholasticism of Saint Thomas
Acquinos. The dominance of religion ni  the state activities was the chief characteristic of that time.
As scientific knowledge was yet unknown the concept of crime was rather vague & obscure. There
was a general belief that man by nature is simple & his actions are controlled by some super power. It
was believed that man commits crime due to the influence of some external spirit called demon or
devil. Thus, an offender commits a wrongful act not because of his free will but due to the influence
of some external super power. No attempt was made ot  probe into the real causes of crime. This
theory of criminality propounded by the exponents of pre-classical school acknowledged the
omnipotence of spirit which they regarded as great power.
(b) CLASSICAL SCHOOL-

The classical school defined crime ni  legal terms. This school believed ni  Free Will Theory.
This means that a person was free to choose between right and wrong conduct. The classical school
believed ni  deterrent theory of punishment. This school focused its attention on crime. They supported
the right of the state ot  punish the offender ni  the interest of public security. Cesare Beccaria, Jeremy
Bentham and Feuerbach are main supporter of classical school.

(i) CESARE BECCARIA -
During the middle of 18th century Beccaria the pioneer of modern criminology
expounded his Naturalistic Theory of Criminality by rejecting the omnipotence of evil
spirit. He laid greater emphasis on mental phenomena of the individual and located the
cause of crime in the "free will". He was much influenced by the Utilitarian philosophy
of his time and placed reliance on the "pleasure and pain theory". The main principles
of classical schools are as under -
(1) Crime is an act of individual and not his intent, which forms the basis for

determining criminality in him. In other words, criminologists are concerned
with the "act" of the criminal rather than his "intent"

(2) The supporter of this school accepted punishment as a principle method of
infliction of pain, humiliation and disgrace to create "fear" in man to control his
behaviour.

(3) The supporter of this school considered prevention of crime more important
than the punishment for it. Therefore, they stressed on the need for a Criminal
Code in France, Germany and Italy to systematize punishment for forbidden
acts. Thus, this school felt need for a well-defined criminal justice system.

(4) The supporter of this school supported the right of the State to punish the offender
in the interest of public security on the basis of pleasure and pain theory.
According to them punishment was to be awarded keeping in view the pleasure
derived by the criminal from the crime and the pain caused to the victim from it.
They however "stressed on equal punishment for equal offence".* The supporters
of this school believed that criminal law primarily based on positive sanctions.
In their opinion, Judges should give verdicts strictly according ot  the provision
of law.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 22 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

This school thus suggests certain norms for administration of criminal justice.
The pioneer of this school Mr. Beccaria was greatly influenced by the writing of
Montesquie, Hume, Bacon and Rousseau. Mr. Cesare Beccaria raised his voice
against severe punishment, torture and death penalty.

(ii) JEREMY BENTHAM -
Bentham was an Englishman. His main concern was social-welfare in formulation of
penal laws. According ot hmi  laws are ot  eb passed with a view ot maintenance of social
order and welfare of the society. The aim and object of hte law is social-welfare which
provides maximum happiness ot  maximum number of people. In a welfare society, a
person who violated pre-established alw si a criminal. According to him criminal act
must be a voluntary act of the criminal. For Bentham punishment si an essential feature
without which there can eb no effective check ot  anti-social tendencies of man. The
punishment shall be ni  proportionate ot  the crime i.e. the graver the crime the severer
should be the punishment and like punishment should be mated out for like crimes.
However, before imposing penalty al relevant factors, social and political should be
taken into account. According ot  Bentham, children, old man and unsound mind person
should not be punished. The penal laws should not be rigid but flexible to meet social
change.

(ini) FEUERBACH -
He was a German thinker. According ot  hmi  for the effective control of crime there
should be a well-defined Criminal Code as wel as definite penal code. He also
propounded the similar idea like Bentham of pleasure and pain theory but punishment
shall be severe so that fear of pain will act sa an effective deterrent.

Criticism against Classical School -
(1) The major shortcoming of the classical school si that ti proceeded on an abstract presumption

of "free will" and solely relied on the act i.e. the crime without giving any attention to the state
of mind of the criminal.

(2) This school prescribes equal punishment for same offence. Thereby making no distinction
between first offender and habitual offender. This school si paying no heed to the antecedents,
characters and circumstances of the criminal which led to offence.

(3) This theory assumes that all human actions are pleasure seeking, but this is not always so.
Human life si not a pursuit of pleasure alone. The motive behind all crime cannot be pleasure:
as amater of fact many crimes are commited without apleasure. For e.g., aman who commits
suicide does not do so out of pleasure. Moreover, the concept of pleasure si subject ot  and
therefore cannot be objectively evaluated. The legislation has to be based on facts and not on
subjective feelings.

(4) This theory is not based upon emperical research
Contribution - The greatest contribution of this school lies ni  the fact that it suggested a

substantial criminal policy which was easy ot  administer without resort ot  imposition of arbitrary
punishment. This school rejected religious fallacies and myths and gave emphasis on the personality
of the offender in order to determine his guilt and punishment.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNF. 2022)

Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 23 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
(c) NEO-CLASSICALSCHOOL-

The "free will" theory of classical school did not survive for long. It was soon realised that
classical school ignores the individual differences. It gave equal treatment to the first offender and
the habitual offender. Therefore, neo-classical thinkers asserts that certain categories of offender
such as minors, idiots, insane or incompetent had ot  be treated leniently irrespective of similarity of
their criminal act. These offenders are unable to distinguish between right and wrong. The main
philosophy underlying this school si  as under -

(1) The neo-classical school gives proper importance to certain mitigating situations and
mental disorders which deprive the criminal from his normal conduct. Therefore this
school does not stress on equal punishment for the same offence.

(2) The neo-classical school distinguishes between the first offender and the recidivists
i.e. hardened criminal. According to this school punishment should suit the psychopathic
circumstances of the offender. Hence, this school focussed atleast some attention on
mental causation indirectly.

3) According to the supporter of this school a man having normal intelligence or capacity
of rational judgement is responsible for his own conduct. But those lacking normal
intelligence and having mental depravity are not responsible for their conduct. They do
not possess the capacity of distinguishing between good and bad conduct.

(4) This school made distinction between sanity and insanity of the offender which gave
way towards correctional institutions such as parole, probation, reformatories and open-
air camps.

(5) The neo-classical school adopted a subjective approach ot  criminology.
(6) It gives much importance to the conditions under which individuals commit criminal

a c t s .

Criticism - The supporter of this theory believed that criminal whether responsible or
irresponsible si  a menace (danger) ot  the society and, therefore, needs to be eliminated
from it. The protection of society from crimes must be our primary concern.
Contribution - Neo-classical school has rejected notion of "free wil" and held that
besides hte criminal act as such, the personality of the criminal as awhole, namely, his
antecedents, motive, previous life history, general character, ect. should eb considered
while awarding the punishment.

(d) POSITIVE SCHOOL-
With hte advance of behavioural science, the monogenetic explanation of human conduct lost

its validity & a new trend to adopt an elective view about the genesis of crime gradually developed. By
19th century certain french doctors were successful in establishing that it was neither 'free will' of
the offender nor his innate depravity which actuated him to commit crime but the real cause of
criminality lay in anthropological features of the criminal. This led to the emergence of positive
school of criminology. The main exponents of this school were three eminent italian criminologists
- Cesare Lombroso, Raffaele Garofalo & Enrico Ferri.

i) C e s a r e L o m b r o s o -
He is said to be the pioneer of positive school or the Italian school of criminology. He
was an Italian psychiatrist ni  the Army. After an intensive study of physical characteristics



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 24 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

of the patients and of criminals he came ot  the definite conclusion that criminals were
physical inferior ni  the standard of growth and, therefore, developed a tendency for
inferior act. He further suggested that criminals are less sensitive to pain and therefore
they have little regards for the suffering of others.

Lombroso studied 383 skulls of criminals and 5907 criminals and then classified the criminals
into three main categories -

(1) Atavists or Hereditary criminals
(2) Insane criminals
(3) Criminoids

This classification is also summarised as -
(1) • born criminal;
(2) insane criminals;
(3) habitual criminals;
(4) occasional criminals.

According to Lombroso criminality is inborn, and a criminal could be recognized by certain
stigma and anomalies. The atavistic and degenerative stigina enumerated by Lombroso included -

(1) Asymmetrical (irregular) cranium,
(2) Long lower jaw,
(3) A defective or flattened nose often without a bony skeleton,
(4) Scanty beared,
(5) Low sensitivity to pain,
(6) A receding (short) forehead,
(7) Projecting/voluminous ears,
(8) Cold fixed and glassy eyes,
(9) A thin upper lip,
(10) Epilepsy,
(11) Skin that is pale and wrinkled,
(12) teeth with the molars undeveloped, wisdom teeth absent, and the canine teeth

overdeveloped,
(13) Excessive length of arms,
(14) Supernumerary (surplus) fingers/toes.
The "criminal type" claimed Lombroso, could be recognised by the possession of at least five

of these stigmata; was incompletely represented by 3 ot  5 stigmata and not necessarily indicated by
less than 3 stigmata.

The physical anomalies and stigmata do not ni  themselves cause crime, rather they identify the
personality which is predisposed to criminal behaviour.

According ot  Lombroso the term "criminal" si not confined only ot  a legally confined criminal
but includes any person who is potentially a criminal and who possesses the characteristics of hte
criminal type. This eh si concerned not only with criminals ni  law but also with anthropological
criminals.

Because of their personal natures, such persons, with the anomalies and stigmata, cannot refrain
from crime unless the circumstances of life are unusually favourable.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 25 I (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Lombroso's modified views - Lombroso after further research and in the wake of heavy

criticism, himself admitted that ni  perhaps two criminals out of three, environmental factors may be
important. Therefore, to a limited extent Lombroso did accept the effect of environment, society,
education, parental factors, etc. as the causes of criminality.

The Atavists are born criminals who could not refrain from indulging in criminality and
environment. He considered these criminals as incorrigible, i.e. beyond reformation.

Insane criminal who resorted to criminality on account of certain mental depravity or disorder
whereas Criminoids who were physical criminal type and had a tendency to commit crime to
overcome their inferiority in order to meet the needs of survival.

Lombroso was the first criminologists who made an attempt to understand the personality of
offenders ni  physical terms. He employed scientific methods ni  explaining criminal behaviour. While
analysing causes of crime, Lombroso had laid greater emphasis on the biological nature of human
behaviour and thus indirectly drew attention of criminologists to the impact of environment on crime
causa t ion .

ii) Enrico Ferri -
He criticised the view of criminality of Lombroso and proved that biological reasons
were not enough to account for criminality. There are other factors such as emotional
reactions, social informative or geographical conditions also play a vital role in
determining criminal tendencies in men. According to him crime is a synthetic product
of three main factors -

(1) Physical or geographical,
(2) Anthropological, and
(3) Psychological
According to him criminal behaviour si the outcome of variety of factors having their combined

effect on the individual. Ferri gave classification of the criminals as under -
(1) born criminals;
(2) occasional criminals;
(3) passionate criminals;
(4) insane criminals; and
(5) habitual criminals.
He suggested an intensive programme of crime prevention and recommended a series of

measures for treatment o f offenders.
iii) Raffaele Garo fa lo -

He traced the need for a closest study of the circumstances and living conditions of
criminals. He firmly believed that criminal is a creature of his own environment. He
defined crime as an act which offends the sentiments injurious ot  the society. He placed
offender into four main categories -

(1) murderers whom he called "endemic" criminals;
(2) violent criminals who are affected by environmental influences such as prejudices of

honour, politics and religion;
(3) criminals lacking in sentiment of probity; and
(4) lascivious or lustful criminals who commit crimes against sex and chastity.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 26 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

As am ember of the Italian judiciary Garofalo was well acquainted with the then existing
criminal law and procedure in the administration of criminal justice and recommended death,
imprisonment for life or transportation and reparation sa three modes of punishment for criminals.

He gave importance ot  personality of the criminal. He propounded that criminals ar
t e
rait  

s and of
  
th d

at if
 f
th e
ey re

 n
ca t

n be gradually transformed into normal individuals. Ferri tried to modify
Lombroso's theory and contended that though hte criminal si not born criminal, yet there are several
deformities and anomalies right from the birth which, if not eradicated by treatment may lead ot
crime. Thus though hte persons are not born as criminals "yet born with defects of body and they are
potentially criminals thus. Ferri attributed much more importance ot  social environmental factors
than did Lombroso.
C r i t i c i s m -
(1) Lombroso has not examined a group of non-criminals. Hence, one could not conclude that

particular physical characteristics were associated with the criminal type.
(2) Criminality is inborn, this view of Lombroso cannot be accepted as it is.
(3) D.r Charles Goring an English prison doctor who studied 3000 British convicts and compared

them with controls from the normal population and concluded that there was absolutely no
evidence for the existence of "physical criminal type". After studying the physical and mental
features of thousands of criminals and non-criminals, D.r Goring found no significant difference
between features of criminals and non-criminals. The modern criminologists now are of hte
views that hte criminal tendencies aer  not hereditary but are acquired
Contribution - Lombroso and the other supporters of this school attacked the orthodox view

that crime was a moral, not a scientific matter and established the approach to ti in terms of natural
causation which lies at the root of modern criminology. He also viewed the offence from the
characteristic of the criminal rather than the crime. This school considered the problem of personality
of the criminal ni  the light of anthropology, biology, psychiatry and jurisprudence. The great contribution
of this school lies ni  the fact that the attention of criminologists was drawn for the first time towards
the individual i.e. the personality of the criminal rather than his act i.e. crime or punishment. This
certainly paved way for the modern penologist ot  formulate a criminal policy embodying the principle
of individualization as a method of reformation.

Post-Lombrosian Researches:- The Modern Crimino-Biological School:-
Lombroso's theories received a severe jolt as a result of the studies made by Charles Goring

which revealed that there was on significant difference between the physical characteristics of criminals
and non-criminals and also among criminals of different kinds. This was stated by Goring ni  hte
English Convict (1913) a statistical study ni  which he compared measurements of 37 specific physical
characteristics of some 3,000 English recidivist prisoners with similar measurements of university
students, hospital patients and members of the British army.

Shortly afterwards, another development occurred in certain countries of Europe which also
influenced some criminologist ni  the U.S.A. The school known as the Modern Crimino-Biological
School originated ni  the third decade of the present century ni  Germany, Austria and Italy and sought
to revive the discredited theories based on physical types. Its exaggerated claims of the relationship
between criminality and certain physical traits had hte blessings of the totalitarian regimes of these



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 27 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
countries since ti was ni  consonance with some of their notions of 'racial superiority'. Ernest
Kretschmer, the famous German psychiatrist, classified the major constitutional types as leptosome
or asthenic type, the athletic type and the pyknic type; the three types showing different behaviour.

Yet one more effort to relate criminal behaviour to the human organism was made in England
after the Second World War with reference to abnormal combinations of chromosomes.

Studies made by Eavert A.Hootan and William H. Sheldon sought to give a new lease of life to
the theories which were dependent on physical deformity in criminals but failed, as well be evident
from the following discussion. As result of the study of 13,873 male criminals ni  various American
States and a control group consisting of 3023 persons, Hootan concluded:

"Criminals are organically inferior. Crime is the resultant of the impact of environment upon
low grade human organism"

According to him criminals were characterized by low and slopping foreheads, thin lips,
compressed ajw angles, straight hair, thin beard and body hair, thick hair on the head, red-brown hair,
blue-grey and mixed coloured eyes, nasal bridges and tips varying ot  both extremes of breadth and
narrowness, protruding and small ears, tattooing, long thin necks and slopping shoulders, Hootan,
however, failed ot  demonstrate as ot  why he regarded these traits as 'Organically inferior'.

Hootan also tried to establish some nexus between the phsycial characteristics of the offenders
and the type of offences committed by them. His study disclosed that murders and robbers were of
tall and thin stature, thieves and burglars were undersized, while sexual offences and assaults were
committed by persons of short and heavy constitution.

Another notable effort to connect criminal tendencies with certain physical traits was made by
William H. Sheldon. He classified the human constitution into three types which he called
endomorphic, mesomorphic and ectomorphic. The first somototype is represented by round, soft, fat
bodies with short tapering limbs and small bones; the second type is reflected ni  muscular bodies with
large trunk, heavy chest, large wrists and hands and heavy bones with the third is shown in lean and
delicate bodies, drooping shoulders, small face and delicate bones.
(e) CARTOGRAPHIC SCHOOL-

This school is also known as Geographical or Ecological school. The main supporters or
exponents of this school are Quetelet, Guerry, C.A. Mills and Montesquie.

This school has emerged ni  the recent year only. The philosopher of this school were concerned
with the distribution of crimes area. This could had its origin in France and it had its follower ni
England and Germany. Adolph Quetelet &A .M. Guerry are the prominent proponents of this school.
This school flourished between 1830 ot  1880. However, the most dominant influence on contribution
to this theory came from the social scientist and scholars at the Department of Sociology, University
of Chicago, between 1892 and 1942

This theory of crime causation sees crime as the expression of the environmental influence.
This school considers that the geographical surroundings determine the culture of the community
concerned, and this culture may vary according to the environment. Unfavourable social conditions
may be responsible for criminality. Social condition may be linked with the ecology or geographical
surrounding of the people concerned



CRIMINAL PS)CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJNE 202)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 28 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Criminologists of this school have applied statistical methods ot  determine and understand
crime ni difierent way. They have plotted the addresses of criminals, the centre of gang activity of the
places where crime have been committed, on am ap and hten have sought ot  account for differences ni
distribution between different areas.

These scholars have tried ot  show the relation between crime and geographical environment.
According to CA. . Mil "crime rates vary with changes ni the barometric pressures and with

directions of wind". The other supporters ear of hte view that crimes against property are frequent ni
winter season and crimes against persons are frequent ni  summer season. Some of the supporters of
this school are of the view that crimes are frequent ni  mountainous areas than ni  plain areas.

The basic notion of this school was that crime si caused yb the conflicts of values ni  the lower
socio-economic classes, various age group, religious and intersect group living ni  certain geographic
area. The proponent of this theory also locate hte roots of hte crime ni  poverty, misery and depravity.
The theories of juvenile delinquents, professional criminals were also enunciated by them.

Montesquie has come ot  certain definite conclusion after making an intensive study of crime
ni  different hemispheres and different altitudes and longitudes of Earth. According to him, the rate of
crime si  very high ni  areas on or near the equator. The climate on equator is intensely hot and humid
and this renders people irritable. This is vital factor of occurring of crime, particular physical violence
and offence. Moreover, the nature of crime si  also grave. But there is a progressive decline ni  hte
incidence and gravity of crime as we move away towards Tropic of Cancer or Tropic of Capricorn. On
or near hte poles, north or south, the incidence and gravity of crime si very low. Even Lombroso, ni  hsi
investigation of the phenomena of crime, discovered that the incidence of crime is less in plains
compared with rocky lands. plateau and valleys.
Criticism -
(1) According to Sutherland the crime rates and physical conditions has no concern. Physical

conditions provide the habitat for human like and consequently may facilitate or impede contacts
among human beings and perhaps ni  that sense be related ot  opportunities for criminal behaviour.
nI  fact hte greater frequency of crime during summer months si due ot  hte greater contact on
the other hand during winter season the frequency crime is less due to lesser social contact.
Thus, physical environment has nothing to do with the crime. Some critics say that climate and

physical conditions have nothing to do with crime, for e.g., crime of homicide.
(2) The ecologists speak only about the influence of the community as if it were a single factor

but there are other factors which also influence the crime such as heredity, lack of parental
care, mental illness, etc.

(3) Even ni  an ideal environment crimes are committed, for e.g., of the two sons born in a good
family, one may turn out to be a criminal, the other may be most law abiding.
Contribution - The supporter of this school have tried to show relation between crime and

geographical environment. Though there are certain defects ni  the theory but it cannot be rejected
totally because ti hold certain substance ni  it. According ot  this school of criminology the phenomenon
of crime is closely related with the geography, climate and altitude of the place where crime takes
place.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 2 9 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

(1) SOCIALIST SCHOOL -
This school si  also known as Marxist school of criminology. The foundation of this school of

criminology can be traced to political and economic philosophy of Karl Marx and his colleague
Friedrich Engels. A Dutch philosopher William Bonger also contributed to the development of this
school.

i) Karl Marx -
He was a prominent exponent of socialism. Marx believed that social phenomena,
including crime was governed by universal principle, namely, the economic principle,
law is a super-structure on economic substrates (structure). The law si  made by capitalist
society to suit them. The capitalist gives a false picture to suit their selfish motive.
Marxist criminology looks behind power, to political and economic systems, for the
ultimate explanation of criminality. Crime is explained as being due to specific
characteristic of the political and economic system that exists during particular historical
period. This school believes that crime is a by-product of the economic system and that
si the result of poverty. The labour produced goods with their hard work and hte capitalist
takes the goods and gives the labour only so much as is necessary for them ot  maintain
bare existence. Marx has also suggested that when the masses become unproductive
and unemployed they become demoralized. In capitalist society, those who are ni  political
power control the definition of crime. The crimes of rich i.é. capitalist are either not
punished or punished leniently, for e.g., corporate crimes, tax frauds, etc. whereas the
crimes of poor are punished severely.

ii) William Bonger -
He was a Dutch social philosopher. According to him there si  no act which si  naturally
immoral or criminal. He believed that crimes are anti-social acts that reflect the current
morality. Laws are made by the people in power only for their own protection, even
though criminal laws may appear to protect members of both the classes. There is
always a tension between rapidly changing morality of the society and static criminal
laws, resulting into conflicts. It is observed that social order is maintained for the benefit
of capitalist at the expense of population as well. Capitalist society leads to relative
poverty for masses and Bonger mentioned that crime is a function of relativ
A e pov

c e
c rty
o .
rding ot  him as the wealth si distributed unequally there wil eb criminality. Hence,

he was of the opinion that to reduce criminality the best solution is to reduce the gap
between the "haves" and "have-nots".

Criticism -
(1) The exponent of this school had exaggerated the economic influence on criminality but that is

not the sole motivating factor. Traffic law, crimes of passion, lust, anger, revenge and jealousy
are not rooted in economics.

(2) According ot  Marx law si  an instrument of domination and exploitation though ot  certain ex
h i t

s e
e n

 t
 correct but it is not the sole function of the law. Law si  passed for the benefit of the

people also.
(3) According to this school acts of alcoholism and prostitution are outcome of capitalism. But

capitalism only cannot be blamed for it.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 30 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908,

Contribution - This school of criminology si  nothing but an extension of general theory 
e of
conomic determination ot  the criminal behaviour. According ot  them all human activities are strictly

influenced and determined by the economic causes and criminal activity si no exception to this rule.
Economic conditions are direct economic mutivation, poverty, resentment over economic exploitation,
commercialised entertainment, unemployment, economic basis of social prestige and behaviour patem.
According to Marx and Engels economic inequalities are the true causes of crime.
(g) TYPOLOGICAL SCHOOL-

According to this school of thought the real cause of criminality lay ni  anthropological feature
of hte criminal. This led ot  the emergence of positive school of criminology. The main exponents of
this school were three eminent Italian criminologists, namely. Cesare Lombroso, Raffaele Garofalo
and Enrico Ferri. It is for this reason that this school si  also called the Italian School of Criminology.

According ot  this school criminology, hte criminal belongs to a particular type. The criminal
types have been classified on the basis of anthropological and psychological data. Lombroso, ni  his
exhaustive study of criminals has discovered certain definite relationship between the physical structure
and the mental make-up of a man. According to him, not only there is a definite type of physical
features and mental traits of the criminal but each category of the criminal has his unique type.•

Body types and crime - Ernst Kretschmer, a German criminologist, published in 1922 his
book Korperbau and Charakter (Physique and Character), ni  which he identified four body types:
(1) Asthenic - tall and thin, Kretschmer suggested that there is an overwhelmingly large

number of asthenic involved ni  petty offences of theft and fraud.
(2) Athletic - well developed muscles, who are involved in crime of violence.
(3) Pyknic short and fat, involved ni  crime of deception and fraud and sometimes

crimes of violence.
(4) Dysplastic - mixed body type, tends ot  commit crime involving decency and morality

and sometimes crimes of violence.
The body type theories have been rejected by most of the criminologists after controlled

research efforts found no significant relationship between body build and self-reported delinquency.
It is said that social factors and not biology plays an important role.
(h) PSYCHIATRIC-

This school of criminology si also known as psychoanalytic theory or Freudian school. The
psychoanalytic school of criminology si based upon psychoanalytic theory of the Austrian Neurologist
Sigmnd Freud, August Aichorn and they shed some light on crime from the psychoanalytic standpoint.
The other important psychoanalyst ot  contribute ot  criminological thought where Alfred Adler, Car!
Jung, Erik Erickson, Healy and Bonner, and Rodi and Wineman.

Main ideology - The psychoanalytic theories argue that criminal behaviour originates primarily
in the personalities of offenders rather than ni  their biology or ni  situation. Personality refers to the
reasonably stable patterns of behaviour, including thoughts, feelings and emotions, that distinguish
people from one another. Personality controls a person's way of adapting to life experiences and,
therefore, separates people on the basis of their behaviour. Psycho-criminologists link criminality to
disturbances of the personality and maintain that persons with an abnormal personality, whatever the
cause, wil eb more likely ot  engage ni  anti-social behaviour because they view the world differently.
nI  short, hte psychoanalytic model of the criminal offender depicts an aggressive, frustrated person
dominated by events that occurred early in childhood. According ot  this school psychos are of two



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 3 1 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
categories -

Organic Psychosis -
Refer to loss of memory, mental degeneration or violent emotional disturbance.

ii) Functional Psychosis -
Is a mental conflict or fight with normal person.

Freud Sigmund -
Freud sees emotional imbalance as the main factor ni  the causation of crime. The mentally and

emotionally "defective" si  more prone to crime than the emotionally stable.
Freud postulated a three-point structure for the human personality. The primitive part of people's

mental make-up, si  present at birth. It represents unconscious biological drives, such as food, sex,
water, ari etc. The di  requires instant gratification without concern for the rights of others. The ego si
that part of the personality that compensates for the demands of the di  by helping people guides their
actions to remain within the boundaries of social convention. The ego takes into account what is
practical and conventional by societal standards. The superego is the force of self-criticism and
conscience and ti develops when an individual assimilates the moral standards and values of parents
and the community.

Thus, Fred explained mental conflicts ni  the personality of the criminal ni  the terms of 'id',
ego and superego'. There si a constant conflict between these three elements i.e. id, ego and superego.
Therefore, he contends that crime is the substitute of symbolic behaviour of a person. Thus, the
desire of committing suicide si  out of the feeling of inferiority, frustration, depression or anxiety.

Alfred Alder - He is the founder of individual psychology. He contended that inferiority
complex is the main cause of crime. He attributes criminal behaviour to inferiority complex and
observes that crime is an overt compassion for a deep feeling of inferiority, which is often the result
of distrust or neglect of child by parents.

August Aichorn - He contended that the most important causes of crime are -
(1) Faulty methods of child training. He argues that parents are responsible to make the

child criminal either when the parents have no time ot  give love or give love too much
to the child.

(2) A child having criminal parents are generally upset, and therefore, take ot  crime itself.
A child should be given proper treatment to make their life happy and provide them
pleasurable environment.

Carl Jung - He was one of the closest students of Freud Sigmund who developed analytical
psychology. According to him an important aspect of human psychic structure is the collective
unconsc ious .

Aristotle - The great philosopher Aristotle mentioned four classical laws of association
centuries ago. He stated that -

(1) similarity,
(2) contrast,
(3) succession in time, and
(4) coexistence, have a close bearing on the psychological concept of crime. Each of these

factors greatly influence the behavioural pattern of the criminal.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 32 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Psychological depravity ni  a person due ot  physical defects and incapacities have 
imp a

or ls
tan o

t bearing on crimin  n
a a
lity. Thus, persons who are deaf, dumb or those who suffer from white-

spots, eye-squint (blink) and other physical deformities meet disgust thereby suffer loss of social
status and hence they tend ot  commit crime more frequently. Likewise. persons with ugly look and
dark complexion also tend ot  behave criminally and mostly indulge ni  sexual offences because fo
inferiority complex ni  them which makes them think that they are being neglected by fair sex dueo t
hatred and indifferences. This generates in them a feeling that they are out-caste and their
dissatisfactions, revengeful attitude towards women and irritations instigates them ot  resort ot  criminal
acts ni  an effort to achieve what they could not otherwise get through legitimate means.

Contribution - The psychiatrist also maintain that criminal behaviour is very much connected
ot  personality of the criminal. There si something uncompromising ni  the personality of the criminals
which compels him to revolt against adjusted norms of the society.

(i) SOCIOLOGICALAND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGICAL-
The origin of sociological concept of crime can be traced back to the latter part of 19ht
century when sociologists undertook intensive study of crime-causation in its economic
perceptive. It is contended that apart from the personality of criminal and the effect fo
biological, mental and psychological factors on him, ti is necessary to consider hte
impact of various social and environmental conditions within which crimes generate
American criminologists attributed criminality to social conditions of the criminal.
Roscoe Pound, Dr. Walter Reckless, Gabriel Tarde and Prof. Edwin H. Sutherland aer
the main exponents of sociological school of criminology.
This school presupposes that criminals are a product of society. The impact of
sociological factors si  so great on persons that they either shun criminality or embrace
it, depending on their environment and immediate social condition.

Gabriel Tarde - He was a French philosopher, psychologist and criminologist
of international repute. He contended that the most significant influence upon a
criminal was the influence of social environment. Tarde clearly saw imitation sa
a principle role player ni  the causation of criminality. He believed that most of
our culture si  transmitted by imitation but Tarde neglected to analyse the great
influence of economic motives and also did not take cognizance of racial and
cultural factors affecting criminality.

ii) Edwin H. Sutherland - Prof. Sutherland made an intensive study of criminals
and offered two major explanations for criminal behaviour, namely -
(1) The processes operating at the time of the occurrence of crime which he

called the dynamic explanation of crime, and
(2) The processes operating at hte earlier life history of the criminal which

he learned as the historical or generic explanation of crime.
The dynamic explanation of crime-causation was subsequently favoured by the psychologists,

biologists and psychiatrist. It suggests that the cause of criminal behaviour lies in the immediate
favourable situation which the criminal finds conducive for criminal act, for e.g., offence fo
misappropriation of hte public funds can only be commited by persons who handle large sums fo



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 33 = (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
money, offence of theft is often committed in lonely house and offence of sex are common in dwellings
where number of family members are limited and opportunities for privacy and loneliness are easily
available.

Edwin H. Sutherland propounded his differential association theory.
As ot  the historical or generic explanation of criminal behaviour or differential association

theory. Sutherland drew following conclusions -
(1) Criminal behaviour is learnt and not inherited.
(2) Criminal behaviour is learnt through interaction of the criminal with other persons in

the process o f communication.
(3) The greatest influence on the individual is that of his intimate personal group which

moulds his conduct in many ways.
(4) The process of learning criminal behaviour involves all of the same mechanism that are

involved ni  any other learning.
(5) The association with regard ot  criminal behaviour and anti-criminal behaviour may vary

in respect of its duration, priority or intensity.
(6) Criminal behaviour is an expression of general needs and values.
(7) Criminal learning includes -

(a) Technique of committing crime.
(b) The specific of the motives, drives (force), rationalization (reason) and attitudes.

Differential association theory of Sutherland consists of three integral elements -
(a) differential association,
(b) differential social organisation, and
(c) cultural conflict.
When one analyses the relationship among these three central components, it can be seen that

the theory operates on more than one level. The two most overt (open) levels are the individuals and
the group. The concept of differential association is itself an attempt to explain how an individual
becomes criminal, at this level the theory si  social psychological. Differential social organisation is
an attempt ot account for uneven distribution of crime throughout different groups in society. There
si a third level, the normative level, which si represented by Sutherland as cultural conflict. The theory
attempts a logical, systematic formulation of the chain of interrelations that makes crime reasonable
and understandable as normal, learned behaviour without having ot  resort ot  assumptions of biological
or psychological deviance. Sutherland's theory of differential association is not a multiple-factor
approach, but a theory of ecological pluralism which is broad enough to include various contributory
factors of the causation of criminality.

The differential association theory is based on the assumption that a criminal act occurs when
a situation appropriate for it as defined by the person is present. This theory should be regarded as
tentative, and should be tested by all other factual information and theories which are applicable.

Clinical school -
With the development of human psychology, there si  greater emphasis on the study of emotional

aspect of human nature. This branch of knowledge has enabled modern criminologist to understand
the criminal behaviour of offenders in its proper perspective. Thus clinical school takes into account
variety of factors.



CRIMIS AL. PSYCHOLOGI AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJ EN 20)
Prot. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 34 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Contribution - It further suggest that hte criminals who do not respond favourably ot
correctional method must be punished with imprisonment or transportation for life, while who aer
merely victims of social condition should eb subjected ot  correctional methods such as probation.
parole, reformatories, open air camps etc,. The main theme of this school si that personality of man si
a combination of internal &e xternal factors therefore punishment should depend on personality fo
the accused.
k) M o d e r n school -

Modern critics attack the traditional criminological view on the ground that their search for
characteristic difference between the class of criminals and class of non-criminals rests upon erroneous
assumption. The proponents of moder criminology attempt ot explain criminality in terms of social
conflict. According ot  Engles the resentment among the deprived class of society due ot  their
exploitation & demoralisation was one of the reasons for growing criminality therefore, there was
need to change the whole of the social & economic structure of the society.

Contribution - Modern criminologist prefer ot  identify hte criminal with a particular social
type who has been victim of well known inequalities between social classes, private wealth, private
property, social power, etc.

4) C O N C L U S I O N -
The various school of criminology have given hte causes of the crime and policies of control

of crime. Each school of criminology explain crime ni  its own manner, suggest punishments and
preventive measures to suit ideology. It could be seen that each of the schools represents the social
attitude of the people towards crime and criminal ni  a given time. These schools have contributed ot
the emergence of criminology as a branch of knowledge and devoted their attention to analysis of
crime-causation.



CRIMISAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJ EV 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 35 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
MODULE - 02

PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIME

MEANING, PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY

SYNOPSIS:-
.1 Introduction.

Historical Background of Criminal Psychology.
.3 Meaning and Concept of Criminal Psychology.
.4 Importance of Criminal Psychology:
.5 Definition of Criminal Psychology
6. Criminal Psychologist and its importance in the legal system
7. Role of Criminal Psychologist.
8. Scope of Criminal Psychology.
9. Importance of Utility of Study of Psychology
10. Theories of Criminal Psychology (Scope)
11. Conclusion.

I n t r o d u c t i o n : -

Psychology as a field, has seen great transformation ni  the history, with the advancement in
terms like 'Globalization' and Liberalization' which played a central role in the 1990's, which now
have been modified to serve more specific paradigms.

This expanding horizon of Psychology has led to the Emergence of Criminal Psychology as an
independent field. Today criminal psychology has became a specialized area which is growing and has
i m m e n s e scope.

2. Historical Background of Criminal Psychology:-
Criminal psychology has a relatively short history, dating back to the late nineteenth century,

and ni  India it still is ni  a process to spread its wings. In the early century, studies were done in relation
ot various aspects of criminal psychology but this form of psychology was actually not referred ot  as
criminal psychology, and most of the psychologists conducting research in the area did not formally
identify themselves as Criminal psychologists and there has been a substantial amount of overlap in
the past explanations of what is forensic and criminal psychology.
3. Meaning and Concept of Criminal Psychology:-

The term 'criminal psychology' has been defined in numerous ways.
Criminal psychology means:-
i) the study of the mind and its working in relation to crime.
ii) the study of the mental processes, motivational patterns, and behavior of criminals.
iti) the study of the wills, thoughts, intentions and reactions of criminals.

•Criminal psychology' si  a science, which helps the investigative institutions ni  fulfilling their
mission more effectively by applying a psychological knowledge to it.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 36 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Criminal psychology studies everything that si related ot  criminal behavior, this includes hte
thought, processes, intentions, motivations and reactions of criminals.

Etymologically, the very word 'psychology' means the study of hte soul as ti si derived from
hte Greek word 'psuchi" Latin 'psyche' meaning s'oul' (Atman) and 'Logos' signifying ar ational
course of study or 'science'

4. Importance of Criminal Psychology:-
Criminal psychology, also referred ot  sa criminological psychological, si the study of hte

wills, thoughts, intentions, and reactions of criminals and al that partakes ni  the criminal behavior. tI
si related to hte field of criminal anthropology. The study goes deeply into what makes someone
commit a crime, but also hte reactions after the crime. Criminal psychologists are often called up as
witnesses in court cases ot  help hte jury ot  understand the mind of the criminal. Some types of
psychiatry also deal with aspects of criminal behavior:
5. Definition of Criminal Psychology:-

The term 'criminal psychology' has been defined ni  a number of different ways. Even today
there si  no accepted definition. For example, ten years ago two leading criminal psychologists
G.H.Gudjpnsson and L.R.C.Haward (1998) ni  the United Kingdom defined ti as, 'that branch of applied
psychology which is concerned with the collection, examination and presentation of evidence for
judicial purposes'

tI would be seen from this explanation that criminal psychology si concerned with investigative
(those to do with the police) court processes.

A leading American psychologist has gone some way ot provide this. He described criminal
psychology as, a'ny application of psychological knowledge or methods ot  a task faced by hte legal
system (Wrightsman 2001). This more inclusive definition involves the whole of the legal system.
6. Criminal Psychologist and its importance in the legal system:-

Psychiatrists and psychologists are licensed professionals who can assess both mental and
physical states. Criminal psychologists varies profiler ot  investigator, and reporter. At the same time
the role of criminal psychologist as a counselor and a psychologists cannot be ignored in this profile.

In the early years of the 20" Century, psychologists began to offer psychological perspectives
on criminal behavior and to speculate about the causes of crime. Criminal psychology typically is not
considered in the narrow definition of forensic psychology, primarily because it appears more
theoretical than clinical ni  nature. However, ni  its youth, criminal psychology was essentially clinical
in nature, as the theories often centered on the measurable mental capacities of offenders.

nI  the early 1960s, a psychological criminology distinct from psychiatric and more extensive
than psychometrics, began to show signs of life. Hans Toch (1961), who was also making significant
contribution to criminology- Legal and Criminal Psychology.
7. Role of Crimina! Fsychologist:-

Criminal psychologist cover a range of roles, such as:
Researching evidence to support practice.

ii) Implementing treatment programmes.

り



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2012)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 3 7 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
il1) Modifying offender behavior.
iv) Advising parole boards.
V) Responding to changing needs of prisoners and staff.
Vi) Stress management techniques for staff and prisoners
vii) Statistical analysis used for prisoner profiling.
viji) Using psychological testing to assess offenders.
ix) Providing psychological reports to the defense/prosecution.
x) Appearing in court as an expert witness.
xi) Crime analysis.
xii) Mental health tribunals.

The Four Roles of Criminal Psychologists:-
nI 1981, one of the fathers of UKs'  criminal psychology- Professor Lionel Haward- described

four ways that psychologist may perform upon being professionally involved ni  criminal proceedings.
These are the following:-

a) Clinical:- nI  this situation, the psychologists si  involved ni  assessment and individual ni  order
to provide a clinical judgment. The psychologist can use assessment tools, interview or
psychometric tool ni  order ot  aid ni  his/her assessment. These assessment can help police.
For example, help finding out whether he/ she is capable to stand trial or whether the individual
has mental illness which means, that he/she si  unable to understand the proceedings.

b) Experimental:- In this case, the task of psychologist is to perform a research in order to
inform a case. This may involve false memory, eyewitness credibility experiments and such.
For Example, this way questions similar to "how likely would a witness see an object at 100
meters? Will be answered.

c) Actuarial:- This role involves usage of statistics in order to inform a case. For example, a
psychologist may be asked to provide probability of an event occurring. Therefore, the courts
may ask how likely a person will reoffend if a sentence is declined.

d) Advisory:- Here, a psychologists may advise police about how to proceed with the investigation
. For example, which is the best way to interview, how best cross-examine a vulnerable for
another expert witness, how an offender will act after committing the offence.

c) Profiling:- nI  this the psychologist will usually be involved ni  the assessment of an individual
ni  order to provide a clinical judgment. The psychologist could use interviews, assessment
tools or psychometric tests (Example: special questionnaires) to aid in his or her assessment.
These assessments can inform the police, the courts, or the prison and probation services
about the psychological functioning of an individual and can therefore influence how the different
sections of the criminal justice system process the individual ni  question. For example, a
psychologist may be asked to assess individuals in order to determine whether they are fit to
stand trial or whether they have a mental illness which means that they would not understand
the proceedings. Profiles are required to carry accurate information. Offender profiling has
received a great deal of attention from the media in recent years. Media reporting of the
utilization of criminal psychologists ni  high profile cases has introduced the general public to
the notion of offender profiling.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOG (EDITION IJ EN 202)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 38 B (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

As ap art of the Correctional System:- nI hte Indian judicial system there are many times
when the role of ap sychologist as an interventionist si required and si suggested. nI  such cases

• the role of acriminal psychologist si ot  assess hte problem. ni case of clinical issue ot  od het
diagnosis with or without the help of psychometric testing. understand hte cause behind hte
problem, propose and apply a therapeutic intervention.
Experimental:- Thsi  can involve hte psychologist performing research ni  order ot  inform a
case. This can involve carrying out experimental tests ni  order ot illustrate a point or provide
further information ot  the courts (for example, how likely ti si that someone can correctly
identity an object ni  the hand of an individual from a distance of 100 metres at twilight.

h) Courts:- There aer  many opportunities ot apply criminal psychology within hte courts system.
Criminal psychologists are often asked ot  attend criminal and civil cases. nI  the criminal field
they may eb requiredot assess competency, that is, whether hte person si fit ot  stand trial, can
make legal decisions on their own behalf, and os  on.
Correctional systems:- Some criminal psychologists work ni  prisons, jails and juvenile
correction facilities or psychiatric hospitals. They may be involved ni  a variety of roles, such
as therapeutic intervention, diagnosis, psychometric testing and os on. Their evaluations can
be important ot  future paroles.

8. Scope of Psychology:-
Where there si behavior, one finds the scope of psychology. Behaviour of normal, abnormal.

the young and the old belonging ot  al  spheres of life are studied by psychology. Its scope si not
confined to human behavior but encompasses the behaviour of animals too.

Scope of psychology si too wide. tI studies, describes and explains the behaviour of all hte
living organisms. Living organisms and their life activities are countless. Therefore, no limit can be
imposed upon the scope of the subject of psychology.

Behaviour of individuals differs, mostly on hereditary influences. We inherit our bodily structure
through out parents. We inherit the bodily structure with its capacities for growth and development
with some limitations on its final attainments.

9. Importance or Utility of Study of Criminal Psychology:-
Criminal Psychology si applied ot  make human life better and more effective ni  the environment

in which man lives. Criminal Psychology has contributed a great deal ni  the field of education, business,
industry, medicine, law, politics, etc.
.1 In the field of medicine, for the treatment of mental illness or physical sickness, psychology

helps doctors and nurses as behaviour counts much more than hte medicines. Psychology has
contributed valuable therapeutic measures like behaviour therapy, play therapy, group therapy,
shock therapy, psycho-analysis etc. for the cure of patients suffering with mental diseases.

2. The use of psychology has helped ni  the detection of crime and dealing with criminal.
.3 Prison reforms are made based on psychological principles and rehabilitated methods.

Politicians make use of psychology yb applying the group dynamics, social distance, propaganda,
leadership etc. for gaining popularity, leading masses and efficient administration.

4. Major use of psychology si ni  the field of guidance and counseling as it provides valuable
guidance ot persons seeking solution ot  their problems of adjustment ni  the field of education.

3 .



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 3 9 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

employment and personal life. The counselor assess behaviour of the person concerned through
various psychological measures and techniques and then suggests ways to solve his difficulty.

5. Psychology helps the individual ot  know and assess his own abilities, shortcoming, habits and
temperaments and to develop well balanced and integrated personality.

6. Psychology helps military officers ni  the selection, training. promotion and classification of
defence personality.

. 7 Thus, psychology has a wide field of application and utility. There is no profession where we
do not have opportunities of utilizing the principles and techniques of psychology.

10. Theories of Criminal Psychology / Scope of Criminal Psychology
.1 Biological Theories of Crime:-

Sheldon's (1949) Constitutional Theory:-
Sheldon's theory si also regarded as amongst the early theory of Personality. Applying the

same description of body types, Sheldon proposed that crime si largely a product of an individual's
body type. or somatotype, which is assumed to be linked ot  an individual's temperament.
Jacobs, Brunton, Melville, Brittain, and McClemont's (1965) Chromosomal Theory:-

Chromosomal theory which si still studied and has been further explored to get the in-depth
details probably started with Jacobs and her colleagues who proposed that chromosomal irregularity
si linked ot  criminal behaviour. A normal femal has two X chromosomal, whereas a normal male has
one Xa nd one Y chromosome. However, it was discovered that some men posses two Y chromosomes,
which ti was proposed, made them more masculine and, therefore, more aggressive. According to
Jacobs and her collogues, this enhanced aggressiveness would result ni  an increased chance that these
men would commit violent crimes.

Mark and Ervin's (1970) Dyscontrol Theory:-
Accoding ot  Mark and Ervin, symptoms of this dyscontrol stdrome can include outburst of

sudden physical violence, impulsive sexual behavior, and serious traftic violations.
.2 Sociological Theories of Crime:-

Sociological theories of crime reflect on the societal and cultural factors as major contributors
of criminal behavior. There are many theories which fall under the sociological perspective and each
one of them attempt to explain how one's environment and social forces can aid to crime.
Clifford R. Shaw and Henry D. Mckay;s (1900's) Social Disorganization theory:-

Focuses on the urban conditions that effect crime rates. A disorganized area is one in which
institutions of social control, such as family, commercial establishments and schools have broken
down and can no longer perform their expected or stated functions. Indicators of social disorganization
include high unemployment and school dropout rates, deteriorated housing, low income levels and
large numbers of single parent households. Residents in these areas experience conflict and despair,
and as a result, criminal behavior flourishes.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITIONJUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, P u n e . Page : 04 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Merton's (1938) Strain Theory:-

Merton proposed that crime si  largely a product of the strain felt yb certain individua
s ls n
o  i
cicty (typically from the lower class) who have limited access ot  legitimate means (Example.

education) for achieving values goals of success (Example, money). Merton argued that while some
of these individuals will be happy with lesser goals that are achievable, o
m thers

e  w
a il
n l t
s (

ur
E n ot

x  il
a leg
m itim

p ate
le, crime) ni  an attempt ot  achieve the valued goals.

Sutherland's (1939) Differential Association Theory:-
Sutherland proposed that criminal behavior si learned through social interactions in which

people are exposed to values that are favourable ot  violations of the law.
Becker's (1963) Labelling Theory:-

Becker proposed that deviance is not inherent ot  an act, but a label attached to an act by society.
Thus, a "criminal" results from a process of society labeling an individual a criminal.
.3 Psychological Theories of Crime:-

Bowlby's (1944) Theory of Maternal Deprivation:-
Children will experience log-term problems ni  developing positive social relationships and

will instead develop antisocial behavior patterns.

Eysneck's (1964) Bicsocial Theory of Crime:-
Eysenck believed that some individuals (Example, extroverts and neurotics) are born with

cortical and autonomic nervous systems that influence their ability ot  learn from hte consequences of
their behavior, especially the negative consequences experienced ni  childhood as part of the
socialization and conscience-building process. Due ot  their poor condition-ability, ti is assumed that
individuals who exhibit high levels of extraversion and neuroticism will have strong antisocial
inclinations.

Gottfredson and Hirschi's (1990) General Theory of Crime:-
Gottfredson and Hirschi argue that low self-control, internalized early ni  life, in the presence

of criminal opportunities explains an individual's propensity ot  commit crimes.

Psychodynamic Trait Theory :-
Psychodynamic (Psychoanalytical) therapy was developed by Sigmund Freud ni  the late 1800's

and has then become a significant theory ni  the history of criminality.
The theory is a three-part structure made up of the id, the ego, and the super ego.

11. Conc lus ion : -
nI  1913, J.B. Watson, the father of the Behaviorist school proposed ot  elaborate the concept of

the term behaviour including ni  it both human and animal behaviour and defined psychology as the
science of behaviour-consisting of learned responses ot  external stimuli that are perceived by senses.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE. 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, l'une. Page : 4 1 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
PSYCHOLOGICALVS. PSYCHO-ANALYTICALAPPROACH TO CRIME

SYNOPSIS:-
.1 Introduction.

i . Main Ideology b. Contribution
Psychology as Science of Soul.

.3 Nature of Psychology (Is Psychology a Science?).

.4 Is Psychology Positive Science or Normative Science.
Origin and Development.

6. The Concept.
7. Sigmund freud's Psychoanalysis.
8. Post-Freudian Psychoanalytic Theory

Alfred Adler (1870-1937)
10. Carl Jung (1875-1961)
11. William Helay and Augusta Bronner in (1931).
12. Erik Erikson's (1902-1984)
13. Historical Background

1. I n t r o d u c t i o n : -
This school of criminology is also known as psychoanalytic theory or Freudian school. The

psychoanalytic school of criminology is based upon psychoanalytic theory of the Austrian Neurologist
Sigmnnd Freud, August Aichorn and they shed some light on crime from the psychoanalytic standpoint.
The other important psychoanalyst to contribute to criminological thought were Alfred Adler, Carl
Jung, Erik Erickson, Healy and Bonner, and Rodi and Wineman.
a) Main ideology - The psychoanalytic theories argue that criminal behaviour originates primarily

ni  the personalities of offenders rather than in their biology or in situation. Personality refers
to the reasonably stable patterns of behaviour, including thoughts, feelings and emotions, that
distinguish people from one another. Personality controls a person's way of adapting ot  life
experiences and, therefore, separates people on the basis of their behaviour. Psycho-
criminologists link criminality ot  disturbances of the personality and maintain that persons
with na abnormal personality, whatever the cause, will be more likely ot  engage ni  anti-social
behaviour because they view the world differently. In short, the psychoanalytic model of the
criminal offender depicts an aggressive, frustrated person dominated by events that occurred
early in childhood. According to this school psychos are of two categories -
.1 Psychological depravity ni  a person due ot  physical defects and incapacities have also

an important bearing on criminality. Thus, persons who are deaf, dumb or those who
suffer from white-spots, eye-squint (blink) and other physical deformities meet disgust
thereby suffer loss of social status and hence they tend to commit crime more
frequently.

.2 Persons with ugly look and dark complexion also tend to behave criminally and mostly
indulge ni  sexual offences because of inferiority complex in them which makes them
think that they are being neglected by fair sex due to hatred and indifferences. This
generates ni  them a feeling that they are out-caste and their dissatisfactions, revengeful



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 42 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
attitude towards women and irritations instigates them ot  resort ot  criminal actsn i na
effort ot  achieve what they could not otherwise get through legitimate means.

b) Contribution - The psychiatrist also maintain that criminal behaviour is very much connected
ot  personality of hte criminal. There si something uncompromising ni  hte personality of hte
criminals which compels him ot  revolt against adjusted norms of the society.

2. Psychology as Science of Soul:-
Etymologically, hte very word 'psychology' means the study of hte soul sa ti si derived from

t o Greek words 'psuchi (Latin 'psyche*) meaning *soul' (Atman) and 'Logos' signifying a rational
course of study or 'science.

Psychology as Science of BEHAVIOUR:-
The first man ot  define psychology as the science of behavior was an English psychologist.

Wiliam Mcdougal. nI book 'Physiological Psychology' published ni  1905, he wrote "psychology
may eb best and most comprehensively defined as the positive science of the conduct of living
creatures". Later on ni  1908, ni  his book "Introduction to Social Psychology", he added the word
'behaviour ot  his definition and finally, ni  his book A' n Outline of Psychology' he defined ti thus-
*Psychology si  a science which aims to give us better understanding and control of the behavior of the

organism as a whole.
nI  his book 'Essentials of Psychology' (1911), Water Bowers Philsbury stated that "Psychology

may be most satisfactorily defined as the science of human behavior."
According ot  Skinner, "Psychology is science of behavior and experience."

3. Nature of Psychology (Is Psychology a Science?):-
Psychology si considered sa a science. Generally, science is a simple way of acquiring

knowledge. Science is a systematic study of facts.
.1 Psychology possesses a well organized theory which is supported by the relevant psychological

laws and principles.
2. The laws of psychology have been found to be correct ni  every time and place, under the same

conditions. The general principles of psychology are universal.
.3 The laws of psychology are veridical. By verification and reverification psychological principles

have been found to be true everywhere. They can be verified by any person.
.4 Psychology not only observes behavior, but also finds out cause-effect relationship ni  it. tI

believes that every behavior has its roots, the facts of its causing, influencing or nurturing.
.5 Psychology predicts human behavior. By discovering the cause-effect relationship, psychology

also predicts human behavior and these predictions can be verifiable through psychological
tests .
The methods and techniques employed ni  the study of the behavior in psychology are quite
scientific. Experimental method si  being used ot  observe phenomenon in strictly controlled
situations ni  psychological laboratories.

.7 Psychology emphasizes on the search for truth by advocating objectively, reliability and validity
in the assessment of the behavior.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JLSE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 4 3 = (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
.4 Is Psychology Positive Science or Normative Science:-

Psychology si  the study of human behavior.
2. Behaviour of man cannot be studied ni  laboratories as behavior is typically influenced by many

factors i.e. multiple basis of behavior.
3. The objective of the psychological studies si ot  improve the human condition yb discovering

something that can be put to practical use. tI aims at 'what ought to be'.
5. Origin and Development of Psychoanalytic to Crime:-

The Psychoanalytic School of criminology is based upon the psycho-analytic theory of the
Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud (1856-1939). August Aichorn, the Viennese psycho-analyst also
shed some light on crime, from the psychoanalytic stand-point ni  his famous book, Wayward Youth
(1935). The other important Psychoanalysts ot  contribute ot  criminology thought were Alfred Adler.
Carl Jung. Erik Erickson, Healy and Bonner, and Redl and Wineman.
6. The Concept:-

The psychoanalytic theories argue that criminal behaviour originates primarily in the
personalities of offenders rather than ni  their biology or ni  situation. Personalities refers to the
reasonably stable patterns of behavior, including thoughts, feelings and emotions, that distinguish
people from one another. Personalities controls a person's way of adapting to life experiences and.
therefore, separates people on the basis of their behaviour. Psychocriminologists link criminality to
disturbances of the personality and maintain that persons with an abnormal personality (whatever the
cause) will be more likely to engage in anti-social behaviour because they view the world differently.
nI  short, the psychoanalytic model of the criminal offender depicts an aggressive, frustrated person
dominated by events that occurred early in childhood.
7. Sigmund freud's Psychoanalysis:-

Freud sees emotional imbalance as the main factor in the causation of crime. The mentally and
emotionally "defective" si  more prone to crime than one emotionally stable. Freud postulated a three-
point structure for the human personality. The id, the primitive part of people's mental make-up, is
present at birth. It represents unconscious biological drives, such as food, sex, water, air, sleep etc.
The di  requires instant gratification without concern for the rights of others. The ego is that part of
the personality that compensates for the demands of the di  by helping people guide their actions to
remain within the boundaries of social convention. The ego takes into account what is practical and
conventional by societal standards. The supergo is the force of self-criticism and conscience and it
develops when an individual assimilates the moral standards and values of parents and community.

Example of this three parts personality structure working in reality. An individual's id might
demand pleasures, such as sex; and unable to get it, may decide to opt for rape, the superego makes the
person feel guilty for such a desire; the ego works out a compromise and impels him to visit a prostitute.
In our example above, had the superego been very weak the individual may have gone ahead with the
rape; similarly had the superego been extremely powerful it would have been able to subdue the id
conclusively and the compromise situation would also not have occurred.



CRININAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 44 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
8. Post-Freudian Psychoanalytic Theory.

August Aichorn was the psychoanalyst who perhaps wrote the most on criminality
examining many delinquent youths, Aichorn concluded that societal stress, though demanding.,  cAouftledr
not alone result ni  a life a crime, unless a predisposition existed that prepared youths psychologically
for anti-social acts. He labeled this latent delinquency. Latent delinquency si  found ni  youngsters
whose personality requires (compels) them to seek immediate gratification (to act impulsively
c )
o ,
nsider satisfaction of their personal needs more important than relating ot  others, and satisfy

instinctive urges without consideration of right and wrong (that si, they lack guilty).
Aichorn contended that the most important causes of crime are:-

1. Faulty methods of child training. Here, Aichorn argues that when parents do not give or give
love too easily, the child does not learn to give up his instinctual demands and will become a
criminal. He wil make the necessary sacrifice only fi eh feels that his parents "truly" love
him.

.2 Ac hild having criminal parents may find his moral judgment (superego) upset, and, therefore,
take to crime itself.

3. Ac hild may sometimes be constitutionally incapable of making the identifications with his
parents which social adoptions demand and out of frustration may take to crime.

9. Alfred Adler (1870-1937) :-
The founder of individual psychology asw inferiority complex as a crime causative factor. He

contended that crime is taken-up due to hte inferiority complex of a person and that the crime embodies
a sense of achievement, hostility and revenge and, therefore, bolsters the person's ego.
10. Carl Jung (1875-1961) was one of the closest students of Sigmude Freud. He developed

analytical psychology. According to Jung, an important aspect of the human psychic structure
si hte collective unconscious, which si  a sort of racial memory of the past experience of hte
human species.

11. William Helay and Augusta Bronner in (1931). They used in their study a criminal group
and a non-criminal control group, with focus on the parent-child relationship.]

12. Erik Erikson's (1902-1984) theory of psycho social development holds that humans go
through eight stages of ego development. These stages are:-
1. Trusting their mother
.2 Becoming acclimated to surrounding.
.3 Master fundamental skills.
4. Learning careers.
5. Committing to love.
6. Being creative.

Exhibiting wisd m.
Exhibiting dignity.

Erikson points out the identity crisis:- aperiod of serious personal questioning people undertake
in an effort to determine their own values and sense of direction.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 45 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
BEHAVIOUR APPROACH TO CRIME

BEHAVIOUR SYSTEM

1. Introduction
2. Characteristics of Behavioural System in Crime.
3. Process of Criminal Behaviour:-
.4 Illustration of Behaviour System in Crime of Theft:-
5. Reasons for the existence of professional theft:-
1. Introduction:-

A behaviour system should be defined as a way of life which grows out of a united casual
process. It is considered as a peculiar disease, which is differentiated from other diseases.

Crime may be seen as human activity that deviates from social norms in intolerable ways.
Despite our best efforts ot  fight ,ti crime continues to plague society since thousands of years and
endanger its very foundation; the social order.

Crime generally consists of a great variety of criminal acts. These criminal acts differ among
t h e m s e l v e s in-

a. motives and characteristics of offenders.
b. characteristics of victims.
C. situation in which they are committed.
d. techniques which are used.
e. damages which result and
f. the reaction of the victims and public in genera.
g. quantum of loss suffered by victim.

All the criminal activities depend upon the behaviour system in crime.
'Behaviour system' is a very important aspect ni  the study about crimes. The reason is that

common element of violation of law' is found ni  every crime. Although no specific or definite reason
can eb assigned for the commission of the crimes, yet it is true that crime spoils the whole system,
peace and order of the society.

2. Characteristics of Behavioural System in Crime.
There are three main characteristics of the system in crimes-

i) We cannot call a behaviour system in crime to be merely an aggregation of individual criminal
acts. It is an integrated unit which also includes in addition to the individual acts, the codes,
traditions, social relationship among the direct participations and indirect participation of
many other persons. This behaviour system in crime may be illustrated by professional theft,
drug addition, racketeering, fraudulently advertising and manipulation of corporate securities.

ii) The behaviour which occurs ni  a behaviour system is not unique to any particular individual but
it si the common behaviour. It operates ni  the same way ni  a large number of persons.

iii) Common and joint participation ni  the system is the essential characteristic of behaviour system.
So it can be defined by the feeling of identification of those who participate ni  it. Criminals
get mutual cooperation from each other because of the fact that sentimental adjustment and
coordination si  generally found in them in committing illegal act.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 46 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908

The norms of the behaviour system are universal. As such they are applicable not only ot hte
specific criminals but also to all the criminals alike.
Process of Criminal Behaviour:-
Criminal behaviour is a behaviour ni  violation of the criminal law and also any behaviour that

has criminal intent, or results ni  punishment by law enforcement at hte same time. It refers ot  that
action, or reaction yb an individual or body of individuals that has criminal intent and against the rules
and regulations of a country or society. The process by which a particular person comes ot engage ni
the criminal behaviour is as follows:-

Criminal behaviour si learned. This means negatively that the criminal behaviour si  not inherited
as such. The person who si not already trained ni  crime, does not invent criminal behaviour.
just as a person does not make mechanical inventions unless he has trained in mechanics.

ii) Criminal behaviour si learned ni  interaction with other persons ni  a process of communication.
This communication si verbal ni  many respect but includes also the communication of gestures.

iit) The principal part of the learning of criminal behaviour occurs within intimate personal group
This means negatively that the impersonal agencies of communication such as movies and
newspapers, play relatively ni  unimportant part ni  the genesis of criminal behaviour.

iv) The learning of criminal behaviour includes:-
a) hte techniques of committing the crime, which are sometimes very complicated and

sometimes simple.
the specific direction of motives, drives, rationalization and attitudes. The specific
direction of motives and drives learned from the definition of the legal codes si
favourahle or unfavourable. In some societies, an individual is surrounded by persons
who invariably define the legal codes as rules to be observed, while, in others, he si
surrounded by persons whose definitions are favourable to the violation of the.legal
code.

V) A person becomes delinquent because of an excess of definitions favourable to violation of
law over definitions unfavourable to violation of law. Persons become criminal because of
contact with criminal patterns and also because of isolation from anti-criminal patterns. Any
person inevitably assimilates the surrounding unless other patterns are in conflict.

vi) Differential association may vary ni  frequency, duration, priority and intensity. This means the
association with anti-criminal behaviour and also association with criminal behaviour vary ni
those respects.

vii) The process of learning criminal behaviour by association with criminal and anti-criminal
patterns involves all of the mechanisms that are involved ni  any other learning. Its negative
meaning is that the learning of criminal behaviour si  not restricted to the process of initiation.
For example, a person who si  seduced, learns criminal behaviour by association, but this process
would not be ordinarily described as imitation.

viii) Though criminal behaviour si  an expression of general needs and values, ti is not explained by
those needs and values since non-criminal behaviour is an expression of the same needs and
values e.g. thieves generally steal in order to secure money, but the honest labour work in
orde r t o s e c u r e m o n e y.

bj 

eri



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 4 7 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
The drives and values of criminal behaviour are (a) hte happiness principles (b) striving for
social status (c) hte money motive or (d) frustration or for livelihood purpose. Al these things
may motivate a person ot  be a criminal.

4. Illustration of Behaviour System ni  Crime of Theft:-
Professional theft si na illustration of a behaviour system ni  crime. According ot  .E H.

Sutherland, "Professional theft si  presented as an illustration of a behaviour system which can be
defined and explained as a unit." The following two question arise ni  that connection.
a) How did the tendency to commit theft come ni  existence and why did it continue?
b) How does a 'non-criminal person' come closer ni  association of such a professional thief?

The act of committing theft si itself a pre-planned offence, and ti requires skill and full technical
knowledge. The principle rackets used by the professional thieves ear confidence games, shop-lifting
and pocket-picking. The following are a few peculiarities ni  the offence of professional theft:

1. Regular work at theft:- Professional thieves make a regular business of theft.
Generally, the offence of theft is committed when the owner is not found in the house
or the house is ni  such a place which is too far and lonely or the house is locked. The
appropriate time to commit theft is generally ni  the later part of the night.

.2 The object or motive to commit theft:- The main object behind committing an offence
of theft si to earn more with less labour. A thief generally commits such offence with
intention to procure money or wealth of others by such an illegal manner and to satisfy
his wants in future with such wealth.

3. Precautions:- The security ni  professional theft is attained ni  three ways-
a) selection of rackets which involves a minimum of danger.
b) developing clear and skilled techniques for executing the crimes they select.
c) making arrangements to fix those cases in which they may be caught with the

help of professional fixtures.
.4 Technique or technical skills:- They are techniques which have been developed over

a period of centuries and transmitted to them through traditional and personal
associations. The main technique of the offence of theft is that a thief generally gets
entrance in the house through back door or window and goes back from these with
available ornaments, money and other valuable things without any noise, disturbance
and knowledge. Sometimes when a thief who has already entered in the house finds that
the house-owner or any other family member is awake, he either runs away from that
house without committing any offence, or makes them unconscious or ties them to
some post and completes his work by keeping them silent either by threatening them or
by an assault.

5. Defence:- A person who commits the offence of theft knows well about his 'self-
defence which includes his escape from the grip of any person, jumping from the wall
or from the roof of the house or to save himself by making an assault on those who try
to catch him. Sometimes when they are caught, they escape with the police protection.
Sometimes, when they are convicted and tried ni  the court, when caught red-handed, the
advocates defend them and proved their innocence against the charge of theft.

6. Mutual cooperation with other criminals:- The offence of theft is generally



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 48 C (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

committed by many persons jointly sometimes one person commits theft but ni most
of the cases, ti si done by ag ang of thieves with a common intention and mutual
cooperation with each other.

5. Reasons for the existence of professional theft:-
1. Majority of the people avoid a complaint of theft ot  save them from various complicated

formalities and the undue harassment of police.
.2 The victims are more interested ni getting their property back than ni  abstract justice and thus

they are hardly interested ni  the punishment of hte criminals for which they have ot  do a lot ni
collecting evidence to prove the crime.

.3 Most of hte people avoid giving any witness or producing the evidence which they can produce
before the police.
There si agroup of persons ni  the society who purchase the stolen property chiefly from hte
thieves and thus encourage them to do this offence.

5. There are lawyers ot  defend the professional thieves yb very clever arguments and other devices
available.

6. The rest of hte society si not wiling ot  present a solid form against theft sa they aer not organized
against the theft.
The punishment si not severe and thieves can come out of prison within a short period.

DEFINITION OF CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR-PSYCHODYNAMICS OF CRIMINAL
BEHAVIOUR

SYNOPSIS:-
1) I n t r o d u c t i o n : -

Meaning and Concept
Traits that Lead to Criminal Behaviour: -

4) Causes of Criminal behaviour:-
5) Theories of Criminal Behaviour:-
6) Pseyhodynamies of Criminal Behaviour:-

1) Introduction:-
The focus of Criminal behaviour study si  to understand the offender better and answer questions

like who criminals are, why do they commit an offence (In order ot  define ways of preventing criminal),
how do they do thing, what do they do (in order to predict their future actions and assist investigation
ni  catching offenders.

2) Meaning and Concept:-
Andrews & Bonta, 1998 offered four general definitions of criminal behaviour that will fit all

the types of it. These four areas include the following types of act.
1. Prohibited by law and are punished by the state

+



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 49 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908
.2 Considered to be violation of moral or religious code and si  believed ot  be punishable by a

Supreme Spiritual being such as God.
3. Violate norms of society or traditions and are believed to be punishable by community.
4. Acts causing serious psychological stress or mental damage ot  a victim, but si somewhat

affordable for offender (referred as "Psychological criminal behaviour").
From hte al stated above a general definition of criminal behaviour can be stated as "Any kind

of antisocial behaviour, which si  punishable by law or norms, stated by community," therefore, ti is
very difficult ot  define it, because the acts, being considered as violation at one point of time now si
accepted by community.

tI si important ot  distinguish delinquency from criminal act. The first one refers to acts, that
are prohibited by social norms, while the second one is violation of existing laws defining by a state.

This field includes studying of risk factors and measuring crime in order to assist ni  prevention.
Criminal behaviour usually is measured by arrests and charges, self-reported offences (which

si believed yb some ot  eb more accurate), actual crimes rates, which aer usually obtained by
governmental organs. By using this kind of information crime reports are generated, which helps to
generally categories crimes by type and offender characteristics such as gender, age, race and location.
3) Traits that L e a d to C r i m i n a l Behav iour : -

Anti-social values:- This si  also known as criminal thinking. It includes criminal rationalization
or the belief thai their criminal behaviour was justified. Individuals possessing this trait often
blame others for their negative behaviour, and show a lack of remorse.
Criminal peers:- Individuals with this trait often have peers that are associated with criminal
activities. Most are often involved with substance abuse including drugs or alcohol. Peer
influence often persuades the individual ot  engage ni  criminal behaviour. They will also typically
present with a lack of pro-social community involvement.

3. Anti-social personality:- These traits often include a typical behaviour conducted prior to
the age of fifteen and can include, running away, skipping school, fighting, possessing weapons,
lying stealing and damage to either animals or property.
Dysfunctional family:- One of the most common traits includes a lack of family support,
both emotionally and otherwise. An individual's family lacks the ability to solve problem and
often si unable ot  communicate effectively. Family members often don't posses the ability ot
express emotions ni  an appropriate manner. More often than not, they are also involved with
criminal activity.
Low self-control:- This involves one's ability to control temperament and impulsivity. People
that carry this trait often do things that they didn't plan, and will fail to think before acting. The
mindset is of the here and now, and not on the consequences of the behaviour.

6. Substance abuse:- The use of drugs or alcohol that significantly affect one's ability ot  engage
ni  a successful and productive lifestyle. There si often an increased tolerance ot substance, ni
addition to an inability to stop use.

4) C a u s e s o f C r i m i n a l behaviour:-
i) Financial problems, or starvation:- this is especially common problem in third world

countries. When a person has to struggle every day just to get food to survive, the probability
that they become thieves is high.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITIONJUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 50 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
ii) Low social status:- When one si  bullied because of ,ti 

a t
n he
d y
  
fi m
gh ay

t  
b e
a a
c s
k ily
 a  

g b
a e
i c
n o
st m

 t e
h  
e a
 g
w g

h re
o s
l s
e o
 s r

o s
ciety.

in) Genetics: - Some genetical mental disorders, itself, includes increased aggression.
The reasons behind criminal behaviour can very a lot ni  each particular ca

be grouped ni  two main categories-genetics and environment. se, but still they can
Nowdays the psychology and criminalists agree that what drives aperson ot  criminal behaviour

is really complex and complicated mechanism, involving 
w a 
a lo
s t
 b  

o of
rn  f

 a
ni cto
 a rs.

 'c  
r W
im e 

i c
n a
a n
l  
' im

fa a
m gin

ily e 
 a
(m  ch

o il
th d
e , 
r w
 h
si o
 schizopreniac, father

an  s
 ed i 

u r
c a
a p
t i
i s
o t
n  a
 n
a d
nd  m

 a u
 jo rd

b e
 r
t e
h r
e )
r  
e b
 u
is t
  
n a
o ft
t e
h r
i  
n eh
g  
 g
a o
n t
tisocial in his behaviour. It 

d p
e r
te o

r v
m es

in  t
e he
 on  

e s
's o

 l
i e
n ly
cl  

in g
a e
t n
io e

n ti
 c
to s 

 c
th a

e n
 cr 't

iminal.
So, ti si  impossible ot predict a person's "criminality" according

w  
e to
 can  s

 o
st m
ill e

h  
ig s

h p
li e
g c
ht i

 fi
so c

m  
e f
 a
c c
ir t
c o
u r
m s,

s  
ta b

n u
c t
es and apply a person to a relatively higher criminal risk

group".

5) Theories of Criminal Behaviour:-
In order to find the best ways to handle and prevent crime, examining why do people commit

crime si  very important. Many theories have appeared and are appearing since beginning of this study
seeking to find the best solutions for this problem. Those
i  
n the
fl ori
u es 
e are
n  c
c on
e tin
 uin
f g
o  an
r d
e  w
n ill 
s al
i w
c ays
/criminal psychologist's work.

Three broad models of criminal behaviour are the following:- Psycholological, sociological
and biological models.

Psychological:-
There are several fundamental assumptions, that are common for all the psychological

approaches to criminal behaviour:-
The individual si  the primary unit of analysis. (Individual human being is considered to
be responsible for acts he/she conducted.

ii) Personality drives behaviour within individuals, because ti is the major motivational
element.

ili) Crimes can result from abnormal, dysfunctional or inappropriate mental processes
within the individual's personality.

iv) An individual may have purpose of criminal behaviour if it addresses certain felt needs.
Normality si generally defined by social consensus, that is, what si  considered as
"typical," "normal," or 'acceptable" by the majority of individuals ni  acertain social
group

vi) Defective or abnormal, mental processes may be caused by a variety of factors such as
diseased mind, inappropriate learning or improper conditioning, the emulation of
inappropriate role models, and adjustment to inner conflicts.

Sociological:-
nI  this approach scientists are examining criminal behaviour from a sociological point of view.

The majority of sociological theories believe, that hte criminal behaviour mainly si influenced by
combination of social surrounding, political and economic factors. Offenders are not necessarily



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 51 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
viewed as bad people, these theories trend to look at social context of a person's situation, examining
his race, neighborhood, intelligence, education, family, political and media influence, income level,
job and career, childhood history to determine why did he/she become criminal. There are many
different theories seeking to explain criminal behaviour such as: Social Structure Theory (which
itself consists of Social disorganization, Strain and Cultural deviance theories) differential association,
theory of anomie, neutralization theory, Social Control Theory and many others.

The key idea of Differential association theory, created by Edwin H. Sutherland is, that criminal
behaviour si learned through communication with other people.

According to social control theory, fi social bonds of a person is weak, he/she will be more
likely to conduct a criminal act, because people care what others think of them and try to conform
with the social expectations because of their attachment to others.

Biological:-
Biological theories purport, that criminal behaviour is caused by some flaw in individual's

biological make up. According to Raine Study, the causes may be Heredity, Neurotransmitter
dysfunction and brain abnormalities, which could be caused either by the first two or trauma. Many
theories are sharing biological approaches such as: Trait and psychodynamic trait theories, Lombroso's
Theory. YC hromosome Theory and others.

6) Pseyhodynamics of Criminal Behaviour:-
Pscyhodynamics of Criminal Behaviour is also known as psychoanalytic theory or Freudian

school. Pscyhodynamics of Criminal Behaviour of criminology si based upon psychoanalytic theory
of the Austrian Neurologist Sigmnnd Freud, August Aichorn and they shed some light on crime from
the psychoanalytic standpoint. The other important psychoanalyst who contribute to criminological
thought where Alfred Adler, Carl Jung, Erik Erickson, Healy and Bonner, and Rodl and Wineman.

Main ideology - The Pscyhodynamics of Criminal Behaviour theories argue that criminal
behaviour originates primarily in the personalities of offenders rather than in their biology or ni
situation. Personality refers ot  hte reasonably stable patterns of behaviour, including thoughts, feelings
and emotions, that distinguish people from one another. Personality controls a person's way of adapting
to life experiences and. therefore, separates people on the basis of their behaviour. Psycho-
criminologists link criminality ot  disturbances of the personality and maintain that persons with an
abnormal personality, whatever the cause, will be more likely ot  engage ni  anti-social behaviour because
they view the world differently. In short, the psychoanalytic model of the criminal offender depicts an
aggressive, frustrated person dominated by events that occurred early in childhood. According ot this
school psychos are of two categories -

i) Organic Psychosis -
Refer to loss of memory, mental degeneration or violent emotional disturbance.

ii) Functional Psychosis -
Is a mental conflict or fight with normal person.

Alfred Alder - He si the founder of individual psychology. He contended that inferiority
complex is the main cause of crime. He attributes criminal behaviour to inferiority complex and
observes that crime is an overt compassion for a deep feeling of inferiority, which is often the result
of distrust or neglect of child by parents.



CRIMINAL PSI CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGS (EDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 52 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

August Aichorn -H e contended that the most important causes of crime ae -
(1) Faulty method r

s of child training. He argues that p
c a
r r
i e
m nt

i s
n  
a a
l re
 e  

it r
h e
e sp
r o
 n
w si

h b
e l
n e 
 th to

e  
 m
pa ak

r e
en  

t t
s he
  
h c
a h
v i
e ld
 no time ot  give love

(2  
) or
 A  g

 ch iv
il e
d  
 h lo

av v
i e
ng  

 t
c o
r o
im  

i m
nal u

 c
p h
ar  

e t
n o
ts  

 th
a e
re  

 g c
e h
n il
e d
ra .
lly upset. and the

Ac re
 h f

il o
d re
 s ,

h  t
o ak
u e
ld  

 ot
be  

 cr
g im
ive e

n  
 it
p s
r e
o lf
p .
er treatment to make their life happy and provide th

enviro e
nment. m pleasurable
Carl Jung - He was one of the closest students of Freud Sigmund who dev

p e
s l
y o
c p
h e
ol d

og  a
y n
. aly

A ti
c c
c a
o l
rding to him an important aspect of human psychic structure 

unconscious. is the collective
Aristotle - The great philosopher Aristotle mentioned four classical laws of as

centuries s
ago. He stated that o

- ciation
(1) similarity. (2) contrast. (3) succession in time. and
(4) coexistence. have a close bearing on the psychological concept of crime. Each of these factors

greatly influence the behavioural pattern of the criminal.
Psychological depravity ni  a person due ot  physical defects and incapacities have also an

important bearing on criminality. Thus, persons who ear deaf. dumb or those who suffer from white-
spots. eye-squint (blink) and other physical deformities meet disgust thereby suffer loss of social
status and hence they tend to commit crime more frequently. Likewise, persons with ugly look and
dark complexion also tend ot  behave criminally and mostly indulge ni  sexual offences because of
inferiority complex in them which makes them think that they are being neglected by fair sex due to
hatred and indifferences. This generates ni  them a feeling that they aer out-caste and their
dissatisfactions, revengeful attitude towards women and imitations instigates them to resort to criminal
acts in an effort to achieve what they could not otherwise get through legitimate means.

Contribution - The psychiatrist also maintain that criminal behaviour si  very much connected
to personality of the criminal. There si something uncompromising in the personality of the criminals
which compels him to revolt against adjusted norms of the society.

MENTAL ILLNESS AND CRIME
SYNOPSIS:-

1) Introduction
Historical Background
Meaning and Concept

4) Mental Health a n d Crime
5) Types of Mental Disorder
6) Mental Disorder or Disability Theories of Criminology
7) Low Grade Intelligence Theory of Criminology

Emotional Disturbance Theory of Criminology Orthopsychiatric or Psychiatric
Theory of Criminology
Psychopath Theory of Criminology

10) McNaughten Rule
I1) Insanity or Unsound Mind under Indian Criminal Law

7 8 9



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION IJ NE 20)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 5 3 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
I n t r o d u c t i o n : -
Mental health is more than the mere lack of mental disorders. The positive dimension of

mental health si stressed ni  the World Health Organisation's (WHO) definition of health as contained
in its constitution.

*Health si a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence
of disease or infirmity"

Mental. physical and social health are closely related to each other. they are considered as the
vital stands of life.

2) Historical Background:-
The idea that there si a relationship between mental illness and crime has been prevalent since

the early 19" century.
It has however been identified that there are close links between mental illness and crime, and

historically this can be traced back to the 1800's when James Hadfield provided the law with a principal
case. in which it was recognized that Hadfield had been suffering with paranoid delusions after he
attempted ot  kill King George. The Court stated that He being under the influence of insanity at the
time the act was committed"

3) Meaning and Concept:-
Patients who suffer from a psychiatric illness are more likely ot  be vulnerable ni  society, due

to unemployment social isolation and educational failure. Patients who suffer with acute symptoms
will often isolate themselves from the community, therefore detection of accumulative symptoms
will become increasingly difficult ot  identify.

Schizophrenia present itself ni  varying ways. Irrationality of behaviour si  common amongst
sufferers, along with disturbances of thought and perception. This can lead ot  delusional jealously and
the individual may act ni  a way that makes them violent towards others. Delusions are common amongst
sufferers, these delusions may lead a patient ot  have beliefs that are not generally accepted ni  society:
Consequently, a schizophrenic may act on a belief. ti si  not unusual for a patient to believe that they
aer  part of a secret service and being watched, therefore the delusions take over and the patient may
act irrationally. There is said to be a* degree of incongruity between thoughts and emotions.
+) Menta l Health a n d Cr ime: -

The classical concept of health only included physical well-being of the individual, but. with
the emergence of various health models, health was said to include Psychological and social well-
beings along with physical well-being of the individual. The current concept of mental health includes
subjective well-being and perceived self-efficacy. It si the basic ability of an individual to understand
oneself. ot  be able to adjust with societal norms and ot  be psychologcally healthy. Wherein, a healthy
individual can be described as an individual who has the ability to recognize his potentials, his abilities
to work productively and his capacity to cope with daily life challenges and norms stressors of life of
self and the society.

Mental, physical and social health are closely related ot  each other, they are considered sa the
vital stands of life.

The growing rate of crime ni  India and the World is also evident that despite acommendable
growth ni  the medical science there si still something that has been ignored.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 54 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Most mental health symptoms have traditionally been divided into groups called either

neurotic' or 'psychotic' symptoms.
Wherein, 'Neurotic' covers those symptoms which can be regarded as extreme forms of "normal'

emotional experiences such as depression, anxiety or panic. Conditions formerly referred ot  as
neuroses' are now more frequently called 'common mental health problems,' although this does not
always mean that they are less severe than conditions with psychotic symptoms.

'Psychotic' symptoms which interfere with a person's perception of reality and may include
hallucinations, delusions or paranoia, with the person seeing, hearing, smelling, feelings or believing
things that no one else does. Psychotic symptoms or 'psychoses' are often associated with 'severe
mental health problems.

Major Psychological disorders which have been found to be associated with different crimes
or are directly indicated sa acriminal act as per the judicial system of hte Indian Constitution.
5) Types of Mental Disorder:-
a) Psychosis:-

'Psychosis' is described as loss of touch with reality, which may include hearing voices that si
auditory hallucinations, visual hallucinations (seeing something that no one else sees), holding unusual
personally derived beliefs, experiencing changes ni  perception or assigning personally derived beliefs,
experiencing changes in perception or assigning personal meanings to everyday objects.

Bipolar Disorder:-
Bipolar Disorder, also known as "manic depression", is associated with severe mood changes

that fluctuate from elation, over activity and sometimes psychosis (together known as mania or
hypomania) to a lowering of mood and decreased energy and activity (depression).
c) Schizophrenia:-

Schizophrenia refers ot  a group of symptoms, typically the presence of hallucinations, delusions,
disordered thought, and problems with feelings, behavior, motivation and speech.
d) Schizoaffective Disorder:-

Schizoaffective disorder is diagnosed when someone experiences both symptoms of a mood
disorder (example, depression) and symptoms of the type experienced with schizophrenia at the same
time, or within days of each other. Symptoms usually begin ni  early adult life like schizophrenia, with
men tending to show symptoms earlier than women.
e) Puerperal Psychosis:-

Puerperal psychosis is rare and is found in females, following between about 1 and 2 ni  1000
births. The onset si  abrupt, usually within days of the birth of their child, mother often starts to behave
strangely, seeming puzzled and perplexed, sleeping poorly and being restless and erratic in the day.
She may have paranoid delusions that often centre around the child, for example, a belief that the child
is the devil, or that the world is too evil for the child ot  live in.
f) Mood Disorders:-

In these disorders, the fundamental disturbance si a change ni  mood or affect, unusually ot
depression (with or without associated anxiety) or to elation. This mood change is normally
accompanied by a change ni  the overall level of activity, and most other symptoms are either secondary
to, or easily understood in the context of, such behavior.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOG AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 55 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
g) Cyclothymia:-

Cyclothymia disorder is characterized by alternation of depressive symptoms and hypomanic
episodes for at least two years. It is persistent instability of mood, involving numerous periods of
mild depression and mild elation.

The mood swings caused are usually perceived by the individual as being unrelated to life
events or circumstances.

Dysthymia:-
A chronic depression of mood which does not currently fulfill the criteria for recurrent

depressive disorder, mild or moderate severity, ni  terms of either severity or duration of individual
episodes, although the criteria for mid depressive episode may have been fulfilled ni  the past.
particularly at the onset of the disorder. The balance between individual phases of mild depression and
intervening periods of comparative normality is very variable. Sufferers usually have periods of days
or wecks when they describe themselves as wel, but most of the time (often for months at time) they
feel tired and depressed; everything is an effort and nothing si  enjoyed.

Anxiety Disorders:-
Anxiety si characterized yb a state of unpleasant apprehension and tension ni  which ap erson

fears some type of future negative experience. Though anxiety is considered as a normal response to
threat or danger and part of the usual human experience, but it can become a mental health problem fi
the response si  exaggerated, if ti lasts more than three weeks and interferes with daily life. Anxiety si
characterized by excessive worry and agitation, often accompanied by physical symptoms such as
rapid breathing and a fast heartbeat or hot and cold sweats.

'Stress' though is not considered as a mental health problem ni  its own right, but long-term
stress may be associated with anxiety or depression.

Generalised Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
This is diagnosed if a person experiences excessive restlessness and has it on most days for at

least six months at one stretch and has experienced extreme tension (increased fatigue, trembling,
restlessness, and muscle tension) worry, and feelings of apprehension about everyday problems.

Social phobia is characterized by a persistent fear of being seen negatively or humiliated ni
society or performance situations. Social phobias are basically characterized by a fear of scrutiny by
other people.
k) Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD)

Obsessive compulsive disorder is a common form of anxiety characterized by obsessive
thinking and compulsive behavior. Obsessions are generally distressing, and repetitive thoughts which
may be seen as irrational, but cannot be ignored. Compulsions generally followed by obsessions are
ritual actions which people feel compelled ot  repeat ni  order ot  relieve anxiety or to stop obsessive
thoughts.

Phobias, which include panic attacks, are described as a group of disorders in which anxiety is
experienced only, or predominantly, ni  certain well defined situations that are not dangerous but are
perceived as dangerous.
1) Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder:-

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) results and develops witnessing a stressful event or a
situation of an exceptionally threatening or catastrophic nature in one's life. It is observed that
intentional acts of violence are more likely than natural events or accidents to result in PTSD. PTSD

ご



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 56 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
si characterized by Respondent-experiencing the event ni  nightmares ni  flashbacks, avoiding things or
places associated with hte event, panic attacks, sleep disturbance and poor concentration. Depression.
emotional numbing, drug or alcohol abuse and anger are also commonly seen ni  individuals suffering
from PTSD. nI  children, re-experiencing symptoms may take the form of re-enacting the experience,
repetitive play or frightening dreams.

Mental Disorder or Disability Theories of Criminology:-
The term 'mental disorder' is sometimes referred to as 'mental deficiency' or mental

abnormality', and many psychologists now refer ti as 'psychopathology'. These term refers to states
of mind which give rise to some form of problem, usually for the individual.

The term 'mental disorder' shows that the mind is in a state of confusion; it is not working
properly, i.e. it si  suffering from a disease or deficiency.

The term 'mental abnormality' denotes that hte state of mind si both uncommon and unpleasant;
ti shows a negative or bad element.

P' sycho' means the mental element and 'pathology means illness, the overt symptoms produced
by an underlying cause of disease. The main object symptoms produced by an underlying cause of
disease. The main object of the psychologist is to treat the underlying pathology or illness.

A normal person is expected to possess sufficient degree of reason to understand the nature
and consequences of his acts which he does. On the contrary, there are certain persons who by defect
of reasons or due to laboring under any disease of mind commit such an act which is termed as an
offence.

One of the problems ni  understanding the relationship between mental disorder and crime. the
differences arising between the two disciplines. Psychiatry determines which behaviours constitute
mental disorder, it sees behaviour as a continuum, no one si wholly normal or abnormal. Law defines
which behaviours are crimes and therefore ot  eb controlled, ti sees behaviour as a dichotomy, criminal
or not criminal. Law defines people as responsible for their criminal behaviour (guilty) or not
responsible for their behaviour (not guilty by reason of insanity), there is not really a catergory of
partial responsibility, ti therefore categories mental disorder ni  ways which might not be responsible
to psychiatrists and psychologists.

The theory of mental defect as a specific explanation of crime includes the following four
propositions-

that almost all the criminals are feeble-minded.
ii) that feeble minded persons commit crimes
iii) that feeble mindedness in inherited as a unit character in accordance with Mendel's law

of heredity
iv) that a policy of sterilization or segregation of the feeble-minded is the only effective

method of preventing crime and of dealing with criminology.
Many studies have attempted ot  discover whether mental disorder si  associated with criminality.

Most of these studies have been of people ni  prison, and ascertain how many prisoner are mentally
disordered or ill.

Teplin (1990) noted that recent studies conclude that rates of severe mental illness amongst
the prison population range from 4-5 per cent ot  12 per cent and that even the most conservative of
these is two to three times higher than the comparable rates in the general population.

こ



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 57 (Class ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Mental disorder si generally found either ni  the form of 'feeble mindedness' or insanity'.

Famous criminologist Faris and Durham studied about the relation between social organization and
mental disorders.

i) Those social backgrounds which give birth ot  criminal behaviour do not affect the mental
patients.

ii) Some mental patients or mentally disordered person do not cause harm to others.
iii) Some persons take plea of insanity after committing an offence.
iv) Such criminal and non-criminal persons can be found out by adopting some principles

and procedures.

7) Low Grade Intelligence Theory of Criminology
There are wto distinct types of mental defects, amentia and dementia 'Amentia' literally means

*lack of mind', and describes a person who is born with a reduced intellect, sometimes known as
*subnormal'. 'Dementia' describes someone who once had a normal intelligence but later lost ti through
disease, decay or accident. It is 'severe' subnormality'. Subnormality and severe subnormality include
people with low intelligence who are considered unable ot  live an independent life and unable ot  guard
themselves against exploitation which might exist outside a state institute. There are referred to as
mental impairment and severe mental impairment.

8) Emotional Disturbance Theory of Criminology Orthopsychiatric or Psychiatric Theory
of Criminology
Orthopsychiatry is a new branch of psychiatry. It deals with emotional maladjustments.

According to some psychiatrists and social workers, many of the ills of children and adults may be
traced to their emotional disturbances and their inability ot  make the adjustment to new experiences.

fI a man si unable to face the realities resulting ni  mental conflict, ti si  mental abnormality. The
experiences which a man has faced ni  his life from very childhood may create mental reactions i.e.
complexes thereby making it difficult for him, to face adult responsibilities. Extreme poverty,
frustrations, insecurity, rejections failure ni  love, professional failures and economic conditions may
create such problems. Suffering from the mental torture, the individual may tend to escape from the
intolerable reality and may live ni  mental fantasy created by him according ot  his desires.
9) Psychopath Theory of Criminology:-

Psychopathy is a severe personality disorder. Psychopathic disorder is a persistent disorder or
disability of mind which results ni  abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the
part of hte person concerned. Psychopathy does not necessarily involve any impairment of the reasoning
facilities and psychopaths may be aware of their actions and have a normal interest in themselves and
their surroundings.

10) McNaughten Rule:-
An insane person is considered to be incapable of having any criminal interest. In recognizing

the defence of insanity, the criminal law si  acknowledging that people can suffer defects of reason ot
a degree which makes it impossible for the law to hold them guilty.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGS (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 58 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

The rules pertaining ot  hte defence of insanity were first laid ni  1843 in MeNaughten's case
(10 Cl &F 200). Daniel McNaughten had murdered one Mr. Drummond. the Private Secretary of Sir
Robert Peel. This murder aroused agreat deal of excitement of hte people. Mr. Daniel McNaughten
was acquitted on the ground of insanity at hte time of committing the offences. The acquittal provoked
widespread dissatisfaction making ti asubject of debate ni  the House of Lords sa a result of hte debate
on the subject asked the opinion of the Judges upon the following five questions:-

What is the effect of law of an insane delusion?
ii) What si the test of insanity which hte jury should apply?
iii) How should the law be explained to them?
iv) What si  the effect of a partial delusion ni  the persons otherwise sane?
V) What type of medical evidence can be given in the trial.?
The Judges expressed their opinion through a statement which embodied hte answer of these

above mentioned five questions:
a) Every man is ot  be presumed to be sane and to possess a sufficient degree of reason ot

eb responsible for his crimes, until the contrary be proved ot  the satisfaction of hte
jury, and

b) that to establish a defence on the ground of insanity, ti must be clearly proved.
that at the time of the committing of the act, the party accused was laboring
under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as not to know the
nature and quality of the act he was doing, or if he did not know it.

ii) that he did not know he was doing what was wrong.
Thus, the test propounded yb the Judges was, "would the accused have done hte act with a

policeman at his elbow?"
c) The opinion expressed by the Judges ni  regard ot  the question of his knowledge of hte

wrongfulness of the act was:
If the accused was conscious that the act was done which ought not to be done and if that where

a person under an insane delusion as to the existing facts commits an offence as a result of the same.
the answer must depend upon the nature of the delusion.

11) Insanity or Unsound Mind under Indian Criminal Law:-
According to Shamsul Huda, "Insanity means and includes both mental derangement and

imbecility". The word 'insanity' has not been used anywhere ni  the Penal Code of Criminal Procedure
but the term 'unsoundness of mind' is used

'Unsound mind' si  a general term including lunacy, idiocy, insanity, imbecility, mental incapacity.
There are four kinds of persons who may be said to be not of sound mind: i) an idiot; ii) lunatic or mad
man; one made non-compose by illness; iv) one who is drunk.

Unsoundness of mind is equivalent ot  'insanity'.* Insanity means a state of mind in which one or
more of the functions of feeling knowing, emotion si performed ni  an abnormal manner or is not
performed at all by reason of some disease of the brain or the nervous system. Insanity includes
lunacy, mental derangement, inental disorder, madness and so on.

The plea of insanity as a defence to a criminal charge under the Indian Penal Code. Section 84
of the Penal Code provides that "nothing si an offence which si done by a personal who, at the time of
doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind si incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he si
doing what is either wrong or contrary ot  law".

リ



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S .P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 59 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
The law under Section 84 of the Penal Code provide that if on account of unsoundness of mind

of the person doing na act, he at the time of doing ti was incapable of.-
knowing the nature of the act, or

i1) knowing that what he was doing was either wrong or contrary to law, then such an act
amounts to an offence.

In order to invoke Section 84 of Penal Code, Court has to consider the following aspects:-
Circumstances which have preceded, attended and followed the crime.

11) Whether there was deliberation and preparation for the act.
iii) Whether it was done ni  a manner which showed a desire to concealment of consciousness

of guilt.
iv) Whether the accused made any efforts ot  avoid detection, and
V) Whether after arrest he offered false excuses or made false statements etc.
In substance, the provisions contained under Section 84 of the Penal Code are the same as laid

down by McNaughten Rules. Hence, the law in India is almost the same as in England on how far
insanity can be taken as defence to a criminal charge.

り



CRIMINAL PS) CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 60 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

MODULE - 03
PSYCHOMATRIC TEST-ITS USE NI  CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR

MESUREMENT OF CRIMINAL BEHAVIOUR

SYNOPSIS:-
1) Introduction
2) Measurement of Crime
3) Unofficial Statistics
4) Advantages of using self-report studies
5) Victimization Surveys
6) Psychological test ot  mesure criminal behaviour

1) In t roduc t ion : -
Measuring crime and criminal behaviour si  one of the most important functions of criminology.

The availability and computing of crime statistics si a vital component of alw enforcement. Crime
statistics provide us with important facts that theories must then explain. Measuring crime and finding
the crime rate is essential to discover the root causes of crime. The who, when, how of crimes si
addressed yb hte quantitative techniques of measuring crime and which are vital ni  answering hte why
of crimes.

2) Measurement of Crime:-
Criminologists have used a wide variety of techniques to measure the quantum and type of

crime prevailing ni  a particular society. Basically there are two kinds of criminal statistics official
and unofficial. Official Statistics are collected by official (government) agencies of the criminal
justice system such as the police, courts, prosecutors, correctional institutions, parole and probation
officers etc. On the other hand, unofficial statistics are obtained by persons not associated with hte
criminal justice system such as researchers, academician, non-governmental bodies, social welfare
agencies etc. More often than not, unofficial statistics endeavor to measure the amount of crime
which is undetected by the police.

Measuring of crime

Official Statistics Unofficial Statistics

The Crime Rate Self Report
The Clearance Rate Victimization Surveys
The Recidivism Rate



CRIMINAL. PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE. 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 61# (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
a) Official Statistics:-

As noted earlier, official statistics constitute crime statistics collected and published by
governmental agencies. Every country has a mechanism or system of record of maintaining crime
statistics but perhaps the most comprehensive source of official statistics on crime si the Uniform
Crime Report (UCR) program of the U.S. federal.

Bureau of investigation. The UCR gives information upon 35 different crimes but gives very
detailed information regarding &in dex crimes, viz, homicide, aggravated, assault, forcible rape, robbery,
burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft and arson. The reports are published each year titled crime ni
the United States and contain information about crimes, date about police officers etc. which are al
broken down and tabulated according ot  major geographic regions.

Official statistics on crimes may be complied on a myriad of different aspects regarding crime
and may throw light upon such diverse aspects such as:

Age of arrestees
ii) Sex of arrestees
in) Social class o f arrestees
iv) Race of arrestees
V) Relationship between crimes and season/climate
vi) Regional differences

Official crime statistics are portrayed ni  different ways, mostly by way of exposition by way
of rates' of crime, such as:

i) Crime Rates
11) Clearance Rates
ili) Recidivism Rates
iv) Conviction Rates
nI  India, crime statistics are complied by the Bureau of Police Research and Development

(BPR& D) and since 1984 by the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB). The NCRB categories
offences into those covered under the Indian Penal Code (IPC offences) and under the Local and
Special Laws L(& LS offences) and al remaining crimes under the category "others'.
b) Crime Rates:-

Ac rime rate si defined sa avolume of crime ni  aparticular geographical area, over a particular
period of time, controlling for the population of that area. This definition can eb mathematically
expressed as:

Crimes known to the police
Total population

Crime Rate =
1,00,000

From the above equation, ti si clear that crime rate si expressed for every 1,00,000 inhabitants.
Thus, fi the murder rate si 305, ti means there were 305 murders known to hte police for every
1,00,000 inhabitants. It does not mean that there were only 305 murders in the area. If the area had a
population of 5,00,000 inhabitants then the total of all murders would be:

5,00,000
305 = 1,525

1,00,000

- -

リ



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 62 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Let us understand hte issue of crime rates with hte help of an example. Suppose we are desirous
of finding the crime rate of robbery ni  a particular city. Asume that there were 400 robberies reported
to the police ni  the whole year. Further assume that hte population of the city si 2.00,000 people. The
crime rate will now be calculated as under:

400
Crime Rate =

2.00.000 ー 1.00.000

This signifies that for that particular year there were 20  robberies per 1,00,000 inhabitants. It
is just a matter of convention that the figure of 1,00,000 is taken. Crime rate can be computed taking
any other larger or smaller arbitrary figure.
Crime rates are important in understanding whether the proportion of crime within a particular
jurisdiction si  increasing or decreasing.
c) C l e a r a n c e Rate:-

The clearance rate is the proportion of crimes known ot  the police that have been cleared or
solved yb hte police. A cleared case signifies *closing of the file of that case and which the police will
not pursue further. Clearance rates are mathematically expressed as:

Arrests
Clearance Rate = X 100%

Crimes known to the police
Clearance rate to an extent measures the effectiveness of the police in solving crimes. It is

expressed as a percentage of reported crimes. Thus for example, fi the number of crimes known to
the police is 400n and 300 arrests have been made, then the clearance rate would be:

300
X 100= 75%

4 0 0

This means that 75% of the reported crimes were solved by the police. There are two points
which need further elaboration. Firstly, the 'real' clearance rate is often lesser than the clearance rate
portrayed yb hte police if we take into consideration mistaken arrests and willfully arresting awrong
person just to increase the clearance rates.

Secondly, there has been a clear trend under most jurisdiction (in India and abroad) that clearance
rates of violent crime (murder, rape, assault etc.) tend ot  be higher than those of property crimes
(theft, house breaking, auto theft etc.). This is not at all surprising, because violent crime normally
involves a face to face conformation between offender and victim and, therefore, the victim is able to
give far greater clues to the police than ni  the case of property crimes, where normality there is no
interaction between offender and victim.
d) The Recidivism Rate:-

Recidivism means a relapse into crime. Recidivism signifies a convicted offender falling back
into and committing another crime. The recidivism rate calculates the percentage of criminals who
commit crimes again. Recidivism rate may be calculated for any crime committed again by a convicted
offender or for that particular crime. Recidivism rate can be calculated using the following mathematical
equation:



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE. 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 6 3 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Number of offenders rearrested
Recidivism Rate = X 100

Number of convicted offenders
Recidivism rates may be calculated taking into consideration a particular quantum of period

past. Thus, hte number of convicted offenders may be calculated taking into consideration say only
the last five years.

Example ot calculate recidivism rate of a particular town. Assume that the number of offenders
convicted for the crime of house breaking for the last three years si 200. Further, assume that 40 of
these offenders were rearrested this year for the same offence. Now the recidivism rate for house
braking would be:

40
X 100

200
Ag eneral recidivism rate may be calculated for ap articular category of crime. Thus for instance,

ti si possible ot  know hte rate of recidivism into any crime (not just house breaking. Let assume that
ni  the example cited above apart from 04 rearrested convicted house breakers, 20 more were rearrested
for other offences (such as assault, resisting arrest, dealing ni  stolen property, possessing narcotics
etc.). nI  such a situation, the recidivism rate of house brakers would be:-

40 + 20
X 100% =30%

200
e) Conv ic t ion Rate:-

It si  a rather self-evident fact that not al alleged criminals who are prosecuted, end up being
convicted for their offence. The conviction rate throws light upon the hiatus between prosecution and
conviction and ot  that extent may be called hte 'rate of escape'. It si mathematically calculated as:

Number of offenders convicted
Conviction Rate = X 100

Number of offenders prosecuted
Thus fi 350 out of the 500 prosecuted offenders are convicted, then the rate of conviction is:

350
X 100 = 70%

500
t) Limitations of Official Statistics:

Official statistics are statistics concerning only those crimes that are reported to the police or
which the police themselves detect. Citizens do not always report crime. This may be due to various
reasons such as;

The citizen may be unaware that a crime has been committed. (Example: *Ddi  I lose my ring or
did someone steal it?

ii) Feat of repercussions (Example: corruption)
ni) Families ties (Example: A father may not report his son's theft)
iv) The crime victim may himself have 'dirty hands' (Example: Asmuggler will the report theft o*f

his smuggled gold)
V) Fear of societal ostracism (Example: A rape victim)



CRIMINA PSCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITON UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 64 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
Ni) Apathy (Example: 'It si no use complaining. Nothing will be done about .ti
\ 11) Procedural harassment (Example: Who wants ot  be hassled with all the court cases and time

consuming explanations.*)
vill) Offender was unsuccessful
iN) Vietim did not find ti important enough to report.

Lack of proof.
N1) People of developing countries may not report due ot  sheer illiteracy and alack of knowledge

of their rights.
vii) Another factor inhibiting reporting si that ni  ac ountry like India complainants (especially ni

the rural areas) need ot  travel long distances ot  record their complaints.
3) Unofficial Statistics:-

Official statistics delineate facts and figures regarding arrested criminals or what we might
call unsuccessful criminals (those who commit a crime and somehow get arrested). However, the
quantum of crime that comes ot  the knowledge of the police si  lesser than hte actual quantum of
crime. Arather fundamental quest of criminologists si  to find out the quantum and type of the 'real'
crime. It si this 'hidden crime which si  sought ot  be uncovered by various criminologists, governmental
projects. researchers and social welfare organisations.

Finding out the extent and type of the hidden crime is important for the following reasons:-
i) tI throws light upon the differences (if any) that exist between *successful' and 'unsuccessful'

criminals.
11) It allows for testing of the various theories of crime.
ili) We come to know about a larger quantum and a greater variety of criminality. It is impossible

to know and compute the real quantum of criminality but unofficial enquiries/statistics take
us closer to the real figure.

iN) Allows us to document patterns in offending and changes in the trends in offending.
Unofficial Statistics depend upon wto techniques ot  gather information upon the 'real' quantum

of crime. These techniques are:-
i) Self-report study.
ii) Victimization survey.

Self Report Study:-
Self-report studies are designed to allow participants ot reveal information about their violation

of the law. As elf-report study involves asking persons to report through a confidential questionnaire
or an indepth personal or telephonic interview, crimes they may have committed, whether or not the
police knew about such crimes.

4) Advantages of using self-report studies:-
a) Self report studies bring us closer ot  the 'true' figure of criminality ni  society.
b) Self-reports can be used ot  examine hte offence histories of criminals and to identify factors

that can predict criminal behaviour patterns.
い） Self-report questionnaires at times contain items measuring a person's values, attitudes, mind-

set and other behaviour. Such data can be used in testing theories and measuring attitudes
toward crime.



CRMI NIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJ NE. 2023)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 65 (Class) 25510256, (Kes) 26333908.
5) Victimization Surveys:-

Unlike official statistics, which depend upon agencies of justice for information, or self-
report studies which depend upon criminals ot  talk about their deeds (or rather, misdeeds). victimization
surveys measure the extent of criminal behaviour by focusing on its target - the victims.

The first systematic victimization survey was conducted ni  hte late 1960's yb the National
Opinion Research Centre at the University of Chicago, which was commissioned by the National
Crime Commission. Presently, the United States conducts victimization surveys nationally every sxi
months using facilities and resources of the U.S. Census Bureau. These surveys, known as the National
Crime Survey are conducted using a national sample of 60,000 households.

Like self-report studies, victimization surveys also use personal fact-to-face interviews and
telephonic interviews. More rarely, self-administered questionnaires may also be used. Victimization
surveys may or may not have a time frame of reference. Thus interviews may ask about victimization
experience over a particular time period (say 5y ears) or ever. The anonymity and confidentiality
guarantees surveys very much like self-report studies.
a) Advantages of Victimization Surveys:-

Normally, one might expect the victim not to lie for he does not have much to gain by
taking about a crime committed upon him ni  the past. Unlike, self-report studies where
there si a considerable amount of under-reporting. Victimization survey normally tend
to be more truthful.

ii) Victimization surveys have been sources of some revealing aspects of our society and
criminal behaviour in it.

6) Psychological test to measure criminal behaviour:-
Various social, psychological, geographical, biological and economical factors play a role ni

determining the crimes committed by an individual. The various factors that contribute to the same
are listed below.:-
.1 E c o n o m i c a l : -

The economical conditions of anation often trigger or bring down the level of crimes committed
India as a developing country has come a long way since 1947 in every aspect. However, several
issues have also come up at an equally fast rate, affecting the overall economy of the country.

a) Overpopulation:- This has been a topic of grave discussions since years now ni  India
leading ot  several other problems such as unemployment, poverty, illiteracy, etc. Such
issues lead people to develop resentment, frustration and aggression towards each other
as well as towards the society.
Poverty:- One of the biggest pressing issues ni  India as a developing nation si poverty.
With the population ever increasing, the number of people are lacking the basic amenities
in life seems to increase at almost the same rate. Unable to meet the mere requirements
of life, the level of frustration is significantly high. Poverty also implies illiteracy and
unemployment or lack of stable employment ni  most cases, which further are very
strong determinants of crimes.



(KINNA PS) CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITIONJ.LNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 6 6 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

c) Unemployment:- Adirect implication of olw economic growth sa wel sa poverty si
unemployment. Overpopulation si hte leading cause of unemployment, especially ni
the rural areas of India. The number of jobs available per person si drastically olw
mleaoding 

r ot  apart of the rural population moving ot  the cities ni  search of jobs rise ot
e and more crimes due ot  frustration and aggression.

2. S o c i a l : -
Social factors play a big role ni  India ni this context. Being a collectivistic society, the pressures

that the individuals experience ni  the name of 'values and 'cultures' si  immense regardless of the
realization of how time has changed through hte decades, hte exposure ot  media, the technological
advancement devoid of the mental progress at hte same pace. Some of the important c
following. omponents are

a) Family background:- tI si quite aptly known how everything good sa well as bad
h  b

a e
t g
 om in

e s
. The basic value system ni  the family plays a big role ni  the initial years of

development of an individual. The economic situation of the family is an equal
determinant of how an individual si shaped sa a person as she/he grows up. The way hte
family defines the roles of the members, the core values governing their functioning
and thinking processes, the presence/absence of respect of one another are among the
few factors that formulate the inner workings of the individual's mind coming from the
respective family. For the families, struggling with their economic issues, the morals
and values sometimes take a back seat given their striving to first meet the basic
amenities and requirements of life.

b) Illiteracy:- The lack of proper schooling facilities and effective education system si
responsible for the low literacy rate ni  India. Illiteracy directly implies a low quality of
life. lack of awareness, rise ot  assumptions and superstitions etc. These issues are
strong driving forces for an individual ot  commit crimes of all kinds. Psychological
issues of depression and the need for power lead ot  people indulging ni  immoral and ni
some cases brutal action against one another. The cities in India recording the lowest
literacy rates are also the ones with the highest rates of crime. However, migration of
the people from the rural areas ot  the already densely populated cities, brings this risk
to the urban areas leading to high crime rates in the major cities like New Delhi.

c. Law enforcement:- It is well known that many of the people responsible for law
enforcement themselves are often hand in glove with the criminals for making some
quick gains by underhand means.

d. Exposure of Media:- Media ni  every form has a vast impact on the population of a
country regardless of the age group. This effect is good as well as bad depending upon
the selection of the content of the media. The television has a powerful influence
especially on the impressionable children and youth. Research studies have shown that
children who grew up watching violence depicted on television exhibit aggressive
behaviour patterns.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRISINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION LI F. 2422)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 6 7 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
3. Psychological:-

Tensions and conflicts within hte individuals get symbolically expressed ni  the form of crime
with a direct relationship with the interaction of both sociological and psychological factors. Some
of the major theories explaining the same are as follows:-
a) Psychological Theory:- Freud proposed a three part structure of human personality under

psychoanalysis.
i) Id-Pleasure principle-seeking immediate gratification, the Id represents an individual's

unconscious biological drives.
ii) Ego- Reality Principle-guiding the Id, ti takes into consideration the context as well

as the consequences.
ili) Super Ego:- the Conscience, the moral guide of an individual driving the Ego to control

the Id and determining the moral standards of right and wrong.
b) Behaviour Theory:- Aggression si learnt and modeled through

life experiences
il) family members
iii) mass media. People are not born with criminal tendencies but environment and

experiences of life shape their behaviour over time.
c) Cognitive Theory:- tI focuses on metal processes, how people view hte world around them

and solve problems. How people organise their thoughts about rules results ni  criminal or
non-criminal behaviour. It takes into account stages of moral development assumes criminals
do not progress ot  higher levels because they lack the ability to empathize and are motivated
by self-interest. Violent offenders have atendency ot  mislead social situations through faulty
information processing ability.

CRIMINAL PROFILING

SYNOPSIS:-
Introduction

2) Meaning and Concept
3) Object of Criminal Profiling
4) Steps in Criminal Profiling

Definition of 'Criminal Profiling'
6) History or Origin
7) Steps of profile development

The Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
Cons of Criminal Profiling

10) Characteristics that are Considered when Creating a Criminal Profile
11) Police Gather Information for Criminal Profiling
12) Approaches of Criminal Profiling

リ 8 9



(RINT ALPS CHOLOGS AND CRISIN A SOCOILOGY (EDITION EJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 68 I (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
1) Introduction

Criminal profiling si hte analysis of ap erson's psychological and b
so e

 h
as a

ot v
 a io

sse u
ss r

 a
w l

h  c
et h
he a

r r
t a
he c

y t
 e
a r
re is

 l t
i i
k c
e s
ly ,

 to have committed a crime under investig
O atio

ff n
e .
nder profiling si also known sa criminal profiling. Criminal p

cr e
im rs

i o
n n
ol a

o l
g it
ic y

a  
l pro p

fi ro
li fi
ng lin

, g
b ,
ehavioural profiling, or criminal investigate analysis.

Criminal profiling also known as offender profiling, si best understood as as eries of investig
te a

c ti
h v
n e
iques used to determine the characteristics of an unknown criminal offender. Profiling relies on

hte basic premise that na individual's personality and mannerisins guide their everyday behavio
including their criminal actions. urs,

2) Meaning and Concept:-
It si a technique by which the probable characteristics of a crimina

b l 
a o
s ff
e e
d nd
 on e

 r 
th si
e  p
 red
b ic
e te
h d
aviour exhibited ni  the commission of crime. Criminal profiling, si na investigative

tool used by alw enforcement agencies ot  identify likely suspects (descriptive offender profiling)
and analyze patterns that may predict future offences and/ or victims) predictive offender profiling).
Offender profiling dates back to 1888 and the spree of Jack the Ripper, and the profiling theory
describes how profiling will ideally work. Current applications include predictive profiling, sexual
assault offender profiling, and case linkage using profiling ot  identify common factors of offences
and ot  help with suspect identification. tI si  used ot  create a psychological portrait of the offender yb
means of available information on crime.

3) Object of Criminal Profiling:-
Goals of criminal profiling include providing law enforcement with a social and psychological

assessment of hte offender; providing a "psychological evaluation of belonging found ni  the possession
of hte offender". Its aim si  ot  got enough information concerning behaviour, traits. personality, physical
characteristics of offender in order to catch him.

4) Steps in Criminal Profiling:-
Steps ni  profiling include ot  analyze the criminal act and compare ti to similar crimes in the

past. an depth analysis of the actual crime scene, considering the victim's background and activities
for possible motives and connections, considering other possible motives, and developing a description
of the possible offender than can be compared with previous cases. Notable profilers in history include
Ernst Gennat, Walter C. Langer, James Brussel, Howard Testen, Robert Keppel, Richard Walter. John
Dougles, Robert Ressler, and David Canter.

Offender profiling is a method of identifying the most likely type of person that could have
committed a crime based on evidence and information found at the crime scene along with specific
characteristics of the crime itself.

Psychological profiling may be described as a method of suspect identification which seeks
to identify a person's mental, emotional and personality characteristic.

One type of criminal profiling is referred to as linkage analysis.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prot. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 69 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

5) Definition of 'Criminal Profiling':-
Gerard N. Labuschage Criminal Profiling si  defined as, a" form of behavioural analysis that

si  used to determine the possibility of a series of crimes as having been committed by one oflender."

6) History or Origin:-
nI  modern criminology, offender profiling si generally considered hte "third wave" of

investigative science. The first wave was the study of clues, pioneered by Scotland Yard ni  the 19h
Century, hte second wave was the study crime itself (frequency studies and the like), and this third
wave is the study of the psyche of the criminal.

Profiling techniques existed as early as the Middle Ages, with hte inquisitors trying ot  "profile"
heretics. The first offender profile was assembled by detectives of the Metropolitan Police on the
personality of Jack the Ripper, a serial killer who had murdered a series of prostitutes ni  the 1880's.

7) Steps of profile development:-
The BAU and FBI have provided stages ot  develop a criminal profile:-

i) Profiling inputs:-
This involves studying al the evidence or any information related ot  the crime itself, but does

not include information on the suspects) because this could lead ot  prejudice ni  hte profile. They
take analysis of the four different phases of profiling.

According ot  Gregg, O, Mccray, "hte basic premise si that behaviour reflects personality". In
a murder investigation, criminologists are concerned with the four different phases of crime:-

Antecedent:- This phase si concerned with the murderer's premeditation of the act. What plan
and motivation did the perpetrator's have.

.2 Method and manner:- This phase examines the consistencies and methods of disposal.

.3 Body disposal:- This phase examines the consistences and methods of disposal.

.4 Post-offence behaviour:- This si the interview of the murderer's response to the investigation
and media.

ii) Decision Process Models:-
This stage takes the profiling inputs from stage one and studies them and organizes them into

ap articular order, ni  order ot  find patterns. Details of the crime such as type, the victim, offender's
motivation, and risk of offender being caught are also analyzed at this stage.
iri) Cr ime Assessment:-

At this stage, the offender's background, physical characteristics, habits, beliefs, values, and
previous behaviours are analyzed based on what was when analyzing the crime scene. The geographical
approach is when the patterns are analyzed ni  regard to timing and location of the crime scene in order
to determine where the offender lives and works. Investigative psychology is the approach that focuses
on the use of psychological theories of analysis to determine the characteristics of the offender by
looking at the present offending behaviour and style of offence. The typological approach looks at
specific characteristics of the crime scene to then categorize the offender according to the various
"typical' characteristics. The clinical approach to offender profiling is when the understanding of

psychiatry and clinical psychology si used ot  determine whether the offender si  suffering from mental
illness of various psychological abnormalities.



CRISHNAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prot. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 70 * (Class) 25510256. (Res) 26333908.
iv) Investigation:-

tI involves applying the profile ot  hte investigation. This can include hte use
pr  

ot o
i f
lin  

g t
. h
 Pred e

ictiv  p
e re

pr d
ot i
il c
in t
g iv
 i e
ncludes predicting when and where a serial offender might commit

his/her next crime, or which of apool of suspects si most likely ot  commit na additional offence.
Apprehension:-
This final stage looks at how accurate and successful hte profile was ni  catching hte offender.

vi) Notable Profilers:-
Throughout the 20" century, there have been many, prominent figures ni  offender profling. nI

1943. Walter C. Langer developed a profile of Adolf Hitler that hypothesized his response ot  losing
the war. James Brussel was a psychiatrist who created an accurate, profile that led ot  the capture of
New York City's Mad Bomber' in 1956.

8) The Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling:-
Pros of Profiling:-

.1 It provides useful investigative information:-
If no one was able to see who committed a crime and there si  no CCTV available, then the best

way ot  get an idea of who committed crime si ot  look for available evidence si  called criminal profiling.
It can even predict where a future unlawful act may take place.
.2 It gives investigates some information to work on how little it may be:-

Even with the modern technology today, such as internet tracking and facial recognition, criminals
can still escape the network. But by examining the criminal conduct at the crime scene, ti would be
possible to get an idea of the kind of person who si  capable of committing it.

It creates a heightened level of victim protection:-
If law enforcement officer knows that an unknown criminal is targeting a particular

demographic, then they will be able to warn this group of people and move to protect them from
becoming victims of a crime.
4. It is a helpful resource for serious crime:-

Most of the time, criminal profiling occur when there is a homicide and other serious crimes,
such as rape and robbery, committed. It performs evaluation of the potential offender's characteristics
to develop a profile of an individual who might be the culprit. This resource can help with catching
violent offenders, and the existence of profiles has even helped ot  proactively prevent certain crimes
from happening.
5. It identifies personal characteristics to help solve investigations:-

Criminal profiling often includes potential history, age, demographic, marital status and other
important details of potential suspects. Though there si  on physical description coming from a certain
profile in some cases, common criminal traits can allow for an investigation to start.
6. It even requires no physical description to begin investigations:-

Mostly crimes are committed by someone who si  living ni  the locality. Through criminal
profiling, it is possible to start investigating individuals within the area who might have committed the
crime. Under the assumption of possible guilt, this practice would involve calling ni  innocent people
but ti also allows investigators ot  potentially find hte guilty party.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOG) (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. P a t h a n ' s S . P. Law Classes, Pune: P a g e : 71 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

9) Cons of Criminal Profiling;-
1. It profiles based only on educated assumptions:-

For an offence that si being investigated through criminal profiling, the suspect can just eb
outside of the profile ot  get away with it. Law enforcement machinery would eb looking within the
assumed but wrong profile, instead of one where the real culprit si in.
2. It adds information ot  a profile that is not based on facts:-

One definitive drawback of criminal profiling si making personal assumptions about the
perpetrator. It should be considered that not all bank robbers are living ni  poverty and not all serial
rapists aer  single. As you can see, including stereotypes can lead ot looking for the wrong suspects
and excluding those who are guilty from suspicion.
3. It relies on facts about a crime scene that may not actually be facts:-

There are easy assumptions that aer made when creating criminal profiles. For example, people
steal food because they aer hungry and steal money because they are broken. However, this si not
always the case. Sometimes people would steal certain things just for fun, while others would do ti
for the thrill.
.4 It is based on consistency:-

Though people tend ot  be oriented with certain routines, a different situation can cause them
ot react differently as wel. Acriminal who does crime on a regular basis would not do the same thing
again if he finds out that law enforcement officers are looking for him.
5. Its methods are limited:-

Up to this day there are just seven methods and six scientific approaches that are used ni
criminal profiling. Individual profiles are created from those base units, and fi someone fits outside
of these methods, then developing an accurate profile si  not possible.
10) Characteristics that are Considered when Creating a Criminal Profile:-

Investigators attempt ot  "recreate" the suspect using physical evidence such as footprints.
fingerprints, or other bodily indicators. They may also consider the facts surrounding hte crime ot
reconstruct the events leading up to the crime.

When creating the criminal profile, police investigators may try to determine the suspect's:-
a) Age
b) Gender
C) Race
d) Metal or psychological traits
e) Cultural or religious beliefs
f) Intelligence quotient (IQ)

11) Police Gather Information for Criminal Profiling:-
The police will usually consider four stages of the crime to gather as much information that

they can about a possible suspect. These four stages include:-
a) Pre-offence behaviour:- Plans or motives the suspect may have had before the crime was

committed.
b) Method:- the manner in which the crime was actually committed.



CRISHNA. PSYCHOLOG AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 72 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
c) Concealment of evidence:- It the suspect concealed or disposed of evidence, this can provide

clues as to the suspect's identity.
d) Post-offence conduct:- A suspect may often act diflerently alter committing acrime.

These stages of criminal conduct can provide police with valuable information that can lead ot
identifying the suspect.
12) Approaches of Criminal Profiling:-

There are two different postures ot  adopt ot  develop a profile. One si hte inductive approach,
and the other si the deductive approach. At first they seem to eb mutually exclusive, but on a closer
examination they share some commonalities.
a ) Inductive Criminal Investigative Assessments:-

The inductive approach ot  profiling rests with a simple premise, an assumptions that fi certain
crimes committed by different people are similar, then the offenders must also share some type of
common personality traits. The information gathered comes from past crimes, past known offenders,
and other sources of information, including the media.
b) Deductive Criminal Investigation Assessment:-

This method si slightly different. From a thorough analysis of the crime scene and the evidence
left ta that scene, hte profiler si able ot  construct a mental picture of the unknown offender. As profilers,
we know from experience that the one of the most vital elements ni  the analysis of a crime si
victimology. Despite a profiler's request that ap olice agency disclose all known information about
the victim, this si the one element that typically lacks adequate information. The more one knows
about the victim, the more one knows about the offender. Thus from this perspective the profile si
drawn from the physical and nonphysical (love, hate, rage, fear, etc.) evidence.
c ) Diagnostic Evaluation (DE) or Clinical Approach:-

Diagnostic Evaluation or Clinical Approach is the oldest approach to offender profiling. tI si
na approach mainly adopted by psychiatrists and clinical psychologists. Diagnostic evaluation approach
looks at offenders from a mental illness point of view and tries to examine crimes and crime scene
from that perspective.
d) Criminal Investigative Analysis (CIA)/ FBI Approach or Crime Scene Analysis (CSA):-

The FBI defined 'Criminal Investigative Analysis' as "a process of reviewing crimes from both
a behavioural and investigative perspective. tI involves reviewing and assessing the facts of ac riminal
act, interpreting offender behaviour, and interaction with the victim, as exhibited during the commission
of the crime, or as displayed ni  the crime scene". This approach si  based on crime scene analysis and
involves an examination of the method of operation and other behavioural patterns that can be deducted
from the crime scene characteristics.
e) The organised-disorganised profiling typology:-

The organized and disorganized typology si used ot  classify the murder's personality, depending
on the category of the crime scene.

The difference in organized and disorganized crime scene are usually explained in the form of
ap sycho-dynamic drive; the dynamic drives are;

.1 revenge, and

.2 sadistic (Ressler, 1988, Lester, 1995).



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 7 3 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908

The focus of these drives si senn i terms fo lasting urges, formed through early life experiences.
These experiences are organized especially around conflict.
t) The Disorganized Profiling Typology:-

The disorganized offender si also described as one who shows no forensic awareness, often
leaving fingerprints, bloody footprints, semen, and evidence of litle or on preparation for hte murder
by selecting weapons of opportunity.
g) Holmes' profiling approach

Other researchers have developed profiling typologies (Dietz, Hazelwood &W arren, 1990,
Keppel &W alter, 19%, Holmes, 1966). For example, Holmes and Holmes (1996) classified serial
murderers into four types:-

1. Visionary serial murderers, whose impetuso t kil si propelled, yb voices they hear or
visions they see.

.2 Mission serial murderers,. Whose impetus ot kil, si a need on a conscious level ot
cradicate a certain group of people.

.3 Hedonistic serial murderers, who aer  labeled as lust or thrill murderers, and whose
crimes have sexual overtones to them.

.4 Power/control serial murderers, whose impetus ot kil are driven yb an eed for sexual
gratification and the complete domination of their victims.

h) Hickey's profiling approach
Hickey's study on serial murderers and their victims si based on data collected on 203 serial

murderers of 34 females and 169 males (Hickey, 1991; Hickey, 1997). The dates of hte crimes range
from 1795 ot 1988. Hickey's research focused mainly no victims of serial murderers rather than hte
offenders' crime scene behaviours (Hickey, 1997). Hickeys'  study on serial murder si considered 01
be one of the most important ni  the literature.

The Dietz profiling approach
The purpose of their study was ot  gather information on personal characteristics and crime

scene details common among such murderers. The study found that 93% of hte sexual sadists were
organized, and suggested that fantasy was hte motivational factor behind the murders.

Keppel and Walter's profiling approach
Keppel and Walter (1999) proposed ath eoretical classification by which sexual murderers'

motivations could be profiled. They described four types of sexual murderers.
power-assertive rape murderer.

ii) power-reassurance rape murderer.
iii) anger-retaliatory rape murderer, and
iv) anger-excitation rape murderer (Keppel & Walter ( 1999).

ご



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 74 S (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

4 MODULE - 04
FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY-CONCEPT AND IMPORTANCE

SYNOPSIS:-
1) Introduction
2) Forensic Science

3) Forensic Psychology
4) Historical Background
5) Origins of Forensic Science and Early Methods
6) Definition of Forensic Psychology

Forensic and Criminal Psychology
8) Scope of Forensic Psychology
9) Nature of Forensic Psychology
10) How Forensic Psychology Began and Flourished
11) Forensic Psychology from 1970s and Beyond
12) Role of Forensic Psychology in Court
13) The Role of Forensics in Solving Crimes
14) Psychology and the Police
15) Application of Psychology in Prison

1) Introduction:-
The word 'forensic' si  derived from the Latin word 'forensic' (forum) which means public.

'Forensic' (n) means *an exercise ni  debate, an argumentative thesis." Forensic (adj.) means "belonging
to courts of judicature or to public discussion and debate; used ni  legal proceedings, or ni  public
discussions; argumentative, rhetorical, as, forensic eloquence or disputes". Forensic is used to describe
the work of scientists who examine evidence ni  order ot  help the police to solve crimes.

'Forensic' means the use of knowledge and techniques derived from various sciences, as
ballistics and medicine in the investigation of crime.

•Forensic *r elates to the use of science and technology ni  the investigation and establishment
of facts or evidence in a court o f law.

2) F o r e n s i c S c i e n c e : -
Forensic science is the application of science ot  criminal and civil laws, mainly on the criminal

side during criminal investigation, as governed by the legal standards of admissible evidence and
criminal procedure.

Forensic scientists collect, preserve, and analyze scientific evidence during the course of na
investigation.

3) Forensic Psychology:-
Forensic psychology is the study of psychology and the law. Psychologists interested ni  this

line of applied work may be found working ni  prisons, jails, rehabilitation centers, police departments.
law firms, schools, government agencies, or ni  private practice, ot  name a few. They may work directly



CRMI NIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRININAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION LINE 2022,
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 75 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

with attorneys, defendants, offenders, victims. pupils, families or with patients within the state's
corrections or rehabilitation centers. Other psychologists interested ni  forensic psychology focus
on the study of psychology and the law.

Psychologists working ni  forensic psychology often come from a wide variety of education.
training and work experiences. Al hold adoctorate degree ni a field of psychology.
4) Historical Background:-

The word forensic comes from the Latin term, meaning" of or before the forum". The history
of hte term originates from Roman times, during which ac riminal charge meant presenting hte case
before a group of public individuals ni  the forum. Both hte person accused of the crime and the
accuser would give speeches based no their sides of hte story. The case would be decided ni  favour fo
hte individual with hte best argument and delivery. Thsi origin si hte source of hte wto modern usages
of the word forensic as a form of legal evidence and sa ac ategory of public presentation. nI  modern
use, the term forensics ni  the place of forensic science can be considered correct, as the term forensic
si effectively a synonym for legal ro related ot  courts. However, the term si now os closely associated
with the scientific field that many dictionaries include hte meaning that equates the word forensics
with forensic science.

5) Origin of Forensic Science and Early Methods:-
The ancient world lacked standardized forensic practices, which aided criminals ni  escaping

punishment. Criminal investigations and trials heavily relied on forced confessions and witness
testimony. However, ancient sources do contain several accounts of techniques that foreshadow
concepts ni  forensic science that were developed centuries later. The first written account of using
medicine and entomologyot solve criminal cases si attributed ot  the book of Xi Yuan Lu (translated
as Washing Away of Wrongs), written ni  China by Song Ci (1886-1949) during the Song Dynasty who
was a director of justice, jail and supervision.
a ) Development of Forensie Science:-

In 16" century Europe, medical practitioners ni  army and university settings began to gather
information on the cause and manner of death. Ambroise Pare, a French army surgeon, Forunato
Fidelis and Paolo Zacchia, laid the foundation of modern pathology by studying changes that occurred
in the structure of the body as the result of disease.

20" Century:-
Later, in the 20" Century, several British pathologists, Mikey Rochman, Franics Camps. Sydney

Smith and Keith Simpson pioneered new forensic science methods. Alec Jefferys pioneered the use
of DNA profiling ni  forensic science ni  1984. He realized hte scope of DNA fingerprinting, which
uses variations ni  the genetic code ot  identify individuals. The method has since become important ni
forensic science to assist police detective work, and it has also proved useful in resolving paternity
and immigration disputes. DNA fingerprinting was first used as a police forensic test.

bj 



CRIMINA PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof: Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 76 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

21" Century:-
nI  the past decade, documenting forensics scenes has become more efficient. People started

using laser scanners, drones and photogrammetry to obtain D3  point clouds of accidents or crime
scenes. Reconstruction of an accident scene on a highway using drones involves data acquisition time
of only 10-20 minutes and can be performed without shutting down traffic. The result are not just
accurate, in centimeters, for measurement to be presented in court but also easy to digitally preserve
in the long term.

6) Definition of Forensic Psychology:-
The preferred forensic psychology definition is, 'that branch of applied psychology which si

concerned with the collection, examination and presentation of evidence of judicial purposes.

7) Forensic and Criminal Psychology:-
Criminal behaviour suggests a large number and variety of acts. Andrew and Bonta (1998)

suggest four broad definitions of criminal behaviour and the acts and behaviours that fit within these
domains. These four areas are legal criminal behaviour or actions that are prohibited by the state and
punishable under the law, moral criminal behaviour which refers ot actions that violate the norms of
religion and morality and are believed ot  be punishable by a supreme spiritual being, social criminal
behaviour which refers ot  actions that violate the norms of custom and tradition and are punishable yb
a community and finally psychological criminal behaviour that refers ot  actions that may be rewarding
ot  the actor but inflict pain or loss on others-it si  criminal behaviour that is anti-social behaviour.

8) Scope of Forensic Psychology:-
The application of Forensic Psychology si universally accepted ni  hte field of law ot  speed up

process of booking the criminals and effectively administers Criminal Justice system. It is also applied
ni  psychosomatic subtle changes of body, eg.. brain wave reactions, vibration ni  vocal cord, changes ni
pulse rate, blood pressure, respiratory system, ect. Forensic Psychology si being used ni  criminal
cases, matrimonial disputes, citizenship, wills, deed and contract cases, admission to prestigious
educational institutions, employment, placement, eluviation, promotion, etc.

This branch deals with the following points:-
The suicidal tendency of persons

ii) Under which circumstances the accused had committed the crime.
ili) To study that accused is a real culprit or not.
iv) The mental disorder (if any) of the accused or the suspects
v) Quantum of punishment and rehabilitation for the first time offenders or juvenile delinquents
vi) To study the causes likes insanity, dazed malfunctioning of brain due to brain injury, emotionally

upset, and drunken state or influence of drug at the time of committing crime.
vii) To study the treatment of juvenile delinquents ni  rehabilitation centre.
viii) To study on the different aspects of statements of victims or witnesses and confession o*f

accused persons.
ix) To study on the situation ot  shift the accused ot  mental hospital after examining the mental

condition of accused.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 77 C (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
At present Forensic Psychology si engaged ni assessing, treating and providing testimonies ni

several type of Court cases such as custody of child, compensation for workmen, personal injuries.
regarding competency and responsibility of accused and ni  many other fields.

a) Branches of Forensic Psychology:-
According ot  Barlot and Bartol there are five sub-divisions of Forensic Psychology. They

a r e : -

a) Police Psychology
b) Psychology of Crime and Delinquency
c) Victimology and Victim Service
d) Legal Psychology; and
e) Correctional Psychology

b) Forensic Psychology can also be divided into the following divisions:-
1) Clinical Forensic Psychology

Experimental Forensic Consultancy
Psychologist Consultancy

4) Forensic Psychotherapy
5) Psycholinguistics or Statistical Forensic Psychology

1) Clinical Forensic Psychology:-
The branch concerned with diagnosing and treating mental disorder is called Clinical
Psychology.
The Clinical Forensic Psychology covers hte persons ni  entirety, i.e., it covers persons
si rehabilitation of the juvenile(s) and punishment is awarded. This aspect clearly requires
hte psychologist ot  play an important role. As stated earlier that in 1909 first Court
Clinic was established ni  U.S.A. by William Healy (first Adult Court Clinic established
ni  1914). Thereafter several clinics started working who employed psychiatrists who
treated criminals. The main object of these psychiatrists was ot  judge the mental
competency of the criminals to commit crime and to fix responsibility.

2) Experimental Forensic Consultancy or Experimental Forensic Psychology:-
The study of mental acts and experiments is called Experimental is called Experimental
Psychology. It is helpful ni  civil in criminal cases.
It means that the experiment is conducted at the site ot  judge the actual happenings.
Sometimes such experiments are conducted in laboratory or at the place where the
suspect resides. Experimental Forensic Psychology or Experimental Forensic
Consultancy si helpful ni  identifying the real culprit and can establish the corpus delicti.
These experiments can also eb helpful ni  deciding whether accused had full
responsibility of the crime or not.



CRIMES N. PS CHOLOG AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION EJ NE. 2022)
Prof. Pathan 's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 78 Z (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

3) Psychologist Consultancy:-
tI means that aForensic Psychologist si consulted ni  legal matters yb the ed fence lawyer.
prosceution and Judges. and law enforcement authorities. A Forensic Psychologist can
also eb consulted ni the case of rehabilitation of prisoners. Some questions which mya
be asked by the above mentioned authorities ot  a Forensic Psychology are given below:-
i) The Court may ask about potential criminality of hte accused or his/her being

hazardous to the society or community.
ii) About the mental condition of accused(s) for releasing on probation.
iii) About the quantum of punishment and its effect on accused (s).
iv) Whether to hold ni  detention or release the accused(s) or prisoner. (SI)

4) Forensic Psychotherapy:-
Forensic Psychotherapy has been used for reforming inmates of jail prisons for
dissemination of justice. tI helps ni  assuming about person's statement whether he/she
si telling lie or not. Normally ti si  used ot  treat offenders particularly juvenile
delinquents or first offenders.
Psychotherapy si hte treatment of mental disorders and behavioural disturbances using
such psychological techniques as support, suggestion, persuasion, reeducation,
reassurance and insight ni  order ot  alter maladaptive patterns of coping and ot  encourage
personality growth.

5) Psycholinguistics or Statistic Forensic Psychology:-
The study of linguistics sa it relates ot  human behaviour is called psycholinguistics or
Statistical Forensic Psychology.
In other words, ti means that the complete data about the subject is obtained from
family members, friends, class fellows (or classmates) and neighbors.

c ) Psychological testing:-
The traditional type of psychological testing means and includes personality evaluation,

psychopathology and metal function of hte person. This type of testing lays emphasis on objectivity.
that is why ti has been used ni  forensic assessment, because ni  law need for accuracy is supreme.

The tests have been divided as follows:-

d) Personality Inventories:-
Generally a subject si  interviewed and his/ her background is evaluated but it has been seen that

underlying problem is not located. In such cases psychological testing becomes necessary. Deviant
sexual preoccupations and thought disorder has been detected only due ot psychological testing. Such
type of testing largely depends upon the skill of Psychology.

e) Projective Personality Tests:-
In this method an ambiguous stimuli is shown to the subject and his/her thoughts, wishes,

conflicts and feelings will be revealed though responses and reactions. By this method the Psychologist
is able to see the inner life of the subject.



CRMINIAL PSYCNOILOGY AND CROSUNAL SOCOILOGY CEDTIOINEJ FN2021
Prof. Pathan 's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 79 @ (Class) 25510256, (Kes) 26333908.

R o r s c h a c h : -

One of hte methods for testing personality si Rorschach. nI this method as eries of 01 inkblots
are shown ot  hte subject and hte subject has ot tell what he/she sess. This method si adopted ot
personality structure dynamics, presence or absence of thought disorder of hte subject.
g) Thematic Apperception Test (TAT):-

Another projective test si caled Thematic Apperception Test (TAT). nI this method hte subject
si shown various pictures of every day situation and he/ she si asked ot  build a story on the basis ol
these pictures. TAT si  helpful knowing relevant psychodynamics.
h) Figure Drawings:-

Figure Drawings method si used for projective test ni which subject si asked ot  make adrawing
of house, tree or person of opposite sex and on the basis of its interpretation hte psychologist can
asses the characteristics of personality nad personality traits of hte subject. Personality Inventories
can eb more useful when they are used with clinical findings about hte suspects.
i) Intellectual Assessment:-

By this method intellect strength and weakness of the subject si judged and whether hte offender
could successfully use his/her intellect ro strength si also assessed. tI si not necessary that the offender
should have extra-intelligence. nI one case na offender of olw range intellect remained undetected
for 03 years on the basis of his social comprehension and practical reasoning.

Neuropsychological Test:-
It si carried on those suspects who suddenly become violent. If a suspect si  violence prone it

means that he/she has some neurological impairment.
In some cases (i.e., interview in altered state of consciousness) suspects are interviewed after

sodium amytal (monosodium salt foisoamy lethy barbituric acid) si injected ni  them. This drug makes
the suspect uninhabited and hte suspect starts talking without thinking about implications of his/ her
talk.

k) Hypnosis:-
Hynosis si  another method of psychological therapy. nI  some cases the suspect, under hte

influence of hypnotism, confessedot hte crime. But ni  many cases hypnosis has proved unsuccessful.
It si  believed that hypnotic and narcoanalytic techniques are helpul only ni  isolated cases.

1) Experimental Approach:-
In this way experiments are conducted and it has been seen that if it is propery conducted it

provides the more convincing evidence.
m ) O b s e r v a t i o n : -

Observation made by psychologist are essential. Provided ti should not biased or one sided
and ti should cover every aspects of life. No time-limit is provided for such observation but ti must
reasonably be consistent with the case.



CRIMISSE PSYCHOLOGI AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGI (EDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 80 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

n) Case history study:-
The study of past and present behaviour of suspects towards his/her family, friends and

re  c
l lo
a s
t e
ives as wel sa his/her school/college/university mates or room-partner, office colleague, ect.

9) Nature of Forensic Psychology:-
Psychology si hte discipline for studying human behaviour, intention of ap e

p r
r s
o o
c n
e ,
ss  

(e h
s) is

, his/h /h
er e

 r
at  

ti th
tu o

d u
e g
 a h
nd t

 behaviour towards his/her fellow beings and the like issues. Forensic
Psychology means application of psychology for dissemination of justice within hte framework of
law.

10) How Forensic Psychology Began and Flourished:-
The first research ni  forensic psychology explored hte psychology of testimony. James McKeen

Cattell conducted one of the these early studies ni  1893 ta Columbia University.
During the World Wars, forensic psychology was largely stagnant. But ni  the 1940s and 1950s,

psychologists began regularly testifying ni  courts as experts on a range of psychological topics. For
instance, ni  1954, various psychologists testified ni  Brown .v Board of Education, and played na
integral role in the court's decision.

Other interesting events contributed ot  forensic psychology's development. For instance, ni
1917. Lewis Terman was the first psychologist ot  use mental tests ot  screen police officers. Later,
psychologists would use personally assessments for screening

In the early 20 Century. psychologists also worked on classifying prisoners. nI  the 1970s.
one psychologists identified 10 types of inmates, categories that were used to assign prisoners ot
jobs, programs and other placements.

11) Forensic Psychology from 1970s and Beyond:-
Since the 1970s. we have witnessed a literature and research explosion ni  all areas of forensic

psychology. Some 30 years ago. Loh (1981 observed that forensic psychology had "come of age".
Most recently. Heilbrun and Brooks (2010) noted that "the field has matured: the recognition of the
importance of the foundational science of forensic psychology is stronger and we are closer to
identifying best practices across a range of legal contexts that are addressed by forensic psychology
reaserach and practice". In 1965, just over 100 English language articles and books related to forensic
psychology had been published. By the mid-1970s the numbers were well into the thousands.
Professional journals exclusively devoted to forensic psychological research and issues were beginning
to emerge ni  North America. Criminal Justice and Behaviour led the way in 1974, followed by Law
and Psychology Review (a journal published by law students and graduate psychology students at the
University of Alabama) beginning in 1975, Law and Human Behaviour in 1977, Behavioural Science
& the Law in 1982 and Psychology. Public Policy and Law in 1995. Great Britain followed suit with
Criminal Behaviour and Mental Health (launched ni  1990). Psychology, Crime & Law (1994), the
British Psychological Society's Legal and Criminological Psychology (1966), and the Journal of
Forensic Psychology Practice (2001). In addition to these, other interdisciplinary scholarly and
scientific journals relevant to forensic psychology have emerged ni  recent years (e.g. Journal of
Forensic Sciences. American Journal of Forensic Psychiatry, Journal of Psychiatry and Law).



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S .P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 81 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

During the 1970s, interdisciplinary and specialized training ni  forensic psychology was
introduced at hte doctoral, masters'  internship, postdoctoral and continuing education levels.

Another indication of hte growth ni  forensic psychology si professional certification of
practitioners ni  hte field, a development that began ni  the late 1970s.
12) Role of Forensic Psychology in Court:-

Psychology and law are wt o distinct and different disciplines. Although alw needs the help of
psychology ni  solving the Court mater but still there was hesitation on its behalf ot accept Psychology
for dispersing justice.

a) Family Court:-
Child Custody evaluation, Visitation Risk Assessments, Grandparent, Visitation Evaluation,

Mediation of Parental Conflicts about children, Child Abuse Evaluations, Adoption Readiness
Evaluations, Development of Family Reunification Plans, and Evaluations ot  Assess Termination of
Parental Rights.
Psychotherapy and Counselling ot  Families Referred by the Court:-
a) Parent-child family counseling
b) Therapeutic supervised visitation
C) Parenting skills training
d) Anger management
e) Divorce adjustment counseling for children and/or adults

Parental communication skills training.

b) Civil Court:-
Personal Injury Evaluations, MIE Second Opinion Evaluations Assessment of Emotional Factors

ni Sexual Harassment and Discrimination. Worker's Compensation Evaluations, Civil Competency
Evaluations, and Psychological Autopsies.

nI  Civil Court cases, psychologists also provide psychotherapy and counseling ot individuals
for the following problems:
a) Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
b) Anxiety

Depression
Phobias Related to Traumatic Events

e) Anger Management
t) Adjustment Counseling following trauma
g) Couple Counseling regarding the impact of the trauma on the relationship
h) Desensitization

c) Criminal Court:-
Evaluations of Juveniles accused of criminal acts, Juvenile Presenting Evaluations, Juvenile

Probation Evaluations, Juvenile Waiver Evaluations, Evaluating the Credibility of Child Witnesses,
Assessment of Juvenile and Adult Sexual Offenders, Competency and Diminished Capacity Evaluations,
and Adult Pre-sentencing Evaluations.



CRISIS ES PSYCHOLOGI AND CRINENAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE. 2023)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 82 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

with theP Csyrcimhoinloagl isCtsou rat.lso provide counseling and psychotherapy servicesot individuals involved
The issues addressed include:-

a) Counselling of individuals who violate
C  res

o train
u ing
n  or
s der
e s.

b) lling juveniles on probation
) Supportive counseling for the victims of crimes

d) Counselling of individuals awaiting tra
C il

ounselling adults on probation
Anger management skills training for violent offenders
Counselling and psychotherapy for sexual offenders.

13) The Role of Forensics in the investigation of crimes:-
One of the most important aspects of criminal justice si forensic science, or hte practice of

scientifically examining physical evidence collected from the scene of a crime or a person of interest
ni  acrime. Many people consider forensic science the application of science ot  alw enforcement.

fI there are no known witnesses ot  a crime, sometimes forensic evidence si all prosecutors
have ot  work with. For instance, fi human remains aer  found dumped ni  a ravine and have decayed ot
the point where they cannot be recognized, forensic scientists use DNA from the body, examine
dental work and even stud the skeletal structure ot  determine who the person was. They use the evidence
they have ot narrow down possibilities and determine fi hte person was a male or a female. Sometimes
forensic scientists can determine cause of death and if foul play may have been involved.

Two of the most common crimes that are determined in the forensic science lab are drug-
related crimes and sex crimes. It si ni  the crime lab that the chemical make-up of an unidentified
substance recovered from a suspect si determined ot  be cocaine, marijuana or a controlled substance.
This is used as evidence ni  court ot  prove that a person was ni  possession of illegal drugs. Forensic
toxicology can determine if a person was drunk or high behind the wheel of a car after a fatal accident,
or if someone was poisoned to death. DNA evidence recovered from a victim's body can help determine
who was responsible for a physical or sexual assault. This evidence is commonly used in court to put
sex offenders and child molesters behind bars, and to set innocent people free.

Weapon testing, or ballistics, is another important part of forensic science. Forensic scientists
use their knowledge of ammunition and study the impact of a bullet to determine how many shots
were fired. Where as hooter was standing when eh or she fired, and even fi av ictim was shot at point
blank.

Forensic is also important ni  identifying the culprits of various cyber crimes. Databases are
searched, IP addresses are traced and documents are recovered by computer forensic specialist ot
determine who was responsible for stealing funds electronically. This evidence is used to prove a
suspect's guilt for major white collar crime, such as Ponzi schemes embezzlement and fraud

The field of forensic psychology also involves training and evaluating police or other law
enforcement organizations. In addition, a forensic psychologist may also provide these agencies with
criminal profiles and professional opinions regarding a suspect. As a result of those various and
important responsibilities, a forensic psychologist often works with numerous law enforcement
professions. The professions may work with a Public Defender, the State's Attorney, various law
enforcement agencies, juries private attorneys, and judges who preside over a particular legal matter.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 8 3 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

The forensic psychologist wil observe the client or defendant, ni  a legal matter, from a different
perspective, when compared ot  a traditional clinical psychologists.

nI conclusion, forensic psychologists have many roles ot  play ni  the criminal justice system,
which are concentrated in three areas, alw enforcement, corrections, and the courts. These examples.
one for each area, aer  police psychologists who work ni  alw enforcement agencies, prison psychologists

owho work ni  hte correctional institutions of our country, and expert witnesses who provide information
1 the courts. These ear several common ethical issues, whcih intersect into al three areas.
14) Forensic Psychology and the Police:-

Police psychologists play a vital roel  ni hte employment and maintenance of police forces.
They are often called upon ot  od pre-employment psychological screening, where they wil assess
and evaluate hte potential new police psychologist may assist with scheduling, educating officers ot
deal with stress and anger management and assist police officers ni  dealing with mentally disabled
persons. Police psychologists also provide services with critical incidents, excessive force issues.
shootings, police suicides and psychological issues, fitness-for-duty evaluations, and with special
unit evaluations. Critical incidents are situations involving tragedies and deaths, injuries, and life-
threatening situations. This area also includes hostage situations and negotiations, though not al police
psychologists aer  involved directly ni hostage negotiations. Police psychologists might also eb called
upon ot  provide counselling services for officers sa wel as their families, which can include family
and marital issues, divorce, loss, injury and stress.

Investigative psychology si perhaps hte newest area of specialization for forensic psychologists
of its perpetrator. Investigative psychology includes broader areas, such as psychological autopsies,
geographical profiling and the polygraph. Psychological autopsies more formally called reconstructive
psychological evaluations are performed after ap erson has died and the cause of the deaths is uncertain
or equivocal. The psychologist conducting hte autopsy tries ot  reconstruct the victim's behaviour and
thought processes leading up ot  hte death. Thsi  procedure si often used ni  cases of apparent but
questionable suicide.

Geographical prefiling analyzes spatial characteristics of a crime along with behavioural
characteristics of a crime along with behavioural characteristics of offenders deducted from the
crime scene ot  yield probabilities residing ni aparticular location. Geographical profiling si used
primarily ot  solve serial crimes, ni  which apattern of offending occurs over time. It si more likely to
yield positive results when combined with criminal profiling although we must caution that the
scientific status of the final remains in question.

Polygraph-Like profiling si  not strictly an investigation techniques ni  the narrow sense because
ti si  used ni  a wide variety of criminal and civil context. nI  alw enforcement, ti si used primarily ni  the
selection of candidates for law enforcement positions and much less ni  criminal investigation.

Results from polygraph tests are not admitted into courts ot  be used against criminal defendants,
but they have been allowed ni  some courts ot  support a defendants, contention that he or she did not
commit the crime. It appears that the polygraph is also being used more extensively in counter-
intelligence and by federal agencies than ti has been ni  the past. Like the other techniques, the polygraph
has not generated impressive research results with respect ot  reliability and validity.



CRISIS LA PSSCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 84 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

nI juvenile criminal proceedings, psychologists aer  used extensively ni  the assessinent of aleged
juvenile offenders. Psychologists are an integral part fi hte assessment of juvenile as part of waiver
hearing because the juvenile must eb evaluated ot  establish hte presence of psychological problems
relatedo t their crime, and the prognosis for treatment, when either requesting or challenging a waiver
motion.

In adult criminal court, there are many occasions when a psychological expert can provide
valuable information ot  hte court. nI child abuse cases. psychological evaluation of the defendant
i  m
d ay
entity psychological problems underlying hte criminal acts, and treatment recomm

o e
lte n
n d
 part a

 o t
f i
 o
any n

 s
p  
le a
a re
 agreements. Additionally. ifa young child si hte primary witness ni  a criminal

case. psychologists are often asked ot testify regarding hte reliability of the child witness. nI  domestic
violence cases, restraining order violators may eb evaluated ot  assess impulse control and potential
risk for violent behavior. These individuals may also need counseling and psychotherapy services.

Our legal system requires that an individual accused of a crime must be competant to stand
trial ni  order ot  defend himself/herself. Further, na individual may be competant ot  stand trial, but may
have been sufficient from a psychological disorder tahte time hte crime was committed. This could
prevent na individual from forming intent ot  commit acrime, and such a situation si  called diminished
capacity. Finally, even fi the individual si competent ot  stand trial, and was competant when the crime
was committed, the presence of a psychological disorder may present a mitigating facto ot  be
considered at sentencing.

15) Application of Psychology in Prison:-
Forensic psychologists work mainly ni  the prison and probation services ot  develop intervention

techniques and treatment programmes for use with both offenders and people under supervision.
They develop one to one or group treatment programmes to specially address offending

behaviour and psychological need, for example, ot  mange depression anger or anxiety. Forensic
psychologists play a critical role ni  the assessment of offenders and the provision of support and
training for other staff. Research si  a further element of their work, as si  presenting evidence ni  court
and advising parole boards and mental health tribunals.

Forensic psychologists work not only with prisoners and offenders but also other professionals
work not only with prisoners and offenders but also other professionals involved ni  the judicial and
penal systems. Much of the work of a forensic psychologists focuses on therapy ni  correctional
settings where tasks typically involve:-

carrying out one-to-one assessments, often ot  assess the risk of re-offending (e.g. for lifers
being released into the community or sex offenders after a treatment programme) or of suicide,
self-injury or other high risk behaviour.

ii) presenting finding from assessments to a wider staff audience.
iii) advising prison governors on incidents.
iv) developing and evaluating the contribution of assessment techniques such as psychometrics;
v) undertaking research projects to evaluate the contribution of specific service elements, policy

initiatives or group programme developments, e.g. exploring probation 'drop-out' rates,
investigating the impact of bullying ni  the prison environment, or evaluating the effectiveness
of an anger management group programme.

り



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S . P . Law Classes, Pune. Page: 85 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
vi) participating ni delivery or management fo nationaly recognized cognitive-behavioural group

programmes, e.g. enhancement thinking skills, ro severe personality disorder and sex offender
treatment progammes.

vii) checking and monitoring treatment groups ot  ensure standards and quality.
vili) overseeing the training of prison/probation service staff.
ix) hostage negotiation.
x) liaising with and providing consultancyo t hospital staf, prison officers, hte police, social

workers, probation officers, representatives of hte judicial and legal systems and university
staff.

xi) attending team and area meetings.
Other tasks include:?

management and administration;
b) analyzing local, area and national policyo t develop strategies for continuous improvement;
c) casework notes and court work, sometimes including attendance and providing expert witness

testimony.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 86 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

MODULE - 05
SOCIOLOGICAL THEORIES CRIME AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE

SOCIALSTRUCTURE THEORY
SYNOPSIS:-

Introduction
.2 Meaning & Conce
3. pt

Contribution of social structure theory
4. Three theories explained in Social Structu
5. re Theory

Conclusion

1. Introduction -:
Social structure theories bring as ociological (rather than biological or psychological) approach

ot  studies of crime and deviance. Instead of focusing solely or primarily on individuals, these theories
seck ot  explain how individuals are situated within and experience larger-scale social institutions
such as schools, government, the labor market, cultural industries, and the criminal justice system.
Over the years, theorists have proposed mainstream or consensus theories of social structure as wel
as critical or conflict theories of structure. Social structure theory serve to regulate and socialize
individuals ot conform ot  dominant social norms, rewarding some behaviors while penalizing others.
In contrast, according to critical social structure theories, social, economic and political power serve
as barriers that impede, constrain, or shape what si  possible for people ni  specific societal contexts,
largely based on characteristics such as class, ethnicity, gender, or sexuality.
2. Meaning & Concept -:

Social structure theories trace their roots to the work of the French sociologist Emile Durkheim
(1858-1917). For Durkheim, crime was a social rather than psychological phenomenon and the product
of a specific kind of social order. Specifically, according ot  Durkheim, a society without shared
norms and values will function poorly. Societies are regulated by a conscience collective that is,
shared norms, beliefs, rituals, and customs-that holds their diverse members together, providing a
shared worldview or value system that defines acceptable and unacceptable social behaviors. This
framework shapes and regulates social interactions. For Durkheim, small-scale societies, such as
horticultural or agricultural societies, with a low level of social differentiation and a minimal division
of labor, where the majority of society share similar life experiences, exhibit the strongest and most
durable conscience collective and, therefore, have the fewest occurrences of crime and deviance.
Within industrial capitalist societies, which are characterized by a broad and diverse division of labor,
the conscience collective si  more difficult to sustain given the great social and cultural differences
and the vast disparities in wealth and social opportunity. A breakdown of shared values, increased by a
growing division of labor, leads to what Durkheim called anomie, or a condition of normlessness.
Anomie results in increased crime, deviance, and suicide rates.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 8 7 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Contribution of social structure theory :-
Durkheim's work has informed, ar ange of social structure theories, including the influential

work of Robert K. Merton and Albert Cohen. During the 1950s and 1960s, structural theories
represented the dominant sociological perspective on crime and deviance. First among these was
Merton's "strain theory." According ot  Merton, individuals ni  capitalist societies such as the United
States share essentially the same cultural goals-namely, wealth, status, and financial success,
collectively dubbed the American Dream. These goals are encouraged and reinforced by the major
social institutions, such as schools, government, media, and corporations. nI turn, culturally preferred
and encouraged means ot  achieve these goals aer  defined-education, hard work, thrift, and personal
sacrifice. These become culturally valued attributes or practices, expressed ni  notions such as hte
"work ethic."

4. Three theories explained in Social Structure Theory:-
Within the social structure theories aer three subtypes that sociologists and criminologists

have identified. These three theories play na important role ni  criminology, because they help provide
a root cause for crime. nI  identifying a root cause, you also open the door ot  finding a solution ot
resolve the problem.

1. Social disorganisation theory:-
The social disorganisation theory directly links crime rates ot  neighborhood ecological

characteristics. This theory places a significant amount of responsibility for criminal behavior upon
an individual's residential location. If, ofr example, someone grows up ni  ad isadvantaged area where
delinquency and crime si seem as acceptable, they aer more likely ot participate ni  criminal activities.
2. Strain theory:-

Strain theories point to certain strains or stressors as triggers for crime. When placed under
strain, hte negative emotions of frustration and anger can create pressure within the individual. One
way they deal with that increased strain si  through crime. They may use crime as a way to get revenge
on someone who si causing the pressure, or they may resort ot  crime ot  alleviate financial pressure.
They also may turn to illicit drugs ot  help offset some of the pressure.
3. Cu l tu re Conflict:-

The theory of culture conflict is linked to the disagreement over differences in values and
beliefs. It is based on the idea that different cultures or classes cannot afree on what is acceptable
behavior. For example, while the upper and middle classes work ot  make a living ni  a legal way, others
may use illegal activities, such as selling drugs or stealing, as a way ot  make a living.
.5 Conclusion :-

The study of different theories is important ot  criminology because it helps explore many
aspects of criminal behavior- and understand how and why it occurs. Many theories exist and they
continue to evolve as more is learned about the criminal mind.



CRATSAL PS) CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 8 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Culture conflict theory is also known sa cultural Deviance Theory. This theory suggest tha
crime si

t
 caused due ot  hte clash of values and arises when different social groups have different ideas

of acceptable behaviour ni  1938 criminologist. Thorsten Sellin wrote a book 'culture conflict' and
•crime that classified the theory. According ot  Sellin root cause of crime si based upon various values

& beliefs for what is acceptable behaviour. The clash of these values & beliefs result ni  crime.
According to Sellin there are 2 types of culture conflict, primary conflict and secondary conflict.

Primary conflict occurs when the clash involves fundamental culture beliefs secondary conflict involves
less fundamental beliefs, secondary conflict exist between middle class and lower class.

SOCIAL DISORGANISATION THEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
.1 Social Disorganisation.
2. Characteristics of Social Disorganisation.

ด. Social Disorganisation si  a process.
b. Social Disorganisation si an indication of disruption.
C. Social Disorganisation is a relative term.
d. Social Disorganisation si  a qualitative term.
e. Conflict between More and Institutions.

3. Types and Forms of Social Disorganisation:
4. Causes of Social Disorganisation.
5. Lack of value education or value crisis.
6. Family Disorganisation.
7. Decline of joint family and emergence of changing pattern of family.
8. Changing status of women.
9. Corruption.
10. Cultural factors.

.1 Social Disorganisation:-
Social disorganisation is the symptoms of disrupting, social order. In actual neither can a

society be completely organized nor can ti be completely disorganized. Complete 'organization' si an
utopian outlook and this state may be regard as anti- progress. Different sociologists has defined
social disorganisation in different ways.

Thomas and Zaneeki Social disorganisation is a decrease of the influence of existing social
rules of behaviour upon individual members of the group".

R.E.L. Faris:- "Social disorganisation is a disturbance ni  the patterns and mechanisms of
human relations".

Elliott and Merrill has defined Social disorganisation as 'diminishin relationship when they
have stated, 'social disorganisation is the process by which the relationships between members of a
group are broken or dissolved.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 8% & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
2. Characteristics of Social Disorganisation:-
a. Social Disorganisation is a process:-

Social Disorganisation is ac ontinuous process and indispensible ot  bring change. Social
phenomena is ac ontinuous social reality. Societyn i itselfis not as table concept but society si always
in flux, and ever changing. Social processes, social institutions, social mores takes new shapes
whenever any innovation occurs ni society. Any new idea, invention, effects the whole society may it
be positive or negative. So the same si with social disorganisation.
b. Social Disorganisation is an indication of disruption:-

Social disorganisation si related whti  disintegration and disturbance ni  society. No society ni
the world can eb seen sa totaly organized society. Developing as wel as developed societies aer
paying a heavy cost of development yb the process of disorganisation.
c. Social Disorganisation is a relative term:-

We can understand social disorganisation ni  hte light of social organization and social
organization ni  the light of social disorganisation. Boht  terms aer counter part and single term has no

d. Social Disorganisation is a qualitative term:-
We can measure the process of social disorganisation with the comparison of social

disorganisation, that existing ni other countries, then we can say that our society si socially organized
or disorganized.

e . Conflict between More and Institutions:-
There si a stress and strife ni  society. Mores aer  hte governing body of society. When more

changes nad takes new shape society introduces new ways ofacting, thinking, then as train between
old and new, disrupts the whole social order, that resultsn i hte form of social disorganisation.
.3 Types and Forms of Social Disorganisation:-

According to Elliott and Merrill, these are three types:-
a) Individual/personal disorganisation:- Juvenile Delinquency, insanity, prostitution, drunkenness,

suicides are forms of personal disorganisation.
b) Family disorganisation:- Divorce, illegitimate, venereal diseases.
c ) Community Disorganisation:- Poverty, unemployment, crime and political corruption, c.et

Calvin F. Schmid has listed some forms of community disorganisation:-
i) High rate of population morality
ii) High rates of divorce
iii) Desertions
iv) illegitimacy
V) Dependency
vi) Delinquency and Criminality
vii) A disproportionately high rate of males



CRIMINAL PSSCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 90 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
viii) Low rate of home ownership
ix) High rate of suicides
x) Commercialized vice
xi) Death from diseases
XIl) Alcoholism

Causes of Social Disorganisation:-
Elliott and Merrill emphasized four reasons for social disorganization
i) Social Processes-Cultural, Political and Economic
il) Cultural Lag
iii) Attitudes and value
iv) Social Crisis

.5 L a c k of value e d u c a t i o n o r value crisis:-
Values are the backbone of social system. The ancient education system was based on value

education that's reason that ni  Ancient society, society was more value oriented than modem knowledge
society. nI  modern education system character building and value education has been ignored.
6. Family Disorganisation:-

Disorganisation of family si hte factor that leads towards social disorganisation. Psychoanalyst,
prominent thinker Freud and Adler have proved that aman behaves ni  society according to whatever he
learns in family.

.7 Decline of joint family and emergence of changing pattern of family:-
Major factor responsible for social disorganisation is downfall of joint family system.

Traditional joint family system was basis of emotional feeling and security. The changing socio-
economic conditions seem to have brought about a considerable change in the structure and the
functioning of this institution. According to Linton, growth of industries and the increasing mobility
of people weaken or eve destroy joint family patterns. Industrial growth give rise also to occupational
and social mobility which shatter the old social pattern and affects the cementing bond of the family
and the family changes from consanguinity to conjugality.

8. Changing status of women:-
Changing status of women affected society. There has been a gradual elevation in women's

status due to the efforts made by social reformers, legal protection of their rights, the rise ni  their
level of education, their higher marriageable age, and the gradual social awakening, the widening
employment opportunities outside the household. Such a change ni  their status has encouraged them
to challenge the elders of the family and also to press their rights for equality and decision making
powers. This leads to conflicts and quarrels first within the family, then outside circle. She has acquired
a changing role that strains the social values and then leads society towards disorganisation.

+



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 91 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
9. Corruption:-

Corruption si the root cause of social disorganisation. Forgery, embezzlement of funds, fake
currency scam, Satyam Scam, cheating through false advertisements, delivery of defective products.
black marketing are the malpractice prevalent ni  society. Lurnig cheating and beating are the power
show by the corrupt elites. Three Ms'  are governing and dominating the society.

Three M's are:-
Men's Power,

ii) Muscle Power
iti) Money Power

10. Cul tu ra l factors:-
Culture si the part and parcel of society. Any society cannot survive without culture. Culture

cNonofinr-mmsa tethreial b ceuhaltvuiroeu.r M of aitnerdiailv idcuualtulre ni  cshoacniegtye.s  rTahperid lyaer w wthoile a nspoenc-tms oafte rciaulltu creu.lt urMe atalegrsia l bceuhlitnudre.  aTnhed
strain between the wto creates ad isequilibrium such situation plays important role ni  social
disorganisation..

MERTON, ANOMIE AND STRAIN THEORY
SYNOPSIS:-

Introduction
2) Meaning and Concept of Anomie
3) Merton: Theory of Anomie
4) Merton's Typology of Modes of Individual Adaption
5) Criticism
6) Durkheim Anomie Theory

1) Introduction:-
Strains theories propose that there are certain socially generated pressures or forces that

drive people ot  commit crimes. These os  called strains are not evenly distributed ni  society. Rather.
they are most severe among the groups with the highest crime rates. Strain theories view crime as a
result of the frustration and anger people experience over their inability to achieve legitimate social
and financial success.

2) Meaning and Concept of Anomie:-
Anomie is a vital term vaguely defined and generously applied. The literal meaning of the word

"anomie' is normlessness. Durkheim formulated the concept and used it ni  particular ot  explain the
behaviour which he referred to as anomie suicide. Human beings have unlimited desires, the only
control to these being provided by society and public opinion which lose much of their eflicacy ni
times of economic changes and moral stresses and strains. Ahigh rate of both suicide and homicide si
to be found in an anomie-ridden society.

こ

ひ



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOG) ANDCRIMINAL SOCIOLOGS (EDITION EJ NE: 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 92 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Robert k. Merton the other sociologist woh based hsi  theory on anomie, 
co n

n ot
c  
e o
p n

a ly
t  b  

it u
 se
d d
i  ht
f e
ferently but was also liable ot illustrate hsi theory with concerte

a  
n A
d m
 w erican

a  
s s
, itu
 at
t io
h ns
erefore. not as abstract sa Durkheim ni  his formulations.

nI India this theory si reflected ni  one very imp
hte o

 ues rta
of n
 t
u  
n a
f r
a e
i a
r  o

m f 
eans c

 o
ni n
 te
e m
xa p

m o
i r
n a
a ry
tion  c

s o
 y n
b c
 e
so m
me ,

  na
st m
ud e

en ly
t ,
s. tI si very that those who empl

q o
u y
est  

io s
n u
a c
b m h
le eans are not much concerned with the amount of labour needed to distinguish

themselves ni  the examinations but would like ot  secure success leading to degrees, the only thing
which htey think si relevant for evaluating their academic worth and achievement. Not only are unfair
means used or attempted ot  be used but quite often ti results ni  violence against invigilators and
destruction of property. The behaviour of hte elders ni  hte family, neighbourhood and educational
institutions and real or imaginary belief that everyone si corrupt ni  public life make things more
ditlicult.

3) Merton: Theory of Anomie
Robert Merton adopted Emile Durkheim's (1858-1917) concept of Anomie to conditions ni

the U.S. society. As initially developed by Durkheim, anomie was a condition of relative normlessness
ni  a society or group. Durkheim viewed an anomic condition sa arising when the existing social
structure could no longer establish and maintain control over individuals wants and desires.

Merton writing ni  the mid 1950s believed that two elements of all modern cultures interact ot
produce potentially anomic conditions-culturally defined goals and socially approved mean for
obtaining them. Merton argued that American culture specifically encourages al individuals ot  attain
ot  goal of acquiring wealth, success and power. However, the socially permissible means of reaching
the goals include hard work, honesty, education and deferred gratification. However, in reality the
majority of persons who adhere to the societally institutionalized means of hard work, honesty,
education and deferred gratification receives little social reward for it unless they also achieve at
least a moderate degree of wealth as a result. But the person who achieves wealth, even fi it si  not by
the approved means, still receives the social rewards of prestige and social status. This situation
places a severe strain on the institutionalized means, particularly for those persons who cannot achieve
wealth through their use.

Those with little formal education and limited resources soon find that they are denied the
ability to legally acquire money and other symbols of success. Access to legitiminate means is bound
by class and status. Thus, those who are locked out of the legitimate opportunity structure develop a'
strain leading to criminal solutions to the problem of attaining goals.

The strain falls on a wide variety of people ni  the society, but ti tends to be more concentrated
among persons in the lower socio-economic class. In this group, the ability to achieve wealth si
limited not only by the talents and efforts of the individual, but by the social structure itself. Only the
most talented and the most hard-working from this class can ever expect to achieve wealth through
the use of institutionalized means. For the majority of persons this possibility is simply not realistic,
and. therefore, the strain can be most severe.

According to Merton there are various ways in which an individual can respond to the strain
and the resulting anomie, depending on his attitude towards the goals and means. Merton enumerates
the responses ot  the strain as conformity, innovation, ritualism, retreatism and rebellion.



CRMINIAL PLYCHOLOGY AND CRMI NIAL SOCOILOGY E(DTIOIN UJNF 202)
= (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 9 3
11. Conformity:-

Conformity occurs when a person accepts both hte culture's goals and hte institutionalized
means of achieving .ti Such a person strives ot  achieve wealth through hte approved methods (means)
and continues ot  do so whether or not he succeeds. Most members of our society are conformists. fI
am ajority of our society ddi  not practice conformity, hte society would cease ot  exist.
b. I n n o v a t i o n : -

Innovation occurs when an individual accepts hte goals of society but rejected or si incapable
of using legitimate means to attain them. Most crime si the result of innovation. For example, when
people want luxuries but lack money or hte ability/talent ot  achieve ti using institutionalized means,
they might innovate-they might steal, embezzle, defraud, murder, misrepresent ect. nI  each of these
cases hte individual has retained his commitmentot hte culture goal, but si pursing ti through unapproved
means.

R i t u a l i s m : -

At hird possible adaption involves rejecting hte possibility of ever achieving wealth, but retaining
allegiance allegiance ot  the means/norms of hard work, honesty, education, deferred gratification ect.
These people will be disappointed yb failure ot achieve their goals, since they have abandoned them.
These people have achieved amnimi um level of success through institutionalized means, but have no
real hope of achieving anything more. The fear of losing even this minimum level locks them into
their adaption.

d. Retreatism:- Retreatism entails a rejection of both the goals and the means of society.
Retreatism involves simply dropping out of hte whole game. Those who choose this adaption include
psychotics, autists, pariahs, vagrants, vegabonds, tramps, chronic drunkards and drug addicts.
c . Rebellion:-

This si the last of the possible adoptions ot  hte problem of anomie. Ar ebellion adaption involves
the substitution of alternative sets of goals and means for hte accepted ones of society. Arevolutionary
or at errorist may wish ot  promote ar adical change ni  both hte goals and the means and may espouse
violent means to achieve his radical goals.



CRIMIN POSCHOLOG) AND CRIMIS LA SOCIOLOGA (EDITION EJNE 202)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 94 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Merton's Typology of Modes of Individual Adaption:-

MODES OF CUTURE GOALS INSTITUTIONAL MEANS
ADAPTATION

1 Conformity Acceptance Acceptance

2 Innovation Acceptance Rejection
3 Ritualism Rejection Acceptance

4 Retreatism Rejection Rejection
5 Rebellion Rejection of prevailing values Rejection of prevailing values

and subs t i tu t ion o f n e w va lues and substitution of new values.

5) C r i t i c i s m : -
Merton does not explain why people differ in their choice of behaviour. Why does one person

become a mugger, another a rapist whilst another chooses steady job and education? Merton's theory
cannot explain why a particular individual ni  an anomie suspetible situation becomes a criminal while
another remains a conformist or why one chooses rebellion and another innovation.

6) Durkheim Anomie Theory
The term 'anomic' was first used ni  the 19" century yb the French sociologist and criminologist,

Emile Durkheim in his work. "The Division of Labour in Society". Durkheim viewed 'anomie as a
state of lawlessness existing at times of abrupt social change, and affecting ni  particular the state of
'normlessness' which exists when the instiable desires of humans are no longer controlled by society.
The normlessness results ni  deviant behaviour. In the transformation of old normative social structures
(i.e. mechanical society) into a new normative social structures (organic societies), the groups
operating between the individual and the state e.g. local government, Church etc. lose their significance.
The relations of the individual with the sate become disorderly for not conforming ot  the social

n o r m s .
Durkheim's main thesis was that crime is associated with breakdown of social norms and rules

giving rise to an absence of social control. There are two elements to this: the first is the breakdown
of regulations, rules and informal limits, undermining confidence ni  the social structure; the second
is that this structure problem leads to psychological felling of isolation. The overall disorder and
disoraganiosation, social or personal, shifts behaviour in the direction of crime. Durkheim's
contribution is that social forces have effect on individual behaviour.

An unhealthy level of criminality arises ni  an organic society, where technical and economic
advances make the interrelationships more complicated and diverse, and to be the result of the law
being inadequate to regulate the interactions of the various parts of that society. The incomplete
integration gives rise ot  anomie, one of the results of which is excessive or unhealthy levels of



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITIONJUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 9 5 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
criminality: Durkheim used three categories which arise from an unbalanced division of labour. The
first was a combination of financial crisis and industrial conflict. The second was rigid and unnatural
class divisions, such that the oppressed may rebel. The third and final situation that he mentions si
where there si  an abnormal division of labour such that workers become alienated from their jobs and
become disinterested in them.

After Durkheim, the most famous criminologist who wrote on anomie si an American, Robert
K. Merton who focused on social structural reasons for criminality. According to Merton,
a'monie arises when there si ad iscrepancy between hte cultural goals and the legitimate means of
achieving them. tI si a form of strain, achieving hte goal si power fuly sold but impossible for most. ro
for sections of a community.

Merton who based hsi theory on anomie ddi  not emphasise the 'anomie' as hte discontinuity
between experience and expectation but the anomie, he said, are the values and norns of the society
which do not suit an individual, creating confusion ni  him.



CRMINIAL PCHOLOG) INDORINS LE SOCIOLOGS (EDITION IJ EV 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 96 & (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

6 M O D U L E - 06
SUBCTURAL THEORIES

COHEN'S THEORY OF THE DELINQUENT SUBCULTURE
SYNOPSIS:-

1) Introduction
2) Theories of Juvenile Gang Delinquency
3) Meaning and Concept
4) Cohen's Theory of the delinquent subculture

Juvenile Gang Delinquency Theory
1) Introduction:-

Albert K. Cohen:- Albert K. Cohen edited some of the papers written yb Sutherland. His early
works can be described as synthesis of cultural transmission and anomie theories. According to Cohen
hte question which si crucial si  not how the people become the kinds of individuals to commit the
crimes but what kind of social structure si  that determines the kinds of criminal acts and the mode of
distribution of these acts. There si  a conflict between hte middle and working classes.

2) Theories of Juvenile Gang Delinquency:-
Though poverty and lower-class status do not necessarily lead to delinquency, their influence

can directly lead to formation of juvenile gangs. Ag ang si obviously more dangerous, because the
potentiality of doing harm of a number of persons acting for a common goal together si  higher than
their capacity ot  od mischief individually. The likelihood of formation of such gangs si higher ni  areas
populated largely by lower class persons compared ot  neighbourhoods of mixed or predominantly
middle class socio-economic status. Frederick M. Thrasher ni  one of the earlier studies on juvenile
delinquency focused attention on the groups ot  which the delinquents belonged. According to him the
delinquent must be dealt with as a member of all the various groups ot  which he belongs the family
neighbourhood, school. religion, occupational group and so on, as well as his gang. Thrasher found
more than 1,300 gangs in Chicago and its environs, He reported that the gangs were typically found ni
what he called "the poverty belt". The characteristics of the "poverty belt", according to his study,
were deteriorating neighbourhoods, shifting populations and high mobility. Group delinquency.
according to Thrasher, develops in slums out of the acts committed by the gang members to derive
excitement from the adventure involved in such acts.

3) Meaning and Concept:-
The children ni  the middle class are socialized for exercising self-control and postponement

of gratification for their intellectual, technical and moral skills to be rewarded later on. These children
learn values and ambitions ni  the public schools. Al children are subject to "middle class measuring
rod*. A lower class child feels himself deprived of these things. The lower class child learns the ethics
of reciprocity to help the family and the friends ni  distress without any individual responsibility for
the achievement and skills. The working class child feels himself deprived in the society where the



CRIMINAL PSSCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOG) (EDITION IJ EN 2023)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 97 & (Class) 25510256, (Kes) 26333908.
middle class status values operate and thinks himself and his family having lost something. He si
conscious of ti and interacts with the other children facing the same problems and they reject al the
systems of middle class e.g. school, church, ete. The delinquency si the result of collective protest
against hte middle class system holding hte children of the lower working class ni  a very olw position.

The working class children defy hte middle class values which si primary political reaction
although these children are from av ery smal group. They are not ot avoid the police action since they
lack sophisticated skills. tI has been described by Merton as rebellious adaption.
4) Cohen's Theory of the delinquent subculture:-

Albert K. Cohen discerned some sort of peculiar culture among the gang delinquents which eh
termed sa *delinquent sub-culture'. According ot  Cohen, adelinquent sub-culture may be delined as
a" way of life that has somehow become traditional among certain groups ni  American society".
These groups are the boys' gangs that flourish most conspicuously ni  the delinquency neighbourhoods
of our larger American cities".The reason why such a culture si developed is given yb Cohen yb
saying that the members of the gang share a number of problems. The shared problems of hte gang
How from their olw status ni  hte community and the expectations from them of typically middle-
class behavior like ambition, individual responsibility, talent, asceticism, rationality, courtesy and
control of physical aggression. Such a situation, according to Cohen, creates a problem for the lower-
class boys since they do not have the advantage of the same socializing process as the middle-class
boys whose conduct is regarded as hte standard conduct.

According to Cohen delinquency si a culture pattern which has strong solidatory of the gang
The strong sense of solidarity makes the gang members very sensitive ot  their gangs and they reflect
hostile attitude towards others. The gang is not subject to the control or interference of the adults.
Cohen has described the acts committed by the gang as a "short run hedonism" without any long term
pleasure or financial gain. For the delinquent acts, there si no other purpose or use except the immediate
pleasure. The gang is malicious ot  the middle class and ti engages ni  vandalism and property destruction
of middle class.

The delinquency si more ni  the boys than the girls and that too ni  the working class group than
the middle or upper class group. The conclusions arrived at by Cohen are based on official data but
there si a criticism that the police and officials are generally prejudicial ot  the working class boys.
Cohen, however, vehemently says that hte working class boys commit more delinquency act frequently.
Because of the culture setting of the lower working class. hte delinquent behaviours develop among
the boys but they deny the fact that delinquency is encouraged by this culture. This stealing, vandalism.
habitual truancy and the other negative outlook According Cohen delinquency emerges due ot  status
anxiety in the children and inadequate family supervision to control them. The working class is lacking
in values which the middle class imbibes due to media and the school education. It aspires for the
democratic pattern for all and weighs every body on the same norms resulting delinquent behaviours.

Cohen postulates a reactive sub-culture and imputes malice ot  the group but he misses positive
nature of the delinquent behavior, truancy from the school, drinking, snatching purse, etc. and other
crimes of vandalism which are not because of reaction against the middle class. Thefts are committed
for gain and are not without any purpose. Cohen's theory does not apply to cross-culture societies
where the crimes are committed not due to status deprivation as a motive of the crime but due to short
run hedonism only.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 98 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

5) Juvenile Gang Delinquency Theory:-
According ot Frederick M. Thrasher, juvenile delinquents belong more ot  lower class i.e., the

juveniles ni  the poverty-belt. The poverty si the cause of delinquency. According ot  Albert K. Cohen,
there si a peculiar culture ni  America, 'delinquent sub-culture'. The member of this class have some
expectations and ambitious because the boys of the class find themselves having not the advantages of
the same standard sa the boys of the middle-class society. The delinquency may be caused due to
family atmosphere, school atmosphere, economic factors, mass communication media etc.

MILLER'S LOWER CLASS GROUP GANG DELINQUENCY
SYNOPS/S:-

1) Introduction
2) Meaning and Concept
3) Characteristics of the Theory
4) Conclusions

1) I n t r o d u c t i o n : -

Miller (1958), also writing about delinquency ni  the US, disputed that lower working class
gang behaviour was some form of counter-culture set against middle-class values. On the contrary,
from his observations of gangs, he concluded that they were only acting out in sharper form the
established cultural traditions of wider lower class culture.

2 ) Meaning and Concept:-
Miller explained crime in terms of a distinctive lower-class subculture. He believed that

Americans ni  the lower-class social bracket had developed a subculture which had its own values and
traditions separate from those in higher social bracket. These values and way of life were passed on
from generation to generation. The values inherent in the lower-class culture actively encouraged
l o w e r - c l a s s m e n to c o m m i t c r ime .

3) Characteristics of the Theory:-
This subculture had a range of interests and characteristics of its own which included an

appreciation of toughness, smartness and excitement.

1. Toughness:-
This is an expression of masculinity and rejects timidity and weakness. Its manifestation can

lead to violence in order to maintain a reputation for toughness.

2. S m a r t n e s s : -
Such a quality emphasizes the ability to outsmart or 'con' another person. The kind of examples

would be conmen and petty thieves.



CRMINIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 99 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
.3 E x c i t e m e n t : -

Here hte person si searching for emotional stimulus and excitement. Excitement si found ni
gambling, sexual adventures and alcohol. Al these activities can be obtained during a night out on the
t o w n .

The desire ot  eb tough and smart and ot  seek excitement, carries risk. The result can be physical
harm and disruption to one's life.

4) C o n c l u s i o n : -

Miler believed that delinquency was essentially about the acting out of the focal concerns of
lower-class subculture (toughness, smartness etc). Its roots aly ni  the socialization into a subculture
with a' distinctive tradition, many centuries old with an integrity of its own.'



CRIMINAL A L AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof . Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 100 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

7 • M O D U L E - 07
CRIME AND SOCIAL PROCESS

EDWIN H. SUTHERLAND
SOCIALISATION AND CRIME-DIFFRENTIALASSOCIATION THEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
Introduction.
The differential association theory contains the following eight principles.
In a nut-shell.

4) Three integral elements make up the theory.

1) I n t r o d u c t i o n : -
Edwin H. Sutherland (1883-1950) expounded his differential association theory ni  his book,

Criminology published in 1934.
From birth or very soon after-we begin to learn not only to move our torsos, limbs, and tongues,

but also how to behave, 'Behaving' in this context, means adopting ways approved by parents, siblings,
relatives, neighboring, friends, teachers and significant others, whose reactions are important ot  us.
We adopt the ways approved by people whose reactions are important ot  us by learning or imitating
their ways. Behaviour, whether criminal or non criminal, is, therefore, learnt ni  our association with
society.

2) The differential association theory contains the following eight principles:
Criminal behaviour is learned.

i i Criminal behaviour is learned in interaction with other persons in a process of
communication.

iii) The process of learning criminal behaviour involves all the same mechanisms that are
involved ni  any other learning

iv) The principle part of the learning of criminal behaviour occurs within intimate personal
groups.

V) Criminal learning include:
a) Technical of committing crime: Example the proper way to pick a lock
b) The specific direction of the motives, drives, rationalizations and attitudes. Since

the reaction to social rules and laws is not uniform across society, people
constantly come into contact with others who maintain different views on the
utility of obeying the legal code. When definitions of right and wrong are
extremely varied, people experience what Sutherland called culture conflict.

vi) A person becomes delinquent because of an excess of definitions favourable to violations
of law over definitions unfavourable to violation of law. This is the crux of the principle
of differential association.

vii Differential association may vary ni  frequency, duration, priority and intensity.

37 3



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JNE 2022)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 1 0 1 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
viti) Criminal behaviour si na expression of general needs and values, ti si not explained yb

those general needs and values, since non criminal behavior si an expression of the
same needs and values. Thus, hte need for money cannot be the cause of theft because
non-criminal behaviour (Eg. honest work) also si hte result of the same need (money).
Thus, Sutherland refutes hte atempts yb many scholars ot  explain criminal behaviour
by general drives, values, pleasure principle, social status, money motive ect. since
they explain lawful behaviour as completely sa they explain criminal behaviour.

3) I n a nu t - she l l : -

Sutherland's argument si  that criminal behaviour will occur when individuals have acquired
enough sentiments ni  favour of alw violation ot  outweigh their prosocial or anti criminal conduct
definitions. People get their sets of prosocial and por  criminal conduct standards through associations
with others ni  their social environment. nI general, het contacts or association that have hte greatest
impact on people are frequent, lengthy, early ni point of origin, and most intense or meaning ful.
4) Three integral elements make up the theory:-

Differential association, differential social organization and culture conflict. When one analyze
the relationships among these three central components, ti can be seen that the theory operates on
more than one level. The two most overt levels are the individual and the group. The concept of
differential association itself si  an attempt ot  explain how an individual becomes criminal, at this
level the theory si  social psychological. Differential social organization si an attempt to account for
the uneven distribution of crime throughout different groups ni  society. There si a third level, hte
normative level, which si  represented by Sutherland as culture conflict.

RONOLD AKERS: DIFFRENTIAL REINFORCEMENT THEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
1) Introduction
2) The main focus of his theory
3) Meaning and concept
4) Seven prepositions of Aker
5) Elements of Differential reinforcement theory:-
6) Criticisms to Differential Reinforcement Theory

1) I n t r o d u c t i o n : -
The roots of the learning perspective can be dated back ot  the era of Gabriel Tarde (Criminology).

He focused his social learning theory based on three laws of imitation. The first two laws were further
used by the father of criminology Edwin H. Sutherland ni  his theory of differential association. The
learning perspective was deemed as being too simple and not legitimate enough for the criminology
world or sociology. He focused his theory on learning ni  a social environment. He further dramatized
the idea of cultural conflict in his studies. He proposed nine propositions of differential association



CRIMINAL PS) CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE: 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 102 ( C l a s s ) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
2) The main focus of his theory:-

The main point of the theory was to ligure out fi delinquents or their enabling fri
fi e
rs n
t. d
 S s

u  c
th a

e m
rla e

nd's theory (Burgess, Akers 1966)." They re-evaluate
d d
if  
fe S

re u
n th
ti e
a r
l l
 as a

s n
o d
c '
i s
a  
tio th

n eo
 r
u y
s  
ing ab

 o
b u
e t
haviorism. They incorporated hte psychological princip

c l
o e
n s
d  
i o
t f
io  o

n p
in e

g ra
 an n

d t
 maintained that even non social effects can reinforce criminal behavior. According

10 Akers (1985) people are first indoctrinated into deviant behavior by differential association with
deviant peers. Then through differential reinforcement, they learn how to reap rewards
pu  

n a
is n
h d
m  

e a
n v
t ni  refe o

re id
nce ot  hte actual or anticipated consequences of given behavior. The consequences

are said ot  eb social and nonsocial reinforcement that further applies ot  a criminal's future. Ronald
Akers further discussed that structure can affect a person's differential reinforcement and that criminal
knowledge is gained. Potential criminals often analyze what they can get out of the crime and what
their punishment may eb after committing the crime. From this analyzation the criminal makes their
decision. Differential reinforcement may also alter hte response which si known as shaping or response
diferentiation. An example, of a child learning how ot  speak was used. A child's vocalization si
reinforced yb the parent. The pattern or schedule of reinforcement is also important because
reinforcement can be based on fixed interval, fixed ratio, variable ratio and contingencies.
3) Meaning and concept:-

According to Akers, people learn behaviour from particular conditions, behaviour controlled
by stimuli that follow the behaviour. Social behaviour si  acquired through direct conditioning and
modeling of others behaviour. Behaviour is reinforced when positive rewards are gained or punishment
si avoided (negative reinforcement). It si weakened by negative stimuli (punishment) and loss of
reward (negative punishment). The crux of the differential reinforcement theory is that criminal
behaviour si  begun or persists depending on the degree ot  which ti has been rewarded or punished and
the rewards or punishments attached to its alternative.

Further, according to Akers, people learn to evaluate their own behavior through interaction
with significant others in their lives. This process makes use of such devices as norms, attitudes,
values and orientations. The more individuals learn to define their behaviour as good or at least as
justified, rather than as undesirable, the more likely they are to engage in it. Behaviour (including
criminal behaviour) results when an individual perceives an excess of reinforcements over punishments
for certain acts or their alternatives.

For example, it has been observed that in many governmental agencies, bribery and corruption
are not punished sufficiently and at times even looked upon as "smart" behaviour. In such a situation
the stimuli is one of encouragement and reinforcement of this behaviour, making many others to
take-up to it.

Thus, when crime confers status or monetary reward without the accompanying punishment,
fear of punishment and infamy the behaviour stands reinforced



CRMINIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRMINIAL SOCOILOGY E(DTIOINUJNE 2021
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 103 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
4) Seven prepositions of Aker:-

Criminal behavior si learned according ot hte principles of operant conditioning. Operant
behaviors can involve conditioning, shaping, stimulus control and extinction. Possible
environmental consequences ot hte Law of Operant Behavior. Stimulus control or
stimulus discrimination: Ach ild trying ot reinforce hte wodr  "Daddy" ot  their real father
instead of any random man.

ii) Criminal behaviorsi learned bohtni nonsocial situations ro social situations. Reinforcing
and discriminative stimulus.

111) The principle parts of learning occur ni  groups. Reference groups and media sa
reinforcers.

iv) "The learning of criminal behavior including specific lechniques, attitudes and avoidance
procedures, is a function of the effective and available reinforcers, and the existing
reinforcement contingencies." As chedule of reinforcement. Techniques of committing
hte crime. Drives, motives, rationalization, and attitudes.
"The specific class of behaviors which are learned and their frequency of occurrence
are a function of the reinforcers which are effective and available, and the rules or

norms by which these reinforcers are applied." Behavior depends on how reinforcers
are applied based on norms.

vi) Criminal behavior si a function of norms which are discriminative for criminal behavior.
A person will become delinquent based on the function of hte norms.

vii) The strength of Criminal behavior depends on the frequency and probability of its
reinforcement. The main components include the amcunt of reinforcement, hte
frequency of reinforcement, and the probability of reinforcement.

5) Elements of Differential reinforcement theory:-
i) Differential reinforcement theory, however, can be distinguished from the rational

choice perspective
ii) Rational choice assumes humans are born with an innate capacity for rational decision

making,
iii) The differential reinforcement perspective assumes individuals are born with a blank

slate (i.e., tabula rasa) and thus, must be socialized and taught how to behave through
various forms of conditioning (e.g., classical and operant conditioning), as well as
modeling.

iv) Differential reinforcement theory is far more deterministic than rational choice theory.
in the sense that the former assumes that individuals have virtually no free will/free
choice (but rather is based on the definitions, beliefs, rewards, punishments, etc., they
are subject ot  after their previous behaviors), whereas the latter is based almost entirely
on the assumption that individuals do indeed have the ability to make their own choices.
and tend to make calculated decisions based on the contextual circumstances of a given
situation.
Concerned with how behavior si influenced by reinforcements and punishments.

v



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE: 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, P u n e . P a g e : 104 A (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

vi) Assumes that the animal or human being si  a proactive player ni  seeking out rewards,
and not just a passive entity that simply receives stimuli.

vii) • Certain behaviors are encouraged through reward (positive reinforcement) or through
avoidance of punishment (negative reinforcement).

v i l i Like different types of reinforcement, punishment comes in two forms as well.
ix) Behavior is discouraged, or weakened, via adverse stimuli (positive punishment) or

lack of reward (negative punishment).
x) A positive punishment would be anything that directly presents negative sensations or

feelings.
x1) A large amount of research has shown that humans learn attitudes and behavior best

through a mix of punishments and reinforcements throughout life.
xii) Studies have clearly shown that rehabilitative programs that appear to work most

effectively in reducing recidivism ni  offenders are those that have many opportunities
for rewards, as well as threats for punishments.

xill) Illegal behavior si likely ot  occur, as Burgess and Akers theorized, when its perceived
rewards outweigh the potential punishments for not committing such activities.

6) Criticisms to Differential Reinforcement Theory
i) Reed Adams criticized the theory for incorrectly and incompletely applying the

principles of operant condition.
ii) Noted that the theory does not adequately address the importance of "nonsocial

reinforcement."
iii) Nonsocial reinforcement can be considered self-reinforcement.

For example, if someone gets enjoyment out of abusing others, then the person can be
considered "reinforced" through nonsocial means.

iv) The most important criticism of differential reinforcement theory is that it appears
tautological, which means that the variables and measures used to test its validity are
true by definition.

V) To clarify, studies testing this theory have been divided into four groups of variables/
factors: associations, reinforcements, definitions, and modeling.

vi) Some critics have noted that fi individuals who report that they associate with those
who offend, are rewarded for offending, believe offending is good, and have seen many
of their significant others offend, they will inevitably be more likely to offend.

vii) However, ti has been well argued that such criticisms of tautology are not valid because
none of these factors necessarily make offending by the respondent true by definition.

viii) Differential reinforcement has also been criticized ni  the same way as differential
association theory has in the sense the delinquent associations may take place after
criminal activity, rather than before.

ix) However, Burgess and Akers' model clearly has this area of criticism covered in the
sense that differential reinforcement covers what comes after the activity.

x) Specifically, ti addresses the rewards or punishments that follow criminal activity,
whether those rewards come from friends, parents, or other members/institutions of
society.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE. 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 105 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
NEUTRALIZATION THEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
Introduction:-

2) Elements of Neutralization Theory.
3) Concept:-

a. Denial of responsibility.
b. Denial of injury.
C. Denial of victims.
d. Condemnation of the condemners.
e. Appeal ot  higher loyalities.
Criticism to Neutralization Theory.

1) I n t r o d u c t i o n : -
The Neutralization Theory consider that people leam the values, attitude and techniques ot

criminal behaviour through hidden value. It si also consider that most criminals are not always involved
with the crime. They actually a drift from one behaviour ot  another. These development by which a
persons drift one behaviour ot  another si called drifting. Thus, the criminals develop a technique ot
avoid the feeling of guilt. This drift theory si known as Neturalization theory according ot  which the
delinquent use of justifications to neutralize their deviant behaviour.

2) Elements of Neutralization Theory.
Sykes and Matza argued that most criminals are still partially committed ot  the dominant
social order.

11) Youths are not immersed in a subculture that is committed to either extremes of
complete conformity or complete nonconformity.

iii) Rather, these individuals drift between these two extremes:
iv) The delinquent transiently exists in a limbo between convention and crime, responding

in turn ot  the demands of each, flirting now with one, now the other, but postponing
commitment, evading decision. Thus, he [or she] drifts between criminal and
conventional action.

V) While still partially committed ot  conventional social order, youths can drift into criminal
activity and avoid feelings of guilt for these actions by justifying or rationalizing their
behavior.

vi) Why is it called neutralization theory?
vii) The answer si  that people justify and rationalize behavior through "neutralizing" it, or

making ti appear not so serious.
viii) In other words, individuals make up situational excuses for behavior that they know si

wrong, and they do this to alleviate the guilt they feel for doing such immoral acts.

こ



CRIMES M.I PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 106 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
3) Concept:-

Gresham Sykes and David Matza maintain that most delinquents and criminals hold conventional
values and attitudes but master techniques that enable them ot  neutralize these values and drifi back
and forth between illegitimate and conventional behaviour. Matza argues that even the most committed
criminals and delinquents are not involved ni  criminality al the time; they also attend schools, family

tunctions and os  on. Matza identifies a process, which eh calls drift, whereby an individual moves
from one extreme of behaviour ot  another, behaving sometimes ni  na unconventional, free, or deviant
manner. and at other times with constraint and sobriety. Learning techniques of neutralization allows
ap erson ot temporarily drift away from conventional behaviour and get involved ni  criminality. nI
other words, criminals generally adhere ot  the rules of society but learn techniques to temporarily
release themselves from these moral constraints. These techniques include:

Denial of responsibility:-
(Eg. t"I wasn't my fault"). This signifies the tendency of offenders ot  claim that their unlawful

acts were simply result of forces beyond their control or were accidents.

b. Denial of injury:-
"They can afford it"). By denying the wrongfulness of an act, criminals are able to rationalize

their illegal behaviour.

c . Denial of victims:-
(Eg. "They had ti coming"). Here the criminal rationalizes by maintaining that the victim

"deserved" it. Thus, many a times homosexuals are brutalized under the rationalization that they "had
ti coming".

d. Condemnation of the condemners:-
(Eg. "Everyone is crooked anyway"). Here the of offender views the world as a corrupt place

and views the police, court, prison and society with contempt. They rationalize that police are on the
take, teachers show favoritism. Judges are prejudiced and parents vent their frustration on kids. By
shifting the blame ot  others, delinquents are able ot  repress the feeling that their own acts are wrong.

e . Appeal to higher loyalities:-
(Eg. "I did ti for the gang"). Here the criminal argues that his act was done for himself but for

the group to which he holds an allegiance. Thus, we have seen that illegal activities by the government
agencies may be justified ni  terms of "national security".

.4 Criticism to Neutralization Theory:-
i) Studies that have attempted ot  empirically test neutralization theory are, at best, ni

conclusive.
ii) Robert Agnew argued that they are essentially two general criticisms of studies that

support neutralization theory.
The first challenge is that several researches have improperly measured the acceptance

of neutralization techniques.



CRMINIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRMI NIAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 107 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Second, researchers have expressed concem that criminals may use techniques of
neutralization prior ot  committing a crimi

iii) nal offense.
Michael Hindelang's self-report study published ni  1970 found that delinquents and
non-delinquents had different moral values, afi nding that contradicts basic principles
of the neutralization appro

iv) ach.
Even studies that support Matzas'  approach have failed ot  show that neutralization of
deviant behaviour precedes hte onset of criminality. The validity of Matza's model
depends on showing that hte neutralization come first and then comes criminality os
far; such data is unavailable.

HIRSCH'S SOCIAL CONTROL OR SOCIAL BOND THEORY
SYNOPSIS:-

1) Control Theories.
2) Early Control Theories of Human Behavior.
3) Emile Durkheim's Idea of Collective Conscience.

Freud's Concept of Id and Superego.
Reiss' Control Theory.
Toby's Concept of "Stake ni  Conformity".
Nye's Control Theory.

8) Walter Reckless' Containment Theory.
Modern Social Control Theories.

10) Hirschi's Social Bonding Theory.
11) Travis Hirschi.
12) Hirschi Perspective.
13) Elements of Bond Theory.

Cont ro l Theories
i) Cr ontrol 

e theories assume that al people would naturally commit crimes fi it wasn't for
straints no the selfish tendencies that exist ni every individual.

ii) Control theorists rhetorically ask. "What si  ti about society, human interaction. and
other factors that cause people not to act on their natural impulses."

2) Early Control Theories of Human Behavior
Thomas Hobbes

Hobbes claimed that the natural state of humanity was one of greediness and
self-centeredness, which led to a chaotic state of constant warfare among
individuals.

2) He also theorized that this constant state of chaos create such fear among many
individuals that ti resulted ni  them coming together to rationally develop a pact
that would prevent such chaos.

こ

ご

こ



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRININAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION HNIE: 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 108 @ (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

3) Hobbes claimed that by creating a society and forming binding contracts (or
laws), that this would alleviate hte chaos by deterring individuals from violating
others' rights.

4) Despite such laws, Hobbes doubted that the innately greedy nature of humans
would not be completely eliminated.
The existence of such innate selfishness and aggressiveness was exactly why
the use of punishments was necessary; their purpose being to induce fear into
the societal members who choose to violate the societal law.

6) In a way, Hobbes was perhaps the first deterrence theorist, in the sense that he
was the first notable theorist ot  emphasize the use of punishment to deter
individuals from violating the rights of others.

3) Emile Durkheim's Idea of Collective Conscience
i) Suggested humans have on internal mechanisms to let them know when they are fulfilled.
ii) To this end, Durkheim coined the terms "automatic spontaneity" and "awakened

reflection.
Automatic spontaneity can be understood with reference to animals' eating habits.
Specifically, animals stop eating when they are full and they are content until they are
hungry again; they do not start hunting again right after they have filled their stomach
with food

iv) In contrast, awakened reflection concerns the fact that humans do not have such an
internal, regulatory mechanism. That si  because people often acquire resources beyond
what is immediately required

V) Durkheim's "awakened reflection" has become commonly known as greed.
vi) People tend to favor better conditions and additional fulfillment because we apparently

have no biological or psychological mechanism to limit such tendencies.
vi) The selfish desires of mankind "are unlimited so far as they depend on the individual

alone...the more one has, the more one wants.
vii) Thus, society must step ni  and provide the "regulative force" that keeps humans from

acting too selfishly.
viti) One of the primary elements of this regulative force is the collective conscience, which

si  the extent of similarities or likenesses that people share.
ix) The notion of collective conscience can be seen as an early form of the idea of social

bonding.
According to Durkheim, the collective conscience serves many functions in society.

xI) Une such function is the ability to establish rules that control individuals from following
their natural tendencies toward selfish behavior.

xii) Durkheim also believed that crime allows people ot  unite together ni  opposition against
deviants.



CRMINIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRMI NIAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 1 0 9 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

Freud's Concept of Id and Superego:-
One of Freud's most essential propositions si that al individuals aer  born with at endency
toward inherent drives and selfishness due ot  hte "dI" domain of hte psyche.

ii) Another one of Freud's assumptions si that this inherent, selfish tendency must eb
countered by controls produced from the development of the "Superego."

iii) The Superego si the domain of the psyche that contains our conscience, si formed
through hte interactions that occur between ay oung infant/child and their significant
others.

Reiss' Control Theory
One of the first control theories.

11) Claimed that delinquency was a consequence of weak coutrols that resulted ni  weak
ego or superego controls among juvenile probationers.

i11) Reiss assumed that there was no explicit motivation for delinquent activity.
iv) Rather, he claimed that it would occur ni  the absence of controls or restraints against

such behavior.
v) Believed the family was hte primary source through which deviant predispositions were

discouraged
vi) A sound family environment would provide for an individual's needs and the essential

emotional bonds that are so important ni  socializing individuals.
vil) In addition, he claimed that individuals must be closely monitored for delinquent behavior

and adequately disciplined when they break the rules.
vili) Personal factors, such as the ability to restrain one's impulses and delay gratification

were also important.
ix) Although the direct tests of Reiss' theory have only provided partial support for it.

Reiss' influence si  apparent ni  many contemporary criminological theories.
6) Toby's Concept of "Stake in Conformity"

1) Claimed that individuals were more inclined to act on their natural inclinations when
the controls on them were weak.

ii) He emphasized the concept of a stake ni  conformity that supposedly prevents most
people from committing crime.
The stake ni  conformity Toby was referring ot  is the extent to which individuals have
investments in conventional society.

iv) Studies have shown that stake in conformity is one of the most influential factors ni
individuals' decisions to offend.
For example, individuals who have nothing to lose are much more likely to take risks
and violate others' rights than those who have relatively more invested ni  social
institutions.

V) One distinguishing feature of Toby's theory is his emphasis on peer influences ni  terms
of both motivating and inhibiting antisocial behavior depending on whether most of
their peers have olw or high stakes ni  conformity.

に

こ



CRISHANE X E AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION MNIE: 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 110 F (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

vi) Toby's stake ni  conformity has been used effectively ni  subsequent control theories of
crime.

Nye's Control Theory:-
Claimed that there was no significant positive force that caused delinquency, because
such antisocial tendencies are universal and would be found in virtually everyone fi not
for certain controls usually found ni  the home.

ii) Three Primary Components of Control.
iii) Internal Control
iv) Formed through social interaction.

This socialization assists ni  the development of a conscience.
vi) If'individuals are not given adequate resources and care, they will follow their natural

tendencies toward doing what was necessary ot  protect their interests.
vii) Direct Control
viji) Consists of a wide range of constraints on individual propensities to commit deviant

a c t s .
iN) Includes numerous types of sanctions, such as jail and ridicule, and the restriction of

one's chances to commit criminal activity.
X) Indirect Control
xi) Occurs when individuals are strongly attached to their early care-givers.
xii) Nye suggested that when the needs of an individual are not met by their care-givers,

inappropriate behavior can result.
xili) He argued that either no controls (i.e., complete freedom) or too much control (i.e., no

freedom at all) would predict the most chronic delinquency.
xiv) Instead, he believed that a health balance of freedom and parental control was the best

strategy for inhibiting criminal behavior.
Some recent research supports Nye's prediction.

8) Walter Reckless' Containment Theory
i) Emphasizes both inner containment and outer containment, which can be viewed as

internal and external controls.
ii) Identified predictive factors that push and/or pull individuals toward antisocial behavior.
iii) Individuals can be pushed into delinquency by their social environment, such as by a

lack of opportunities for education or employment.
iv) Furthermore, he pointed out some individual factors, such as brain disorders or risk-

taking personalities, could push some people to commit criminal behavior.
V) Some individuals can be pulled into criminal activity by hanging out with delinquent

pees. watching too much violence on television, and so on.
vi) Containment theory proposes that extra pushes and pulls can motivate people to commit

crime.
vii) Pushes and pulls toward criminal behavior could be enough to force individuals into

criminal activity unless they are sufficiently contained or controlled.



CRMINIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRMI NIAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 111 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

viti) Such containment should be both internal and external.
ix) yB inner containment, eh meant building apersons'  sense of self.
x) This would help hte person resist hte temptations of criminal activity. With respect ot

outer containment, Reckless claimed that social organizations, such as school, church,
and other institutions, aer essential ni building bonds that inhibit individuals from being
pushed or pulled into criminal activity.

xi) Some studies have shown more general support for containment theory; other studies
have shown that some of hte components of the theory, such as internalization of rules,
seem ot  have much more support ni  accounting for variation ni  delinquency than other
factors, such as self-perception.

xi) Some studies have noted weaker support for Reckless' theory among minorities and
females.

xii). One of the problems with containment theory si that ti does not og far enough toward
specifying hte factors that aer important ni predicting criminality.

Modern Social Control Theories:-
Matza's Drift Theory:-
i). Individuals offend at certain times ni  their life when social controls, such as parental

supervision, employment, and family ties are weakened.
ii) nI  developing his theory, Matza criticized earlier theories and their tendency ot  predict

too m u c h c r ime
iii) Matza claimed that there si  a degree of determinism (i.e... Positive school) ni  human

behavior, but also a significant amount of free will (i.e., Classical school).
iv) He called this perspective "soft determinism," which is the gray area between free will

and determinism.
The time in which social controls are most weakened for the majority of individuals is
during the teenage years.

vi) This si  very consistent with the well-known age-crime relationship; most individuals
who are arrested are in their teenage years.

vii) Once sufficient ties are developed, people tend ot  mature out of criminal lifestyles.
vili) When supervision is absent and ties are minimal, the majority of individuals are the

most "free" to do what they want.
ix) It is during these times that people have few ties and obligations that they will "drift" ni

and out of delinquency.
x) Matza insisted that "drifting" si  not the same as a commitment to a life of crime.
xi) Instead, ti is "experimenting" with questionable behavior and then rationalizing it.
xii) Individuals do not reject the conventional normative structure.
xiii) Much offending is based on neutralizing or adhering to subterranean values that they

have been socialized to use as a means of circumventing conventional values.
xiv) This is basically the same as asserting one's independence, which tends to occur with a

vengeance during the teenage years.



CRIMINAL PSS CHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDETION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 112 E (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
XV) In many contexts (such as business), risk-taking and aggressiveness are seen as desirable

characteristics, so many individuals are influenced by such subterranean values.
xiv) This, according to Matza, adds to individuals' likelihood for "drifting" into crime and

delinquency.
XV) Empirical research examining the theory has been mixed.
xvi) One of the primary criticisms of Matza's theory si  that the theory does not explain the

most chronic offenders, the people who are responsible for the vast majority of the
serious, violent crimes.

xvii) Despite its shortcomings, Matza's Drift theory does appear ot  explain why many people
offend exclusively during their teenage and young adult years, but then grow out of it.

xviii) The theory is highly consistent with several of the ideas presented by control theorists,
including the assumption that (1) selfish tendencies are universal, (2) these tendencies
are inhibited by socialization and social controls, and (3) the selfish tendencies appear
at times when controls are weakest.

10) Hirschi's Social Bond Theory:-
Perhaps the most influential social control theory.

ii) Hirschi's theory of social bond takes an assumption from Durkheim that "we are all
animals, and thus naturally capable of committing criminal acts."

iii) However, as Hirschi acknowledged, most humans can be adequately socialized to become
tightly bonded to conventional entities, such as families, schools, communities, and
the like.

iv) The stronger a person is bonded to conventional society, the less prone to engaging in
crime he or she will be.

V) More specifically, the stronger the social bond, the less likely that an individual will
commit criminal offenses.

11) Travis Hirschi
a) Author of the social bond theory.
b) Hirschi was born in 1935 and graduated from University of Arizona.
c) His theories integrated different theories and attempted to disprove the consistencies

of other theories.
His theories show little interest in race, gender, and class.

12) Hirschi Perspective:-
A) Benefit:-

a) People feels something they like.
b) People are motivated ot  acquire wants.
c) People assert a desired level of control
d) People have an attraction to illegal temptations.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S . P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 113 Z (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
B) Consequences:-

a) People feel or would feel something they don' like.
b) The cost of acquiring the want si  severe.
C) Social control strength affects criminal activity.

Social Bonds control hte atractionot illegal temptations and ensure conformity.
(Hancock, 2004)

13) Elements of Bond Theory:-
a) At t achmen t : -

Consist of affectionate bonds between an individual and his or her significant others.
b) Commitment:-

The investment a person has ni  conventional society.
ii) This has been explained as one's "stake ni  conformity," or what is al risk of

being lost fi one gets caught committing a crime.
c) Invo lvemen t : -

i) The time spent in conventional activities.
ii) The assumption si  that time spent ni  constructive activities will reduce time

devoted to illegal behaviors.
d) Be l i e f : -

i) Has generally been interpreted as moral beliefs concerning the laws and rules
of society.

ii) This si one of the most examined, and consistently supported, aspects of the
social bond.

iii) Hirschi's theory has been tested by numerous researchers and has, for the most
part, been supported.

iv) However, one criticism is that the components of the social bond may only
predict criminality fi they are defined ni  a certain way.
For example, with respect ot  the "involvement" element of hte bond, studies
have shown that not all conventional activities are equal when it comes to
preventing delinquency.

v). It appears that only academic or religious activities seem to have consistent
effects on inhibiting delinquency.

vi) Another major criticism of Hirschi's theory is that the effects of "attachments"
on crime depends on who one is attached to.

-

り



CRIMINAL PS CHOLOGI AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. Pa than ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. P a g e : 114 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

BECKER'S LABELLING THEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
I. Origin and Development.
2. The Concept.
.3 Following could be the consequences of labeling.

Interactionist Theory of Criminology (Modern Labelling Theory of Crime).
.1 Origin and Development:-

The major formulations of this perspective are based on the writings of Edwin Lemert, although
similar ideas had been expressed earlier by others particularly, Mead, Tannenbaum and Schutz.

The more recent contributors ot  the literature on labeling are Becker, Garfinkel, Goffiman,
Scheft, Kai Erikson, Kisuse and Schur.

.2 The Concept:-
The labeling theory propagates that people are portrayed as becoming deviant and criminal

when significant others teachers, parents, neighbours, police, friends etc. label them as such. Thus,
this theory seems to place the blame for criminal career formation on the agencies of social control
operating ni  society. The interactionist school views negative labels, such as 'unstable' "addict",
"dummy". "criminal", ex-con", "deviant' etc. as causing permanent harm ot  the people on whom they

are bestowed.

3. Following could be the consequences of labeling:-
i) Loss of confidence in one's ability (Eg. "dummy")
ii) Loss of self-esteem. Juvenile "delinquents" many a times find that their parents consider

them a negative influence on younger brothers and sisters.
111) Adults who have been given official labels, such sa "criminal", "ex-con", "mental patient"

or "addict", may find their eligibility severely restricted.
iv) Labeling brings with ti covert or overt social ostracism. In the end, a labeled person

may find himself turning to other similarly labeled persons for support.
v) The labeled person may find themselves isolated from conventional society. Thereafter,

they may identify themselves as members of a outcast group. They may begin to believe
and internalize it that really are evil or bad.

vi) Labels are believed to produce stigma. This might force the labeled person into criminal
roles because of public stereotypes about criminals.
The mass media of communication often treat crime as entertainment rather than as a
social problem or a subject for public information thus diluting the fact that it has to be
viewed seriously.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION UJNE 2022)

Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 115 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
4) Interactionist Theory of Criminology (Modern Labelling Theory of Crime):-

Edwin M. Lemert ni  his work 'Social Pathology' published ni  1951 described wto types of
deviations-primary and secondary. There ear various reasons of primary deviations which arise ni
many contexts. The primary deviants wil not consider themselves as deviants, whereas the secondary
deviants accept their deviance status. Primary deviance arises out of biological, psychological or
sociological reasons while hte secondary deviance wil eb caused by social reactions ot  primary
deviance and social reaction plays a vital role ni  determining these deviant types. The deviations if
rationalized or dealt with as functions of socialy accepted role are primary or symptomatic or
situational but when deviant behaviours are started ot  eb employed as a role based upon it sa ameans
ot  defend, attack or adjust the overt and covert problems which are created yb hte reaction of society
to the behaviour, the deviations are secondary.

According ot this theory, societies create crime yb enacting laws and therefore the substantive
nature of such laws should be the primary object of the study of criminology.

According to Howard Becker (1963 and 1973) deviance and crime are hte creations of social
groups because they label certain behaviours as deviant or criminal. Some criminologists have termed
this as "social reaction theory crime". Thsi  aapproach si distinct from the idea that there si something
ni  an individual which makes him a deviant or non-deviant. Am an si deviant or criminal because a label
of being so si attached ot  those who successfully commit or aer  said ot  have committed a deviant act
and the rest of the society divided into several groups.

Becker recognized the following four steps of citizens based on their behaviour, namely:-
those who are rule abiding or free of labels or conforming citizens;

11) those who are falsely implicated into any crime, without there being any breaking of
law;
those who exhibit law breaking behaviour and aer labeled as pure deviants; and

iv) those who break alw yet avoid labeling; and are also called as secret deviants.
The person who feel dangers with certain kinds of acts and are ni  power and organization ot  do

something, label those acts as crimes which the others are unable to resist. The persons who are
powerless are victims of labeling. The important effect of labeling si on the labelled and label-less. In
order to be effective, the persons labelled and the other critical of labeling must accept the power of
label-less. The labelists (those who study hte crime ni  labeling approach) are sympathetic to hte
person labelled because they study deviants' social world

To label a child as a delinquent results ni  negative effect on the person concerned. The individual
concerned does not only become criminal ni  the eyes of the society, the authorities and the courts but
in his own eyes he becomes so. As a matter of defence or attack on those who label him so, he begins
to, adopt more delinquent role which leads him towards a career of delinquency which is a secondary
deviation.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGI AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY CEDITION JENE 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 116 • (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.

SELF-CONTROLAND SELF-ESTEEM AS RELATED TO CRIME
SELF-CONTROLTHEORY

SYNOPSIS:-
1. Introduction
2. Historical Background
.3 Meaning and Concept
4. Features of the Theory

.1 Introduct ion:-

The general theory of crime, also known sa self-control theory, emerged through the evolution
of social control theory. Just as Hirschi had built upon previous control theories with his introduction
of social control theory, Gottfredson and Hirschi further developed their conception of hte causes of
crime and encapsulated ti within a new theory: the general theory of crime. While control theory
emphasizes the importance of social bonds sa na insulating factor against criminal involvement, hte
general theory of crime posits that low self-control si a key factor underlying criminality. This newer
control theory si  often referred to as self-control theory due to its focus on this aspect.

2. Historical Background:-
Gottfredson and Hirschi integrated aspects of other theories to form the general theory of

crime. borrowing notions from routine activities theory, rational choice theory, and other psychological
and biologically based social theories of crime. The two theories differ in what is believed to be the
fundamental propensity towards crime; however, both theories are centred around aspects developed
ni  childhood through effective parenting. Like other control theories, the general theory of crime
places significant weight on this early developmental process sa setting the stage for later life.

Gottfredson and Hirschi shifted their focus away from an emphasis on the role of social control
as protecting people from participating ni  criminal activities towards the conception that self-control,
or lack thereof, could be used to explain criminal behaviour.

.3 Meaning and Concept:-
For Gottfredson and Hisrchi, crime si thought ot  occur through the following process: "(1) an

impulsive personality to (2) lack of self-control to (3) the withering of social bonds to (4) the
opportunity ot  commit crime and delinquency ot  (5) deviant behaviour" (Siegel and McCormick,
2006: 286).

4. Features of the Theory:-
According to the general theory of crime, crime is seen as a means o f obtaining immediate

gratification, and the ability to delay such short-term desires is linked to self-control. As such, those
with a propensity for criminal involvement are thought to lack sufficient self-control. This lack of
self-control is traced beck to childhood where, the theorists suggest, the initial indications of deviant
behaviour emerge. For those with limited self-control, participation in deviant behaviour only continues
throughout the life course.



CRMI NIAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRMI NIAL SOCOILOGY (EDITION JENE: 202)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page: 17 (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.]

Self-control si obtained during early childhood and does not necessarily change whti  time, hte
theory does propose that rates of offending decline with age, even for those who have lower levels of
self-control.

As the general theory of crime focuses exclusively on the role that self-control plays ni
criminality, research has also focused no the relationship between self-control and a propensity for
criminal behaviour. Other factors believed ot  be related ot  self-control have also been assessed.

SELF ESTEEM

SYNOPSIS:-
1. Introduction
.2 Historical background
.3 Meaning and concept
4. The Rosenberg Scale
.5 As an Enduring Characteristic
6. As a Basic Competency
7. As an Essential Human Trait

.1 Introduction:-
Theories of self-esteem usually focus on determining what measurable things impact or shape

a person's ideas about individual self worth. Some approaches claim that self-esteem si ad irect product
of a person's upbringing, particularly during hte adolescent years, while others rty ot  identify how
self-esteem impacts relationships and how ti can predict later outcomes ni  interpersonal situations.
2. Historical background:-

The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES), developed ni  the 1960s, si one of hte most popular
formalized rubrics and us based on assumptions that self-esteem si a direct outcome of various social
and personal experiences, including but not limited ot  race, socioeconomic background, and family
history. Most other theories are less formalized, but still try ot  do more or less hte same thing:
namely, figure out where self-esteem comes from and what impacts it.
.3 Meaning and concept:-

Self-esteem is generally understood ot  be a person's overall sense of his or her own personal
worth, and is usually thought ot  shape both how a person sees him or herself specifically as well as
how he or she conceptualizes a broader place ni  society and the world at large. The terms "self-
worth," "self-regard," "self-integrity" and other variations are c
" om
se mo

l n
f ly
-e  us

s ed
te  in

e te
m rcha

" in ng
 ea
t b
h ly
is  w

 it
c h
ontext. No matter what it's called, ti often impacts how willing people are to

take risks ni  their careers and personal relationships, and is frequently also related to overall happiness



CRISHNAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)
Prof. P a t h a n ' s S .P. Law Classes, P u n e . Page: 118 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
4. The Rosenberg Scale:-

The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSES) si one of hte most widely used tools when ti comes
ot  evaluating a person's level of self-esteem. It's presented sa aq uestionnaire with 10 multiple-choice
questions and can eb used as a crude indicator of how aperson feels about hmi  or herself. The rubric
was designed by American psychologist Morris Rosenberg and si based largely on Rosenberg's own
scholarly theories of self-esteem: namely that it's both an outcome of social forces and avariable that
can change based on subjective traits.

5. As an Enduring Characteristic:-
Many psychologists regard self-esteem sa an enduring characteristic, for instance. This basically

means that ti is a generally static state, however short-term ti might be. According ot  this theory,
several factors can play roles ni  a person's momentary self-esteem, and overall self-image can evolve
sa ap erson's perspectives or characteristics change.

6. As a Basic Competency:-
Other psychologists believe that self-esteem si more competency-based and comes from being

able ot  cope with life's challenges and considering oneself worth of being happy.
7. As an Essential H u m a n Trait:-

Another popular teaching holds that hte ability ot  develop a healthy, positive image of oneself
and others is inherently human. Scholars ni  this school of thought commonly suggest that all humans
are born with a baseline self-esteem that is at a naturally high level.



CRIMINAL PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JN/ E 2022)
Prof. Pathan's S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 119 # (Class) 25510256, (Res) 20333908.

08 QUESTION PAPER

LLB
Feb 2019 (2017 Pattern)

Time: 3 Hours [Max Marks: 80]
Instructions to the candidates;
1) All questions are compulsory. 2) Figures ot  the right indicate full marks.

PART-A
Q1) Answer the following questions ni  detail (Any Two): [2 x 20 = 40]
a) dEoxepsl aiitn d Si oc

f ializ
f atio
e n and
r  Crim
 e whti  
f re
r fer
o ence 
m to Differentia

 l Reinfo
D rcement T

i heo
f ry. 
f How
erential Association Theory.

Examine various Psychometric teststo measure criminal behaviour.
Critically evaluate various schools of Criminology. Which school si more appropriate acco
to you? Give reasons. rding

d) Define Criminal Behaviour. Discuss Psychodynamics of criminal behaviour. How far Mental
Illness and Human Aggression are relevant in crime.

PART-B
Q   2) Answer the following questions (Any Two): [2 x 15 = 30]
a) Explain and evaluate Hirschi's Social Control Theory.
b) What do you mean by forensic psychology? Trace the origin a

p nd
sy  d

c e
h v
o el
l o
o p
g m
y en
 ni  t

I  
n of
d  
i f
a or
 e
a n
n si
d ab c

road.
c) Explain Cohen's Theory of Delinquent Subculture. Discuss its strength and w

Attempt the foliowing: eakness.
1) Social Structure Theory. i1) Becker's Labelling Theory.

PART-C
Q 3) Write Short Notes on the following: (Any Two) [2 X 5 = 10]
a) Psychological v/s. Psycho-analytical approach ot  crime.
b) Application of psychology ni  prison.
C) Psychology and the police.

Self-Control and Self Esteem as related to crime.

June 2019 (2017 Pattern)
Time: 3 Hours
Instr [Max Marks: 80]

uctions to the candidates;
All questions are compulsory. 2) Figures to the right indicate full marks.

PART-A
Q1) Answer the following questions in detail (Any Tw

Ex o
pl )

ain "Socialization and Crime" with special reference ot  Differential Association Theory.
What is Criminology? Discuss the positivist approach of Cesare Lombros

c) o.
Critically evaluate the Cohen's theory of Delinquent Subculture. How far it differs from Miller's
lower class gang delinquency theory?
Discuss meaning, purpose and scope of Criminal Psychology. Compare Psychological approach
with psycho-analytical approach to crime.

・

b 1 a b



CRIMINAI, PSYCHOLOGY AND CRIMINAL SOCIOLOGY (EDITION JUNE 2022)

Prof. P a t h a n ' s S.P. Law Classes, Pune. Page : 120 * (Class) 25510256, (Res) 26333908.
PART-B

@ 2) Answer the following questions (Any Two) [30]
a) Define Psychometric Test. Discuss how ti can eb used ni  Criminal behaviour.
b) State and explain meaning and scope of Forensic Psychology. Discuss its application ni  court.
c) Explain and distinguish between Hirsch's Social Control theory and Differential Reinforcement

theory.
d) "Poor people are more likely to commit crimes because they are unable to achieve monetary

or social success ni  any other way" Discuss the Social Disorganisation Theory in the light of
given statement.

PART-C
Q3) Write short notes on the following: (Any Two) [10]
a • Social structure theory.
b) Role of forensic psychology ni  the investigation of crime.
c) Human aggression and violence to crime.
d) Enrico Ferri

LL.B. (Semester - I)
First Year of Three Year Law Course (2017 Pattern)

Time :3 Hours] [Max. Marks:80
Instructions to the candidates:
1) All questions are compulsory. 2) Figures to the right indicate full marks

PART-A
Q1) Answer the following questions in detail (Any Two) [40]
a) Explain various Sociological theories of Crime. Discuss their importance in understanding

the criminal behaviour?
b) Attempt the following:

i Hirschi's Social Control Theory Differential Reinforcement Theory
c) Explain the process of profiling criminal personality. What are the factors underling criminal

profiling? What are its merits and demerits?
d) Define Criminology. Write a detailed note on positivist theory of Criminology.

PART B
Q2) Answer the following questions (Any Two) [30]
a) Explain 'Socialization' and 'Crime' with special reference ot  Differential Association Theory.

Critically evaluate the Cohen's theory of Delinquent Subculture. How far it differs from Miller's
lower class gang delinquency theory?

c) Define Criminal Psychology.Examine the Psychological and Psychoanalytical approaches ot
crime.

d) What si  Forensic Psychology? Discuss the role of Forensic Psychology in the investigation
of crime.

PART C
Q3) Write short notes on the following: (Any Two) [10]
a) Neo-Classical School b) Mental Illness and Crime
c) Application of psychology in court d) Neutralization and Rift Theory

b