A handbook for police officers
on

Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
(highlighting key provisions and changes vis-à-vis CrPC)

Maharaja Ranjit Singh

Punjab Police Academy
Phillaur

A handbook for Police officers
on

Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
(highlighting key provisions and changes vis-à-vis CrPC)

Prepared by

1. Simrit Pal Singh Nibber, DyDA (PPA)
2. Dr. Harpreet Singh, DyDA (PPA)
3. Inderdeep Singh Gill, DyDA (PPA)
4. Shallinderpreet kaur, DyDA (PPA)
5. Sonia Taank, ADA (PPA)

6.

Typing & Designing by

Sohan Singh Rawat

2024

Maharaja Ranjit Singh

Punjab Police Academy
Phillaur

Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
(highlighting key provisions and changes vis-à-vis CrPC)
INDEX
Sr.
No.

Topics

Page
No.

1.

Salient features of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS)

1

Changes brought in by BNSS vis-à-vis CrPC
with respect to the following:
2.

FIR

1-2

3.

Recording of statements

2-3

4.

Arrest

3

5.

Medical Examination

4

6.

Remand

4

7.

Search

4-5

8.

Attachment, Forfeiture or Restoration of Property – a flow chart

6

9.

Inquest Report

7

10.

Police Report

7

11.

Victim-centric provisions

7-8

12.

Magistrate power in Complaint Case

8

13.

Speedy Trial

8-9

14.

Other Key Changes

9-10

15.

Specific Timelines for various stages of Trial

11-12

Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
(key provisions and changes vis-a-vis CrPC)
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as BNSS) shall
replace the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (CrPC) and shall come into force on July 01,
2024.
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS) seeks to
 ensure speedy justice
 bring transparency and accountability in investigation
 make criminal justice system more victim centric
Some salient features of BNSS
a) Specific timelines for investigation and trial
BNSS prescribes specific timelines for different aspects of investigation and trial in
order to ensure speedy justice.
b) Audio-Video recording of search
BNSS mandates audio-video recording of search and seizure to bring in greater
transparency during investigation.
c) Attachment of Property during investigation
The property of criminals, which is deemed to be proceeds of crime, can be attached
by the Court. Such proceeds of crime shall be distributed among the victims. This
would not only create greater deterence for crime but would also provide some
pecuniary relief to the victims of crime.
d) In-absentia trial of Proclaimed offender
BNSS provides for in-absentia trial of proclaimed offenders.
The major changes brought in by BNSS with respect to investigative process vis-a–vis CrPC
are as follows:

Changes with respect to FIR [Sec. 173 BNSS]
i. Registration of FIR irrespective of jurisdiction [Sec. 173 (1) BNSS]
FIR can be registered at any Police station irrespective of the area, where the offence is
committed.
ii. FIR through electronic means [Sec.173 (1) (ii) BNSS]
FIR can be registered through electronic means (E-FIR). However the same has to be
signed by the informant within 3 days.
iii. Conditions for conducting Preliminary enquiry [Sec.173 (3) BNSS]
In offences punishable with imprisonment between 3 to 7 years, the Officer in-charge
of the police station may
 with the permission of Deputy Superintendent of Police
 conduct preliminary enquiry to ascertain whether there is any prima facie case, for
proceeding in the matter.
Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

1

Such preliminary enquiry must be completed in 14 days.
Note: There was no such provision under CrPC.
Forwarding Daily Diary Reports to Magistrate once in 14 days [Sec. 174 BNSS]
Officer in charge shall forward the daily diary reports of information regarding noncognizable cases once in 14 days to the Magistrate.
Note: There was no specific timeline for this under CrPC.

Changes with respect to recording of statements [Sec. 176, 179-183 BNSS]
i. Recording of rape victim statement at her residence [Sec.176 BNSS]
In relation to the offence of rape, the recording of the statement of victim shall be
conducted at the residence of victim or at the place of her choice by a woman police
officer in the presence of her parent or guardian or near relative or social worker of the
locality. Such statement may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means
including mobile phone.
Note: CrPC did not have any provision for recording the statement of victim of sexual
assault through mobile phone.
ii. Woman Police officer to record the statement of victim of sexual assault
[Sec. 180 BNSS]
The statement of a woman, against whom sexual assault is alleged to have been
committed or attempted, shall be recorded by a woman police officer or any woman
officer. Such statements may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means.
iii. Recording of statement of victim of sexual assault by female Judicial Magistrate
[Sec. 183 BNSS]
Section 183 (6) (a) mandates that the statement of the victim of the rape shall be
recorded only by a woman Judicial Magistrate and in her absence, by a male Judicial
Magistrate in the presence of a woman.
iv. Women, persons above 60 or with acute illness not bound to attend Police station
[Sec. 179 BNSS]
a) no male person under 15 years or above 60 years of age
b) no woman
c) no mentally or physically disabled person
d) no person with acute illness
shall be called to police station for recording of their statement.
However, if the said person is willing to attend the police station he or she may be
permitted to do so.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

2

v. Recording of statement by Judicial Magistrate of witness in offences punishable
with imprisonment for 10 years or more [Sec. 183 (6) BNSS]
 In cases relating to the offences punishable with imprisonment for 10 years or life
or death, the Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the witness
brought before him by the police officer.
Note: CrPC did not have any provision like this.
 If the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently, mentally or
physically disabled, the statement made by the person with the assistance of an
interpreter or a special educator, shall be recorded through audio-video electronic
means, preferably by mobile phone.

Arrest [Sec. 35 BNSS]
i. No arrest of aged or infirm person without permission of DySP in offences
punishable with less than 3 years imprisonment [Sec. 35 BNSS]
In case of offences punishable with less than 3 years of imprisonment no arrest of a
person, who is
 infirm or
 above 60 years of age
shall be made without the prior permission of DySP.
ii. Appointment of Designated Police Officer in every Police station for maintaining
the record of arrested persons and displaying it in digital mode [Sec. 37 BNSS]
An officer, not below the rank of ASI, shall be appointed as Designated Police Officer
in every Police station, who shall maintain and display, in digital mode, the
information regarding name, address, nature of the offence of the arrested person at
Police Station and District Headquarter.
iii. Information of arrest to Designated Police Officer [Sec. 48 BNSS]
Police officer effecting arrest is required to inform about arrest of person to
a) Relatives or friends and
b) Also to designated Police officer
iv. Arrest by Private person [Sec. 40 BNSS]
In case of arrest by private person, the arrested person must be handed over to the
police within 6 hours of arrest.
v. Use of handcuffs allowed in certain cases [Sec.43 (3) BNSS]
The use of handcuffs on the accused is permitted in the following cases:
 in case of habitual or repeat offender or
 in case of a person who has escaped from custody or
 in case of organised crime, terrorist act, drug related crime, illegal possession of
arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of coins and
currency notes, human trafficking, sexual offences against children or offences
against State.
Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

3

Medical Examination [Sec. 51 to 53, 184 BNSS]
i. Application for the medical examination by any police officer [Sec 51 and 52 BNSS]
Any police officer can move an application for the medical examination of accused.
Note:- Under CrPC only SI could move such an application.
ii. Medical report of Victim in Rape cases to be given in 7 days [Sec. 184 BNSS]
The Medical Officer shall, within a period of 7 days, forward the Medico-Legal Report
(MLR) to the investigating officer, who shall forward to it to the Magistrate with Police
Report.

iii. Medical examination report of accused to be given without delay [Sec. 52 BNSS]
The Medical Officer shall without any delay forward the Medico-Legal Report (MLR)
to the investigating officer.

Remand [Sec. 187 (2) BNSS]
Police Remand can be sought even after the initial 15 days
Remand of accused can be sought under BNSS
 within first 40 days of arrest in cases where the offence is punishable with less than
10 years imprisonment.
 within first 60 days of arrest in cases where the offence is punishable for more than
10 years imprisonment.
Note: Under CrPC the Police Remand of accused could be sought only during the initial 15
days after arrest.

Changes with respect to Search [Sec. 103, 105, 185, 186 BNSS]
BNSS has introduced major changes regarding the search proceedings as compared to CrPC.
It has mandated audio-video recording of the entire process of search. The following
procedure has to be followed while conducting search:

Action before proceeding for search in person
& deputing subordinate Police Officer for search
a) Recording of reasons for search in Case diary: The Officer in-charge of Police Station
or IO is required to record the grounds of his belief for conducting search and also record
the reason for not conducting search in person in the case-diary.[Sec 185 (1) BNSS]
b) Conducting search in person: The Officer incharge of Police Station or IO shall, if
practicable, conduct the search in person. [Sec. 185 (2) BNSS]
Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

4

c) Deputing subordinate Police officer for conducting search: If the Officer in-charge of
Police Station or IO is unable to conduct search in person, he may after recording the
reasons, depute any subordinate Police officer for conducting the search.
[Sec. 185 (3) BNSS]

Procedure during Search
Recording of search and seizure through audio-video electronic means [Sec. 105 and
Proviso to Sec. 185 (2) BNSS]
The Officer Incharge of Police Station or IO shall record the whole process of search by any
audio-video electronic means preferably by mobile phone.
Search to be conducted in the presence of two independent witnesses [Sec.103 (4)
BNSS]
As per Sec. 103 (4) of BNSS, before making search, Police officer is required to call upon
two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the place to be
searched is situated.
Refusal to become witness for search amounts to an offence [Sec.103(8) BNSS]
Any person who, without reasonable cause refuses or neglects to attend and witness a search
under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to
him, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 222 of Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.

Action after search
Audio-video recording of search to be sent to DM, SDM or JMIC [Sec. 105 BNSS]
The police officer shall without delay forward audio-video recording to the DM, SDM or
JMIC.
IO to send record regarding search to Magistrate within 48 hours [Sec.185 (5) BNSS]
The IO shall send the copies of the following record within 48 hours to the competent
Magistrate:
a) Reasons for conducting search
b) Reason for not conducting search in person and deputing subordinate police officer in
case someone else is deputed by IO to conduct search
c) The details of search proceedings

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

5

Attachment, Forfeiture or Restoration of Property [Sec. 107 BNSS]
BNSS lays down the following procedure for attachment of property of criminals, derived
from criminal activity and its distribution:
Application by IO for attachment of property made from criminal activity
[Sec. 107 (1) BNSS]
The investigating officer may, with the approval of Superintendent of police or
Commissioner of police, make an application before the competent Magistrate for the
attachment of property made from criminal activity or from the commission of any
offence.
Show cause notice by Magistrate [Sec. 107 (2) BNSS]
Magistrate may issue notice to the person, to whom the property belongs, to show cause
within the period of 14 days as to why an order of attachment shall not be made.

Order of attachment of proceeds of crime [Sec. 107 (4) BNSS]
The Magistrate may, after hearing all parties concerned, direct attachment of the property
found to be the proceeds of crime.

Ex-parte interim order for attaching property [Sec. 107 (5) BNSS]
If the Magistrate is of the opinion that issuing notice to the owner of the property for
attachment will defeat the object of the attachment or seizure, he may pass an ex-parte
interim order for attaching property.

Direction to the District Magistrate for rateable distribution of proceeds of crime
to the victims [Sec. 107 (6) BNSS]
Upon determination that the property in question falls under proceed of crime, the
Magistrate will direct the District Magistrate to rateably distribute the property amongst
those who were affected by the crime.

Action by District Magistrate [Sec. 107 (7) BNSS]
The District Magistrate shall within a period of 60 days distribute the proceeds of crime
either by himself or authorise any other officer subordinate to him to effect such
distribution.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

6

Inquest Report [Sec. 194 – 196 BNSS]
i. Inquest report to be sent to SDM within 24 hours [Sec. 194 (1) BNSS]
The inquest report shall be signed by Officer incharge/IO and other persons shall be
forwarded to the DM or SDM by police within 24 hours.
Note: CrPC did not have any specific timeline for this.
ii. Power to summon person for the purpose of Inquest [Sec. 195 BNSS]
For the purpose of inquest proceedings, no male person under the age of 15 years or
above the age of 60 years or a woman or mentally or physically disabled person or a
person with acute illness shall be required to attend at any place other than the place
where such person resides. If such person is willing to attend the police station he
may be permitted to do so.
]

Police Report [Sec. 193 BNSS]
i. Investigation in certain sexual offence cases under BNS and POCSO to be
completed within 2 months from the date of recording of information
The investigation in relation to an offence under sections 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71 of
the Bharatiya Nayaya Sanhita, 2023 or under sections 4, 6, 8 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 shall be completed within 2 months from the
date on which the information was recorded by the officer in-charge of the police
station.
ii. IO to supply of copies of Police report through electronic means to Magistrate
[Sec 193 (8) BNSS]
The investigating officer shall submit copies of the police report along with other
documents duly indexed to the Magistrate.
The Magistrate shall supply these documents to the accused and victim as required
under section 230 BNSS.
The Police Report and other documents supplied by electronic communication shall be
considered as duly served.

Victim-centric Provisions [Sec. 193 BNSS]
i. IO to inform the victim about the progress of investigation within 90 days
[Sec. 193 (3) (ii) BNSS]
The police officer shall, within a period of 90 days, inform the progress of the
investigation by any means including through electronic communication to the
informant or the victim.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

7

ii. Further investigation to be completed within 90 days [Sec.193 (9) BNSS]
Further investigation during the trial may be conducted with the permission of the
Court trying the case and the same shall be completed within a period of 90 days which
may be extended with the permission of the Court.
iii.Victim to be heard before withdrawal from prosecution [Sec 360 BNSS]
No court shall allow withdrawal from prosecution without giving an opportunity of
hearing to the victim.

Procedure in case of complaint case against Public Servant and others
[Sec. 175 BNSS]
i. Magistrate’s power in complaint against Public Servant [Sec. 175 (4) BNSS]
The Magistrate may take cognizance of a complaint against a public servant, regarding
his official duties after:
 Receiving a report from senior officers of such officer about the fact and
circumstances of the incident and
 consideration of assertions made by such Public Servant.
ii. Magistrate to hear police officer before ordering investigation in a complaint case
[Sec. 175 (3) BNSS]
Magistrate may consider the submission made by the Police Officer before ordering
investigation in complaint cases.

Speedy Trial [Sec. 175 BNSS]
i. Trial in-absentia of Proclaimed Offender [Sec. 356 BNSS]
 The BNSS has introduced provision for conducting trial in-absentia of Proclaimed
Offender. This allows the trial and pronouncement of judgment in the absence of
the accused, which was not provided under CrPC.
 Section 356 of the BNSS mandates the court to proceed with the trial in-absentia
when a person declared as a Proclaimed Offender has absconded to evade trial, and
there is no immediate prospect of arresting him. It also specifies a mandatory
waiting period of ninety (90) days from the date of framing of the charge before
commencing the trial.
Note: CrPC allowed evidence to be recorded in the absence of the accused u/s
299, but did not provide for trial to be completed or for judgment to be
pronounced against Proclaimed offender.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

8

ii. Framing of charge within 60 days [Sec. 263 BNSS]
The Magistrate shall frame the charge against the accused within period of 60 days
from the date of first hearing on charge.
iii. Judgement within a period of 45 days on completion of trial
[Sec. 392 BNSS]
After the termination of trial the judgment shall be pronounced at subsequent time but
not later than 45 days.
iv. Judgement by Session Court within a period of 30 days after arguments
(extendable to 45 days) [Sec. 258 BNSS]
After hearing the arguments of prosecution and defence, Session Court shall give the
Verdict within a period of 30 days extendable up to 45 days.
v. Examination of a witness by audio-video electronic means [Sec. 265 BNSS]
During trial, the statements of prosecution witnesses may be recorded by audio-video
electronic means.
vi. Prosecution Sanction in 120 days [Sec. 218 BNSS]
Under Sec. 218 BNSS the Central or the State Government is required to decide
request for sanction for prosecuting the public servant within 120 days. If the said
Government fails to do so, the sanction will be deemed to have been accorded by the
Government.

Other Key Changes
i.

Forensic aid in heinous crime investigation [Sec. 176 (3) BNSS]
Sec. 176 (3) of BNSS mandates the collection of forensic evidence at the crime scene
by a forensic expert for offences punishable by imprisonment of 7 years or more. The
provision is to be impleamented within 5 years during which such capacity is to be
developed by the State Government.
The State Government shall also notify regarding utilization of forensic facility of any
other State until State develops such facility.

ii. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested (Malicious arrest) [Sec 360 BNSS]
Whenever any person causes a police officer to arrest another person, if it appears to
the Magistrate by whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground for
causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding one
thousand rupees, to be paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so
arrested.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

9

iii. Minimum SP rank officer to be Special Executive Magistrate [Sec. 15 BNSS]
In Police Commissionerate area, minimum Superintendent of Police rank officer may
be appointed as a Special Executive Magistrate.
Note: Under CrPC, Dy.S.P/A.C.P rank officer could be appointed as a Special Executive
Magistrate
iv. Service of summons through electronic communication [Sec 64 (2) BNSS]
Summons may also be served through electronic communication
v. Summons to produce document or other things [Sec. 94 BNSS]
Under Sec. 94 BNSS, any Court or office Incharge of Police station can demand
production of electronic communication including communication device, which is
likely to contain digital evidence.
Note: CrPC did not have any provision for summoning the electronic record.
vi. SP can entrust investigation to DySP [Sec. 175 (1) BNSS]
The Superintendent of Police may after considering the nature and gravity of the
offence require the Deputy Superintendent of Police to investigate the offence.

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

10

Timelines for various stages of Trial under BNSS
Sr.
No.

Stage

Provision

CrPC

BNSS

1.

Charge

Framing of charges by
Magistrate
(for offences the Magistrate
is competent to try and
punish)

No time
prescribed
Sec. 240 (1)
CrPC

Within 60 days from
first hearing on charge
Sec. 263 (1) BNSS

2.

Charge

Procedure for an accused to
No time
file application for
prescribed
Sec. 227 CrPC
discharge
(in cases triable by a Sessions
Court)

Within 60 days from
committal Sec.
250 (1) BNSS

3.

Charge

Procedure for discharge by
Magistrate in case of
absence of complainant on
date fixed for hearing in a
complaint case, for
offences that are noncognizable and
compoundable

Granting 30 days
opportunity to
complainant to appear
in court Sec. 272
BNSS

4.

Plea
Bargaining

5.

No time
prescribed
Sec. 249
CrPC

Procedure for application
No time
for plea bargaining by the
prescribed
accused, in court where trial Sec. 265-B (1)
for said offence is pending
CrPC

Within 30 days from
the date of framing of
charge Sec. 290 (1)
BNSS

Trial

Procedure for admission
and denial of genuineness
of documents by the
defence and prosecution

No time
prescribed
Sec. 294 (1)
CrPC

Soon after supply of
documents, and no
later than 30 days,
unless the Court
relaxes the time limit
with written reasons
Sec. 330 (1) BNSS

6.

Trial

Procedure for examination
of the accused in custody,
through electronic means,
by Magistrate or Sessions
Court

No time
prescribed
Sec. 281
CrPC

Signature of accused to
be taken within 72
hours of such
examination
Sec. 316 BNSS

7.

Trial

Commencement of in
absentia trial against
proclaimed offenders by a
court

No time
prescribed
Sec. 299
CrPC

After a period of 90
days has lapsed from
the framing of charge
Sec. 356 (1) BNSS

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

11

Sr.
No.

Stage

Provision

CrPC

BNSS

8.

Trial

Issuance of two
consecutive arrest
warrants by a court against
proclaimed offenders,
before commencing in
absentia trials

No time
prescribed

Execution of 2
consecutive arrest
warrants within the
interval of 30 days
Sec. 356 (2) (1)BNSS

9.

Trial

Publication of notice to
proclaimed offender to
appear before court, in a
newspaper

No time
prescribed

Notice period of 30
days Sec. 356 (2) (ii)
BNSS

10.

Judgment
and
sentence

Pronouncement of
judgment after termination
of trial in any criminal
court

Immediately
after the
termination
of trial or at
some
subsequent
time Sec.

Not later than
45 days Sec.
392 (1) BNSS

353 (1) CrPC

11.

Judgment
and
sentence

Judgment of acquittal or
conviction by Court of
Sessions

No time
prescribed
Sec.235 (1)
CrPC

30 days from the
completion of
arguments.
Extendable up to 45
days for reasons in
writing
Sec. 258 (1) BNSS

12.

Uploading
of
Judgment

Court to upload a digital
copy of the judgment

No time
prescribed
Sec. 353 (4)
CrPC

7 days from
pronouncement, as far
as practicable
Sec. 392 (4) BNSS

13.

Disposal
of
property

Procedure for custody or
disposal of property
produced before a
Court/Magistrate during
investigation, inquiry or
trial. The Court is bound to
prepare a statement of
property produced before it

No time
prescribed
Sec. 451 CrPC

Within 14 days of
production of property
before the court Sec.
497 (2) BNSS

Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur

12

Notes

We Train to Serve and Protect

Maharaja Ranjit Singh

Punjab Police Academy
Phillaur

