CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE CODE

M. S. RAMA RAO B.Sc., M.A., M.L.
Class-room live lectures edited, enlarged
and updated

Msrlawbooks

CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE CODE

by M. S. RAMA RAO B.Sc., MA., M.L.,

Text and Reference Books:

Govt. of India Publication

: Cr. P. C.
: Bare Act 1973. :

Chitaley D.D.

Cr. P.C Vols. 1 to 3.

Basu

: Cr. P.C. 1973.

Page

1

Ratanlal

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CONTENTS
(Cr.P.C.1973

Pages

1 CHAPTER 1 Definitions

7

1. First Information Report
2. Bailable and Non-bailable Offences

.

3. Cognisable and Non-Congnisable
Offences
4. Complaint
5. Compoundable Offences
6. Police Station, Police Report,
Police Diary

2 Criminal Courts

11

1. Classes of Criminal Courts
2. Executive Magistrates
3. Public Prosecutor and APP
3. Maintenance of Wife and Children

12

4. Confession

14

5. Double Jeopardy

16

6. Investigation

18

1, Investigation, Inquiry and Trial
2. Powers and duties of a Police Officer
on receipt of FIR

7. Offenders
1. Approver

21

2. First offenders
3. Habitual offender
4Juvenile offenders

Page

2

5 Proclaimed offender
8. Search & Arrest

25

1. Search Warrant
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

2. Search how made
3. Arrest without warrant
4. Arrest by a private person

5. Arrest how made
9. Preventive Provisions
1. Urgent Cases of Nuisance

28

2. Disputes as to land or water
10. Bail & Bond
1. Bail
2. Bail in Non-Bailable Cases

31

3. Anticipatory Bail
11.

1. Charge

34

2. Joinder of Charger

12. Trials
1. The trials in the Cr. P.C.

36

2. Sessions Trial
Warrant Case Trial
3. Summons Case Trial
4. Summary Case Trial
5. Irregular Proceedings
6. DeNovo Trial
7. Summons case and warrant case
8. Discharge and Acquittal
13. Limitation

43

14.

44

Additional Topics
1. Exceptions
2. Remand
3. Security
4. Death Sentence
5. Reference
REFERENCE SECTION

Page

3

6. Revision 7.Accused

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

51 to 84

SYLLABUS
Cr.P.C.I973 (Sns.l to 484)
1.

Definitions: Bailable and Non-bailable offences, Cognisable and
Non-cognisable offences, Charge, Complaint, Inquiry, Investi
-gation and trial, Offence, Summons Case, Warrant Case,
Proclaimed Offender.

2.

-Constitution of Criminal Courts and Offices.

3.

Powers of the Court.

4.

Superior Police Officers and Duties of Public.

5.

Arrest of Persons: (i) Arrest without Warrant, (ii) Arrest by
private persons, (iii) Arrest how made- Power to seize etc.

6.

Processes: Summons; Warrant of Arrest; Proclamation and
attachment.

7.

Summons to produce documents or things. Search WarrantsSearch how made-seizure.

8.

Security for keeping the peace and' for good behavior.

9.

Maintenance of Wife and Children (sn.125).

10.

Maintenance of Public Order and Tranquility.
Sn. 144: Urgent Cases of Nuisance.
Sn.145: Disputes as to immovable property.

11.

Preventive action by police.

12.

Information to Police-powers to Investigate (Sn.154 to 176);

13 Confession (Sn. 164)
14 Jurisdiction of Criminal Courts in inquires
15 Trials. Complaints to Magistrates. Commencement of

Page

4

proceedings- before Magistrate.
16.

'Charge', 'Joinder of charges'.

17.

(i) Sessions Trials (ii) Warrant Case Trial (iii) Summons
Case
Trial (iv) Summary Trial.

18.

Commissions.

19.

Appeal, reference and revision, Transfer of Criminal Cases.

20.

Death Sentence, Imprisonment, Fine etc.

21.

Bail and Bonds.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

22.

Irregular Proceedings.

23.

Period of limitation to take Cognisance of some offences.

24.

Trials before High Courts [.First and Second Schedule.]

QUESTIONS BANK
1.

Write explanatory notes on: .

(a) F.I.R. (b) Bailable and non-bailable offences (c) Cognisable
and Non-cognisable offences (d) Complaint (e) Compoundable
offences (f) Executive Magistrate (g) Public Prosecutor (h) Police
Diary, (i) Irregular Proceedings.
2.
Explain the provisions relating to the speedy remedy provided
for, to claim maintenance by wife and children.
3.

What is confession? How is it recorded?

4.
Explain the concept of Double jeopardy with reference to Sn.300
Cr.P.C. Refer to exceptions.
5.
What are the powers and duties of a Police Officer in charge of
Police Station on receipt of information relating to the commission of
a Cognisable offence or a Non-cognisable offence.
6.

Explain:
(a) First Offenders (b) Habitual Offenders
(c) Write a note on Summons-case trial and Summary trial.

9.

(a) What is a Search Warrant ? How is search made ?

(b) When can a Police Officer arrest without Warrant. How is
arrest made ?
10. (a) How are urgent cases of Nuisance dealt with under Sn.144.
Cr.P.C.
(b) Detail the measures contemplated by the Cr.P.C. with
reference to disputes as to a right in respect of land or water. (Sn.145).
11.

(a) What is a bail ? How is a bail granted ?
(b) Can a bail be granted in non-bailable offences ?
(c) Explain Anticipatory bail.
(d) What is a Bond? Now is it executed?

Page

5

12. What is a Charge ? What are its contents ? Explain "joinder
of charges".
13.

What is the significance in Cr.P.C. of the period of limitation?

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

14.

Write short notes on:
(a) Remand
(b) Death Sentence

(c) Revisional Powers of the High Court and the Session Court.
(d) Processes of Courts
(e) Security for good behaviour.
(f) Security for keeping the peace
(g) Accused as a defence witness
(h) Prosecution of public servant
(i) Prevention of Nuisance.
(h) Proclamation of attachment
(i) Appeal ,Revision and reference.
15.

Distinguish between.
(a) Summons Case and Warrant Case.
(b) Investigation, inquiry and trial.

Page

6

(c) Discharge and Acquittal.
16. State the exceptions to the rule that any person may set the
Criminal Law in motion. (Sns. 195 to 199).
17 Detail a Sessions Trial.
18.What is a Warrant Case? Detail its procedure.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 1

DEFINITIONS

Ch.l .l. First Information Report:
(i) Communication of information of a cognisable or a noncognisable offence to the Police Officer in writing is called F.I.R. Infact,
it is the information first in point of time which sets the Criminal Law
in motion. Subsequent information received is not F.I.R.
(a) In non-cognisable offences, when the information is given
to the Police Officer (Sub-Inspector), he should enter the substance
of information in the "Police Diary" and refer the informant to the
Magistrate.
(b) He should not start the investigation without the orders
of the concerned Magistrate. But, on receiving such an order, he may
exercise the same powers in investigating as in cognisable cases.
However, he should not arrest or search without warrant. If the
Police Officer makes an investigation without orders then his report
itself will be construed as a complaint and the Police Officer is deemed
to be the "Complainant".
(c) In Congnisable Offences, according to Sn.154 Cr.P.C, the
F.I.R. is recorded by the Police Officer.
If it is oral, it is reduced to writing, read over to the informant
and is signed by the informant. Information is in writing it is signed by
the informant. The substance of the F.I.R. is recorded in the prescribed
book (Police Diary).
A copy of the F.I.R. should be given to the informant.
A telephone message received by the Sub-Inspector and
recorded by him in his Diary is a F.I.R.

Page

7

(ii) If the Police officer refuses to record the F'.I.R. the informant may send the substance of such information to the S.P. by post,
who may take the necessary action; He may provide for investigation.
F.I.R. should be lodged at the earliest point of time. The object
of F.I.R. is to receive information and to record the circumstances
before the person forgets to establish the information.
(iii) Probative Value:- According to the Supreme Court F.I.R.
is not a substantive evidence. It is used to contradict or to corroborate the informant.
Ch.1,2. Bailable and Non-Bailable Offences: Sn.2(a) Cr.P.C
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

The Cr.P.C. classifies offences into bailable and non-bailable.
Schedule I to Cr.P.C. specifies in detail.
Eg.: Counterfeit of coin, Robbery, Murder etc., are non-bailable But Mischief, House trespass etc. are bailable.
In bailable offences bail is a matter of course. Police Officers,
Courts, Magistrates, Sessions Judge, High Court may release a
person on bail.
In non-bailable cases, bail is not allowed, but a person may be
released on bail (Sn.437). In offences punishable with death or
imprisonment for life there is no bail. In Murder, counterfeit, Sedition
etc. no bail is granted.
The bail amount should not be excessive and should be fixed
taking into consideration the circumstances of each case. The accused
should execute a bond, with or without sureties as the case may be,
thereupon he is released.
Exemption: In non-bailable offences, a person under 16, or any
woman under any case or any sick or infirm person may be released
on bail even if punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
Ch.1.3. Cognisable and Non-cognisable Offences : Sn.2(c) Cr.P.C.
Offences may be classified into Cognisable and Non-Cognisable. A Non-Cognisable offence is one in which a police officer may
not arrest without warrant. In cognisable offences, he may arrest
without warrant. The Cr.P.C. has mentioned these offences in the
schedule. The Police Officers are guided by the above classification,
and the I Schedule.

Sn.41 Cr.P.C. enumerates various categories under which the
Police Officer may arrest without warrant, that is:
(a) Cognisable Offences.
(b) Proclaimed Offender.
(c) Extraditable Offence.
(d) Deserter of Army.
(e) Released Convict.

Page

8

(f) Person with House-breaking tool or stolen property etc.
Ch. 1.4. Complaint: Sn.2(d) Cr.P.C.
A complaint is an allegation made by a person called the complainant, orally or in writing, to a Magistrate, with view to his taking
action under Cr.P.C., that some person (known or unknown) has committed an offence.
In Cognisable offences, the police officer proceeds to directly
investigate. But, in non-cognisable offences, he can investigate on the
orders of the Magistrate. The New Cr.P.C. provides a remedy, where
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

the police officer has made an investigation in non-cognisable cases,
without the orders of the magistrate. According to it, a police report
made by a police officer, in a case which discloses, (after investigation) the commission of a non-cognisable offence, shall be deemed to
be a complaint. Further, the police officer who prepared such a report
is deemed to be the complainant.
A complaint is made to the Magistrate only. What is given to
the Police is only a report. It is not necessary that the name of the
alleged offender must have been mentioned. It may not clearly specify
or even wrongly specify the nature of the offence.
On the basis of the complaint the Magistrate takes cognisance
of the case and proceeds with the examination of the complainant.
Complaint by an idiot or lunatic:

In this case the complaint may be made by any other person
called 'next friend', with the permission of the court. Hence though
the lunatic cannot make a complaint, the next friend can make on his
behalf.
Ch.1.5. Compoundable offences : Sn.320 Cr.P.C.
Offences are grouped into compoundable and non-compoundable. Compounding means 'making a compromise'. Compromise may
be made (i) with the permission of the court or (ii) without the
permission of the court.
Compounding is allowed because the complainant and the
accused may make some compromise within themselves, i.e., they
agree to settle their differences mutually.
Compromise once made cannot be withdrawn. It can be made
at any time before the sentence is pronounced by the court.
The Cr.P.C. has provided the table mentioning the offences
which are to be compounded with the permission of the court.
Ex.: (i) Theft (value below Rs.250/-)
(ii) Cheating.
(iii) Cheating by personation.
(iv) Bigamy.
(v) Insulting the modesty of a woman etc.
The composition is as good as the acquittal of the accused.
In cases of hurt, assault, Cr. trespass, defamation etc., mentioned in the Cr.P.C. the offences are compoundable without the
permission of the Court. The new Cr.P.C. has added a few more
offences to the above list.

Page

9

Compounding without the permission of Court:

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.1.6. Police Station, Police Report, Police Diary:

Police Station: Means any place (or post) declared generally or
specifically by the State Government to be a Police Station and
includes any local area specified by the State Govt. in this behalf.
Police Report: This is report forwarded by a Police Officer to a
Magistrate under Sn. 173(2).
Under Sn.173, investigation is to be completed without any
delay. On completion he prepares a report containing:
(i) Name of the parties.

(ii) Nature of information.
(iii) Names of Prosecution Witnesses(PWs.)
(iv) Whether any offence is committed and if so by whom.
(v) Whether the accused is arrested etc.
He also forwards:
(i) All documents and all exhibits.
(ii) Statements of witnesses etc.
With the submission of completion report, the duty of the
Police Officer ends, and, the duty of the Magistrate begins.
Police Diary: Every investigation Police Officer should maintain a Diary (Station House Diary or Police Diary). He should enter
his day to day proceedings in it. He shall mention the time of receipt
of information, when investigation started and when closed, places
visited etc. and a statement of circumstances.

The diary may be called for, by the Criminal Courts. This is not
used as evidence.

Page

10

The accused has no right to get into the diary. The Police
Officer may use it as aid to memory (Aide memorie), in such a case,
the accused has a right to get into the diary.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 2
CRIMINAL COURTS
Ch.2.1. Classes of Criminal Courts: Sn.6. Cr.P.C.

Below the High Court, the following Criminal Courts are
constituted.
(i) Sessions Court

(ii) I class Judicial Magistrate,

(iii) II Class Judicial Magistrate (iv) Executive Magistrate.
The III class Magistrates have been abolished.
The Judicial Magistrates and Executive Magistrates are given
different and distinct functions and powers under the Cr.P.C.
Ch.2.2. Executive Magistrates:
The State Government may appoint Executive Magistrates in
each district and one of them as District Magistrate and if need be
another as Additional District Magistrate. A Commissioner of Police
may be vested with the powers of an Executive Magistrate.
Executive Magistrates have jurisdiction in various cases: (i) Sn.107
Order to execute bond for keeping peace, (ii) Sn. 129 Dispersal of
assembly by use of Civil force, (iii) Sn.144 Urgent cases of
Nuisance etc. (iv) Sn.145 Disputes as to Possession of immovable
property.
Ch.2.3. Public Prosecutor and A.P.P.
The State Government has the power under Cr.P.C. to appoint
Public Prosecutors at the High Court level and at district level is
consultation with the High Court and the Sessions Court.
The District Magistrate prepares a panel of names who are fit
to be appointed as Public Prosecutors.
The minimum qualifications is at least 7 years practice as an
Advocate. The Public Prosecutor is a public servant.
Asst. Public Prosecutors are appointed by State Govt. in each
district for conducting prosecution in Magistrates Courts. No Public
Officer below the rank of a Police Inspector and who has made
investigation in the case can be appointed as A.P.P.

Page

11

Office of the A.P.P. is the creation of the new Cr.P.C. A.P.P.
may appear before Magistrates court. He is not under the control of
the Police Department.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 3
MAINTENANCE OF WIFE AND CHILDREN
Ch.3. Maintenance of Wife, Children and Parents:
Sn.125 Cr.P.C. deals with the provisions relating to maintenance of wife, children and parents. One essential duty of the husband
is to maintain his wife and children if they are not in a position to
maintain themselves. The Cr.P.C. provides for a speedy remedy. The
details are provided for in Sn.125 Cr.P.C.
Changes made in the Cr.P.C.1973:
The Joint Committee appointed by the Parliament had made
certain observations. On the basis of these, some changes have been
introduced in Sn.125 Cr.P.C.
(i) The Magistrate may make an order if the wife is unable to
maintain herself.
(ii) The benefit is available to the parents also.
(iii) The benefit is available to a divorced wife so long as she
does not remarry. This secures social justice to women.
(iv) In respect of children, maintenance benefit is available up
to 18 years. After that there is maintenance, only if the child is under
a physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself.
A husband having sufficient means, may neglect to maintain his
wife and children and parents. The Children may be legitimate or
illegitimate. The wife and children and father and mother if they are
unable to maintain themselves may move an application before the
concerned Magistrate. If the Magistrate is satisfied about negligence
or refusal of the husband to maintain his wife, children or parents he
may make an order against the husband for payment of a monthly
allowance. Such amount shall not exceed Rs.500/- per month. The
Magistrate may order the payment to the applicant.
The amount becomes payable from the date of the order or
from the date of the application by the wife. This is decided by the
Magistrate.

Page

12

Enforcement of the Order:
The Magistrate, if he finds that the husband though he had
sufficient means has failed to comply with the order, without any
reason, may for every such breach, issue a warrant and may sentence
the person to imprisonment for a month or until the amount is paid.
The husband may offer to maintain his wife, if she is willing to live
with him. But if the wife refuses on the ground that the husband has
married another wife or has kept a mistress then it is a valid ground
for her to refuse to live with him and to live separately.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Limitations:

i) The amount should be claimed by the wife within a year from
the date of the order of the Magistrate.
ii) The wife is not entitled to receive maintenance if she is living
in adultery.
iii) She cannot get maintenance if, without proper reason, she
refuses to live with the husband.
iv) She cannot get maintenance if she is living separately with
mutual consent.
If the above grounds are shown, the Magistrate may cancel the
order of the maintenance.
Recording of Evidence:
The Magistrate shall record the evidence in the presence of the
husband or his advocate. He shall follow the procedure of a summons
case trial. He can also proceed Ex-parte (absence of the husband) if
the husband wilfully neglects to attend the court. The ex-parte order
can be cancelled within three months if there is a strong reason.

Scope of the Order:

Page

13

The monthly allowance may be increased if there are sufficient
reasons. However the maximum is Rs.500/- per month. The
Magistrate shall give a copy of the order to the wife and such an order
may be enforced by any Magistrate in any place in India where the
husband may live. Such Magistrate has the same powers to enforce
the order, as the Magistrate who made the order for maintenance.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 4
CONFESSION
Confession: Sn.164 Cr.P.C.
Confession means admission by the accused of his guilt. The
Magistrate may record a statement of confession made:
i) In the course of investigation OR
ii) At any time before the commencement of the trial. No
confession can be recorded by the Police Officer. If recorded it is not
admissible.
The Magistrate records the confession in the same manner as
he records evidence.
In the Evidence Act Sn.27 and 28 deal with confession.
Accordingly, confession must be recorded by the Magistrate only.
Accused 'A' makes a statement. 'I have thrown the dagger in a well.
I have killed 'D' with it" Here, if in persuance of the statement, the
Police Officer discovers, the dagger, the fact that it was discovered is
admissible in evidence. But the statement I have killed 'D' with it, is
not allowed.
Confession is not to be used as substantive evidence.
Procedure:
Before recording the confession, the Magistrate explains to the
person making it that he is not bound to make it and that it may be
used as evidence against him. The Magistrate records only if the
statement is made by the person voluntarily. He must be fully
convinced about the truth or the veracity of the statement. Even if
there is an iota of suspicion about the truth, the Magistrate may refuse
to record the confession.
Recording:
When recording, he makes a memorandum, explains to the
accused that:
The accused is not bound to make a Confession, that if. made,
his statement may be used against him as evidence. He must certify
that the statement was voluntary, that it was done in his presence and
hearing, that it was read over to him and admitted by him to be
correct and that it contained a full and true account of the statement
made by him.

Page

14

At the foot of the memorandum, the Magistrate shall sign, seal
and put the date.
Contents of the Memorandum:
The contents should be to the following effect:
"I have explained to the accused Sri ........................... that he is
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

not bound to make a confession; If he does so, same may be sued
against him I further certify that the confession was voluntary, it was
taken in his presence and hearing, that I read it over to him, that he
admitted as correct that is was a full and true account of the
confession made"
Signature of Magistrate with Seal and Date.
Evidentary Value:
In Ram Kishan V. Harmit Kaur, the Supreme Court has held
that the confession statement is not 'substantive evidence'. It can be
used to corroborate the evidence of a witness or to contradict him.
A Magistrate who has no jurisdiction is also empowered to
record the confession but then the records are to be sent to the
Magistrate who conducts the trial. (Brij Bhushan V.King).

Page

15

In order to ensure that the confession is voluntary, it prohibits
the detention of the accused in police custody, (when he is unwilling
to make a confession before the Magistrate).

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTERS DOUBLE
JEOPARDY
Ch. 5 Double Jeopardy : Sn.300 Cr.P.C.
One fundamental principle of Criminal Law is that no person
who has been accused of an offence should be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. This principle is contained
in Art.20(2) of the Constitution and also in S.300 Cr.P.C.
The origin of this is in the English Law 'Nemo debet Bis Vexari'
(no one shall be vexed twice). This has two cordinal rules, namely:
(a) Autre fois acquit (previous acquittal)
(b) Autre fois convict (previous conviction)
According to this if a person has been prosecuted and either
convicted or acquitted, then the accused should not be tried again by
any Court in India, for the same offence.
In Venkata Raman Vs. Union of India, Venkataraman was
subjected to a departmental inquiry and was dismissed from Central
Government services on grounds of bribery. The police arrested him
under 161IPC. for bribery. He contended that he should not be tried
again. The Supreme Court held that the departmental proceedings
was not a prosecution and therefore he cannot get the benefit.
In Maqbul Hussain Vs. State of Bombay-M was subject to an
inquiry by the custom authorities who confiscated gold from him
and also fined him. Held Custom proceedings were not prosecutions.
According to the Supreme Court, prosecution and punishment
must be read in a conjunctive sense. That is, if a person is prosecuted
and punished, he should not be tried again. Hence if a person is prosecuted and acquitted, the Constitution is silent about this. But Sn.300
Cr.P.C. provides that if a person is prosecuted and convicted or
acquitted he should not be tried again for the same offence.

Exceptions:
Sn.300 provides for the following exceptions:
(i) If the lower court has no jurisdiction at all, then the rule
does not apply. The accused can be tried again.

Page

16

(ii) If a person is tried for a distinct and separate offence, then
the rule does not apply and, with the consent of the State Government he may be tried for a separate charge which he could have been
tried in the former trial.
Ex. (a) Servant 'A' is tried on a charge of theft and is acquitted.
He cannot be tried again for theft or criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is tried on a charge of murder and acquitted. It appears
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

that there was robbery also before murder. A may be tried for
robbery.
(iii) If a person is tried for an offence but subsequently if it turns
out that the consequences of the act resulted in a different offence
a together, the person may be tried.
Ex. (a) A causes grievous hurt and is convicted. The injured
rson dies in the hospital. A may be tried for culpable homicide.
(b) A is tired for culpable homicide and convicted. HE cannot
tried again on the same facts for murder.
Scope:
Double jeopardy benefit does not apply to execution proceedings.

Page

17

(i) What is barred is the second prosecution for the same
offence on the same facts. (Sn.22l)

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 6

INVESTIGATION
Chl6.1. Investigation, Inquiry and Trial:
Sn.2(h): "Investigation"includes all the proceedings under the
Cr.P.C. for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer
or
person authorised by the Magistrate.
Sn.2 (g): Inquiry means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted by a Magistrate or Court under Cr.P.C.
Investigation, inquiry and trial denote the three successive
stages in the Criminal proceedings.
(i) Investigation: is conducted by the Police Officer. The objective is to collect evidence in respect of the case on hand. It starts
witjh the F.I.R.
It includes: Proceeding to the spot, getting the facts and
circumstances, collecting all the evidence available, examining
perjsons, arresting the accused, making the search, seizing materials
etc He submits a report to the Magistrate in the prescribe form.
(ii) Inquiry : The end of investigation is the beginning of the
inquiry. This is a proceeding of the Magistrate or Court prior to trial.
The objective is to find the truth or falsity of the facts to proceed
further, to take action.
If there is any truth, there will be a trial otherwise the
accused is discharged. Enquiry may be judicial, non-judicial, local
or preliminary. Examples are: proceedings for maintenance of wife a
children, enquiring for keeping the peace. Proceeding under Sn.145
Cr.P.C. is an inquiry.

Page

18

(iii) Trial: The essence of this is that the Proceeding ends in
conviction or acquittal. An inquiry is not a trial. The sessions trial and
the warrant case trial are examples. (In a summons case, there is no
formal charge or inquiry).

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.6.2. Powers and duties of a Police Officer on receipt of
F.l.R.: Sns.154 to 175 Cr.P.C.
Information:

Information relating to cognisable offence, may be given by any
person to the Police Officer. It may be oral or in writing. If it is oral
it is reduced to writing, read over to the informant, signed by him.
The substance of it is entered in the Police Diary. If the information is
in writing it is signed by the informant and the substance is entered in
the police diary. This information is F.l.R. A copy of this shall be
given free of cost to the informant.
If the information is in respect of a non-cognisable offence, the
police officer cannot directly investigate. He refers the information to
the Magistrate. If the Magistrate orders, then only the Sub-Inspector
may investigate.
If the officer refuses to record in cognisable case, the informant
may by post send the substance of information to the S.P. concerned,
ivho may direct investigation in suitable cases.
Spot Investigation:
The Police Officer informs the Magistrate and proceeds to the
pot for investigation and for collecting the facts and circumstances
of the case. He also takes steps to arrest the accused.
On arriving he calls a few respectable persons of the locality
and in their presence he conducts the Mahazar. These persons are
panchanamas (witnesses).he will draws up a report. In case of
murder, he examines the bruises, wounds etc. Weapons ,if any, are
seized and sealed. Blood, stained clothes and other things found are
sealed as 'Exhibits'. The dead body is then sent to postmortem. The
Police Officer draws up the report and it is signed by the
panchanamas. This is called the mahazar report
The Police Officer may require the attendance of persons
acquainted with the circumstances of the case. Male below 15, and a
female of any age may not be called to the Police Station. He examines them orally.

Page

19

Statements made during investigation may be reduced to
writing. They need not be signed. He should not use force .or induce
them. Such a statement may not be used in a trial. He is empowered
to 'Search' (Sn.165).
The accused may be arrested without warrant in cognisable
cases. He must be produced before the Magistrate within 24 hours of
the arrest. He may be kept in custody under the order of the Magismsrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

trate. The maximum period is 15 days (Remand). But according to the
new Act, this may be extended if the Magistrate is satisfied that there
are adequate grounds. The maximum period of detention shall be 60
days. Thereafter, he shall be released on bail. Remand should be made,
only after the accused is produced before the Magistrate. The
Magistrate shall record the reasons for Remanding.
Police Diary
The Police Officer should maintain a diary and record.
(i) The time of reception of F.I.R.
(ii) The time of beginning and closing of investigation.
(iii) Place visited,
(iv) A statement of circumstances. The Criminal Courts may
call for the diary. The accused cannot call on it, except when it is
used by the Police Officer to refresh his memory.
The Police Officer submits a final report to the Magistrate
setting forth:
(i) The names of the parties.
(ii) Nature of information.
(iii) Names of persons concerned with the case.
(iv) The accused- whether he is in custody or not.
(v) Post Mortem Report, etc.

Page

20

With the final report the investigation comes to an end.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER - 7
OFFENDERS
Ch.7.1. Approver: Sn.306 Cr. P.C.
An associate in a crime is called an accomplice. No doubt he is
a guilty associate, but pardon is granted to him. He is called the
'Approver'. He is granted pardon:
(i) To obtain evidence relating to the case and
(ii) To use evidence against the other accused. To this end, he is
given an assurance by the Magistrate, that no action will be taken
against him. He is examined as a witness for the prosecution. Pardon
may be granted in the following offences:
(a) Cases triable by Sessions Court,
(b) Offences punishable with 7 years imprisonment or more.
Pardon
Pardon may be granted by the District Magistrate, 1 Class
Magistrate at any stage from investigation upto trial, but before
judgement. Pardon may also be granted by Court of Sessions and
High Court.
The pardon is granted on condition that as a return for
the pardon, the approver should make a full and true disclosure of
the circumstances known to him.
The Magistrate shall record his reasons for granting pardon.
Pardon is given because there will be no other better evidence
available in the absence of the approver's disclosure.
Ex.:- In Belur Srinivas lyengar Murder Case, Bangalore, Channa
became an approver and assisted the prosecution to arrest Krishna,
Muniswamy and Govinda Reddy. Channa had made a complete
disclosure of the conspiracy and the other circumstances of the case.
Breach of promise

If the approver does not disclose fully and truly, the circumstances and the facts of the case, then, he has committed a breach of
his promise. In such a case, the Magistrate may try him for so much of
the offence as is disclosed by him to the court.

Page

21

Protection
The approver gets full protection only when he has fully and truly
disclosed all the relevant facts necessary for investigation.
The evidence given by the approver is admissible, but the
universal practice of the courts is not to convict the accused on
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

the uncorroborated evidence of the Approver.
The reason is that the Approver is 'Participes Criminis'
(participate in the crime) He will have a motive to put the blame on
the accused or to shift the guilt from himself. (Sn. 133 Evidence
Act).
Ch.7.2. First Offenders:- Sn. 360 Cr.P.C.
Provisions are made in Cr.P.C. for those who commit offences
for the first time. This is a benevolent legislation. It enables the court
to release the accused instead of sending him to the prison. The
release is on probation of good conduct.
The object is to avoid the sending of first offender to the
prison and of running the risk of turning him into a regular
criminal.
When a person above 21 is convicted for 7 years or with fine
only or when a person below 21, or a woman is convicted for less
than life imprisonment, and no previous conviction is there, the court
having regard to the age, character or antecedents and circumstances,
may release him on bond, instead of sentencing him.
He must appeal within 3 years when called upon, and, in the
meantime he must keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

Scope:
This section applies to the accused who is convicted of theft,
dishonest misappropriation, cheating or any offence punishable with
2 years imprisonment or with fine only.
There must be no previous conviction against the accused.
The court will take into consideration the age, character, antecedents or any extenuating circumstances and instead of sentencing
him, releases him on admonition.
The Sessions Court, or any Appellate Court or the High Court
may pass an order under this provision.
If the accused fails to observe the conditions imposed by the
Court, he may be arrested and sentenced by the Court.

Page

22

The order issued under this section is in substitution of the punishment,

Ch. 7.3. Habitual Offender: Sn. 110 Cr.P.C.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

According to the Cr.P.C. special provisions are made in respect
of habitual offenders and desperate characters. The object is to prevent the commission of an offence by such persons, and of securing
future good behaviour from them.
Habitual offender means
(i) Habitual robber, house breaker, thief or forgerer.
(ii) Habitual receiver of stolen property or harbourer of
thieves,
(iii) Habitual Kidnapper, extortioner abductor or cheat or
peace violator
(iv) Habitual violator committing offences under
(a) Drugs & Cosmetics Act. (b) Foreign Exchange
Regulations Act. (c) Food Adulteration Act. (d) Custom Act etc.
(v) Habitual offender of hoarding, profiteering and
adulteration and
(vi) A person so dangerous and desperate to be a hazard to
the community.
The I Class Magistrate, who receives information about such a
person, is within his jurisdiction, may require him to execute a
bond (with sureties) for his good behaviour for a period not above 3
years.
The Magistrate must give a show cause notice giving all details
about the information, value of the bond etc.
Ch.7.4. Juvenile Offenders: Sn.27 Cr.P.C.
Certain benevolent provisions have been made in the Cr.P.C. to
meet the Juvenile (Youthful) offenders.
A person under the age of 16 ( as on the date he is produced
before the Court), accused of an offence not punishable with death or
imprisonment for life is a' juvenile' and he may be tried by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate or by a Court empowered under the Children Act
1960 or under any law, which provides for treatment, training and
rehabilitation.

Page

23

The objective is to save juvenile offenders from the company of
convicted criminals in the jail, and alsp to give them suitable training
and to rehabilitate them.
Ch.7.5. Proclaimed Offender: Sns.40(2), 82 and 83.
He is any person proclaimed by the court as an offender who is.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

accused of an offence punishable under Sns.302 (murder) 304
(Culpable Homicide), 392 (Robbery) etc. as stated in the Or.P.C
The court must have issued a warrant against him.
He must have absconded or concealed himself.
The proclamation in writing is to be published requiring him
to appear within 30 days.
Publication means reading publicity in some conspicuous place,
affixing a copy to some conspicuous part of the house of the accused
and the court. It may be published in newspapers.
Attachment of property: After issuing the Proclaimation
the
Court may proceed to attach his property. If the proclaimecd offender
appears within 30 days, the court may make an order releasing the

Page

24

property. If he does not appear, the property shall be at the
disposal of the government. It may sell after six months.
If the offender has not absconded and if he did not know the
Proclamation he may appear before the Court
within 2years.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 8

SEARCH & ARREST
Ch.8.1. Search Warrant: How search is to be made:
A search-warrant, is a warrant (order) issued by the Magistrate
to the Police Officer to search a particular place or places and to seize
the thing or things or to discover persons who are wrongfully confined (The II schedule to Cr.P.C. has given the pro forma of the search
warrants).
A Search-Warrant may be issued for :-(i)
The production of a document or thing.
(ii) Search of a place suspected to contain any stolen property,
forged documents etc.
(iii) Seizure of any forfeited publications and
(iv) To discover any person who has been wrongfully confined.
The Search Warrant authorises Police Officer to enter and search
the place to seize any article, thing, document which is required under
the Warrant, to convey that to the Magistrate. It also authorises him
to arrest and produce before the Magistrate any person found therein
who is privy to the offence. In case of a confined person, after search
and discovery, the person must be produced before the Magistrate.
PROFORMA
Form No.ll (Sn.94 Cr.P.C.)
To
The Police Officer ............
Station.........................
Whereas information has been laid before me ............... that the
house no ......... address .......................................................................
is used as a place for the deposit of ................... goods ...................

Seal of the Court

Signature of the Magistrate.

Page

25

(stolen property etc).
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said
place......... and to use, if necessary reasonable force for that purpose
and to search every part of the said place and to seize or take possession of any property (which the case requires), and to forthwith bring
before this court ......... ..returing this warrant with an endorsement
certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution.
Date .............

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.8.2. Search how made:

The Police Officer who is duly authorised to make the search
may enter the place or places concerned, and the persons in charge of
the place or house or closed place (godown etc), must allow free
ingress and egress to him.
The Police Officer must conduct a mahajar. He must call 2 or
more respectable persons of the locality, make the search in their
presence prepare a list of items seized.
If the person is a woman, search shall be made by a lady
police or any woman with strict regard to decency.
The Panchanamas shall sign the Mahajar. The Police Officer
produces the items seized and the Mahajar-report before the Magistrate.
The person arrested (or discovered) is also produced before
the Magistrate. He also submits his report, thereof, to the
Magistrate.
Ch.8.3 Arrest without Warrant:Sri. 41.

A Police Officer may arrest a person without a Warrant in the
following circumstances:
(i) Person concerned with a cognisable offence.
(ii) A proclaimed offender.
(iii) A person concerned with an extraditable crime.

(iv) Deserter of Army.
(v) Released convict.
(vi) Person with house-breaking tool or with stolen property.
(vii) (i) Habitual Offender.
(ii) Any person who commits a non-cognisable offence before
the Police Officer and who refuses to give his name, address etc.
(iii) Any person who is designing to commit a cognisable
offence.

A Private person may arrest a person who is committing in his
presence, a non-bailable and cognisable offence or a proclaimed
offender. But, without delay, he must make him over to the Police
Officer.

Page

26

Ch.8.4. Arrest by a Private Person:

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.8.5. Arrest how made: Sn 46
The Police Officer is empowered to arrest in cognisable cases.
But, he may arrest with a Warrant in non-cognisable cases. In so
arresting he may touch or confine the accused unless he submits to
the arrest.
He may use force if the accused forcibly resists or attempts to
evade the arrest.
He has no powers to kill except in extreme cases of escape
and if accused of offences punishable with death or life
imprisonment.
He is entitled to free ingress or egress and hence may break
open any closed door or window. But, he should not enter a zanana
but should give due notice of his entry. Decency is expected of the
officer in such cases.
The accused after arrest should not be put to unnecessary restraint.
The Police Officer should inform him the grounds of his
arrest and to bail him in case of bailable offences.

He should search the person and seize all articles, expect
wearing apparel.
The search of a woman must be made by a woman police or
by another woman.
Amendment 2005 Sub-section (4) has been added to
prohibit arrest of a woman after sunset and before sunrise except
in exceptional circumstances and where such circumstances exist
the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class is
to be obtained
Weapons if any are also seized.

Page

27

The arrested person and exhibits are to be produced before
the Magistrate, with a report thereof.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 9
PREVENTIVE PROVISIONS
Ch.9.1. Urgent cases of Nuisance: Sn.144.

One of the preventive measures provided for by the Cr.P.C.
to meet emergent cases, is to dispense with the usual
formalities followed by the Magistrate and, to empower him to take
measures by making ex parte order, if need be.
The details are provided in Sn.144.
Conditions and Procedure:

(i) The Magistrate must be satisfied that there is sufficient ground
to proceed under this section, and that a speedy remedy is desirable.
(ii) He may issue a written order stating the facts of the case. It
must be served as a Summons.
(iii) The order must direct.
(a) to abstain a person from doing an act.
(b) to take the order with certain property under his manage
ment or possession.
(iv) The objective of the order is to
(a) Prevent obstruction, annoyance or injury to any lawfully
employed person.
(b) Prevent danger to human life, health or safety.

Page

28

(c) Prevent disturbance of public tranquility, riot or an affray.
(v) If the situation warrants, the order may be made ex
parte. This means, it may be directed against any particular
individual, or to a group residing in a specific area, or to the public
generally, in a particular place.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(vi) The order may be altered suo motu by the Magistrate.
It may be rescinded. Any person aggrieved may make an application
to the Magistrate who shall hear and direct suitably.
(vii) The maximum duration of the order is 2 months
from the date of making it.
Order: (Examples):
(1) To abstain from interfering with a temple or its properties.
(2) To abstain from interfering with a natural Easement right of
way in a village-are examples.
(3) In cases of apprehended danger or riot, an order to the pub
lic of a locality not to assemble in groups of 4 or more persons is an
order under this section.
(4) The duration should also be specified.

Ch.9.2. Disputes as to land or water: Sn.145 Cr.P.C.
One of the preventive measures provided for by the Cr.P.C is with
reference to disputes as to land or water.
The object is to prevent any breach of the peace relating to any
land or right to water, but taking the subject out of the hands of the
disputants and to make one of them the custodians. (Any other
person may be made the custodian).
The disputes may not affect the public at large, but are fraught
with dangerous consequences.
Hence, the preventive relief under Sn.145.
Conditions and Procedures:

(i) There should be a dispute regarding possession or right of
use or of land or water or its boundaries. This include buildings, markets, fisheries, crops and rents and profits of such property.
(ii) The dispute must be of such a nature as is likely to cause a
breach of the peace.
(iii) Initiation:

Page

29

On police report or other information.
The Magistrate must be satisfied about the above two
conditions. He may summon the parties
to the court to submit in writing their claims in respect of possession
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

of the subject matter. One copy of the summons shall be affixed in
some prominent place of the subject matter.
(iv) Inquiry:
The Magistrate must peruse their statements, hear them and
receive all other evidence available and shall decide who was in possession of the property.
If he finds that one party ' A', has wrongfully dispossessed 'B'
and taken possession within 2 months next before receipt of
information, he may treat 'B' as in possession and proceed. This
order is final unless there is any evidence to prove possession until
evicted in due course of law.
(v) Perishables:

If the subject matter of dispute is any crop or other produce of
property and is subject to speedy decay, he may make an order for
proper custody and sale and make suitable orders.
(vi) Title:
The Magistrate does not enquire into the merits or to the title
of the parties.

Page

30

This is to be decided by the Civil Court. It is only when the
Civil Court decides the title that the Magistrate may revise his
order if need be.
(vii) No Revision: The High Court has no Revisional power .

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 10
BAIL AND BOND
Ch. 10.1 Bail
Bail is basically a security for the appearance of the accused
before the court as and when called upon. There is the release of the
accused from legal custody, but, it presupposes that he is in custody.
Hence, if his conduct is prejudicial to a fair trial, he forfeits his right
and he may be arrested and sent to custody.
If the accused binds himself it is a personal bond, but if a surety
guarantees the securing of the person before the court it is a bail.
BOND
I, ......... having been arrested under a cognisable offence by the
Police Officer of ........... Police Station and brought before the ..........
Magistrate, charged with the offence under Sn ........and required to
give security for my attendance before the court on condition that I
shall attend the court on the days of trial and in case of my default, I
bind myself to forfeit to the Govt. a sum of Rupees.... ........
Date ............

Signature of Accused.
BAIL

1 ..... hereby declare myself surety for the accused, ...... that he
shall attend the court etc........ and that in case of his making default 1
hereby bind myself to forfeit to the Govt. a sum of Rupees..........
Date ............

Signature of Surety.

If the accused does not appear before the court, the surety
forfeits the bail amount and a warrant may be issued to arrest the
accused.

Ch.10.2 Bail in Non-bailable cases:

Page

31

(i) Add Ch.1-2 material of this e-book.
(ii) If the Police Officer during investigation and the Court in a
trial of a non-bailable case, finds that there are no reasonable grounds
to believe that the accused has committed a non-bailable offence, he
may be released on bail. Reasons are to be recorded.
(iii) In case of:
(a) Offence punishable with imprisonment for 7 years or more.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(b) Offence against State etc.
(c) Abatement of the above offence etc.
-the accused may be released on bail by imposing conditions to
ensure his attendance and of not committing similar offence or in the
interests of justice.
(iv) If the trial of non-bailable offence is not concluded in 60
days from the first day of hearing, the accused may be released on
bail.
Ch.10.3. Anticipatory Bail: Sn 438

Accepting the Law Commission Report, a new provision was
made for 'Anticipatory bail' in the Cr.P.C. 1973.
The condition for bail according to the courts is that the
accused must be in legal custody. Hence, if a person is not in custody
but is implicated under false cases, he cannot get a bail at all. To meet
this situation, the 'Anticipatory bail' was invented.
The Law Commission stated that if some influential people
implicit false charges against their rival 'A', with a view to disgracing
him and getting him put in jail, then-'A' must have a way out.
If 'A' is not likely to abscond or misuse his liberty, there is no
justification why he should be arrested, detained and then released on
bail.
Hence, looking to his character, his antecedents the courts
may grant in advance an anticipatory bail. Sn.438 provides for such
a bail.
Conditions and Procedure:

(i) The bail may be granted by the High Court or the Sessions
Court.
(ii) The person must apply to the court stating that he apprehends that he may be arrested on accusation of a non-bailable
offence; he, must request the court to direct that in such an event of
an arrest, he may be released.
(iii) The court, may give directions imposing conditions as it
thinks fit.
(a) That he must be available for police interrogation.

Page

32

(b) That he should not interfere with or use any threat, promise
or inducement to any person giving evidence.
(c) That he should not leave India without permission.

(d) Any other condition of ordinary bails as the court thinks fit.
(iv)-Utility:
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

If such a person is arrested on such accusation, the Police
Officer as per the above direction should release the person on bail.

Page

33

If any Warrant is to be issued, the Magistrate must issue
bailable warrant.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 11
CHARGE
Ch.11.1. Charge:
(i) Sn. 2(b) defines Charge. It includes any head of charge when
the charge contains more heads than one.
(ii) Every charge should state the offence, should be clear and
specific, refer to the Specific Sections of the I.P.C. (or any other law)
or any part of the section, and should be in the language of the Court.
Previous convictions if any must be set out.. The reason is to
make him liable for enhanced punishment.
CHARGE
I, ............................... Magistrate, hereby charge you
...........................(the accused ) as follows:
That you on ................ at ...................... committed Culpable
homicide not amounting to murder causing the death
of ......................... and thereby committed an offence under Sn.304
I.P.C. and within the congnisance of this Court.
(Hi) The charge should give sufficient notice of the nature of
the offence charged. The manner of committing the same need not be
given except when the charge is insufficient to give the meaning of
the offence charged.
e.g.: A is accused of theft of a radio on 1-1-97 at Mysore. The
charge need not state the manner of commission of theft.
(iv) Alteration: Any charge may be altered or changed by the
Court at any time before judgment is pronounced.
Ch.11.2. Joinder of Charges:
(i) Separate charge:
The rule is that there must be a separate and distinct
charge for every offence and that there should be a separate
trial.
e.g.: A is accused of theft on one occasion and of causing
grievous hurt an occasion. A must be separately charged and
separately tried.

Page

34

(ii) Three offences together:
A maximum of three offences of the same kind committed within
one year may be tried together. He may be tried separately for other
offences.
In Subramanya Aiyers Case, the accused had been charged with
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

41 offences spread over 2 years. The Privy Council held that this was
prohibited.
(iii) In one series of acts so connected as to form the same
transaction, two or more offences are committed by the same person,
he may charged and tried in one trial.
A has committed House trespass. Lurking house trespass and
grievous hurt in one transaction. He may be charged together.

Page

35

(iv) When the offence comes within the definition of two or
more Acts, he may be tried together.
A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes
hurt to him. A may be separately charged with and convicted of
offences under Sn.323. Voluntarily causing hurt, Sn.392; Robbery and
Sn.394 causing hurt voluntarily while committing robbery.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 12
TRIALS
Ch.12.1 The trials provided for in the Cr.P.C. are:
(i) Sessions Trial,
(ii) Warrant Case Trial,
(iii) Summons Case Trial,
(iv) Summary Trial.
Ch.12.2 Sessions Trial: Sn.225 to 237 Cr.P.C.
(i) Sessions Court:
The Sessions Court is the highest court in the District and has
jurisdiction to conduct trials of offences including murder (302), culpable Homicide not amounting to murder Sn.304 etc. as per the First
Schedule to Cr.P.C. These offences specified therein [in the Schedule]
are triable exclusively by the Sessions Court.
(ii) Committing the accused:
In a case initiated on a police report, if the offence is one triable
by the Sessions,
the Magistrate.
(a) Should commit the accused to the Sessions (No elaborate
preliminary enquiry is necessary).
(b) He may remand him to custody or release him on bail.
(c) He should send all the record and documents and exhibits to
that court.
(d) He should notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment
of the case to the Sessions. All the necessary documents (copies) are
to be given to the accused.
(iii) Opening of Sessions:
The trial is conducted by the Public Prosecutor. He opens the

case by reading out the charge and stating by what evidence he
proposes to prove the guilt of the accused. The Judge, on
consideration of the records and documents and hearing the
grounds. He records his reasons for the discharge.

Page

36

prosecutor and the accused, may discharge if there are no sufficient

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(iv) Framing of charges:
If he finds that there are sufficient grounds he frames the charges,
reads and explains to the accused and asks him whether he pleads
guilty or claims a trial. If he pleads guilty, he may be convicted.
(v) Examination of witnesses:
If he does not please guilty or refuses to plead, the Judge fixes
a date for examination of witnesses. The witnesses may be examined
in chief and cross-examined. Their depositions are recorded. If after
the prosecution evidence, examination of the accused and hearing
the prosecution and the defence, the Judge considers that there is
no evidence, he records his reasons and acquits him.
(vi) Defence:
If not acquitted as above, he calls on the accused to enter his
defence. The Judge files the written statement, if any, put forward by
the accused. He issues summons to his witnesses etc. The
witnesses are examined and cross examined. Their depositions are
recorded.
(vii) Arguments:
The public Prosecutor sums up his case and the defence
gives its reply. If the defence put forward any point of law, the
prosecutor answers with the permission of the court.
(viii) Judgment:
After hearing the arguments, and the points of law, the Judge
delivers the judgement.
In case of conviction , he hears the accused on the sentence
and passes the sentence on him.
•

(ix) Appeal:

Page

37

Appeals are allowed from the sessions to the High Court, within
the period of limitation. In case of death penalty: 30 days ; in case of
any other penalty: 60 days.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.12.3. Warrant Case Trial:
Warrant case means a case relating to an offence
punishable with death/imprisonment for life or imprisonment
for a term exceeding 2 years
. The schedule to Cr.P.C. has specified these.

Trial:
Case may be instituted on a Police Report
(or may be instituted otherwise than on police Report by
complaint).
In a case instituted on a Police Report the following procedure
is followed:
(i) The Magistrate must satisfy himself that the documents of
the case have been furnished to the accused. If, after considering the
above documents, and after hearing the prosecution and the accused,
he finds that the charge is groundless, he shall discharge him.
(ii) If the Magistrate forms the opinion that the accused has
committed an offence, he shall frame a charge. The charge shall be
read and explained to the accused and he shall be asked whether he is
guilty or claims to be tried,
If the accused pleade guilty, the Magistrate shall record the
plea and convict him.
(iii) If he refuses to plead or claims to be tried, the Magistrate
shall fix a date for the examination of the witnesses. He shall take the
evidence produced by the Prosecution. The Prosecutor may examine
his witnesses. The defence counsel may cross-examine the witnesses
of prosecution. The prosecutor may re-examine them.-He sums up
his arguments.
(iv) The accused now enters on his defence and produces his
evidence. His witnesses are examined; they may be cross-examined
by the prosecutor.(They may be re-examined by the defence counsel).

Page

38

(v) The Defence Counsel sums up his argument. The prosecutor may reply. If the Magistrate finds that the accused is not guilty he
shall acquit him. If he finds him guilty, he shall pass sentence according to law i.e., he shall convict him.
[If a previous conviction is charged and the accused does not
admit, the Magistrate may take evidence in respect of previous conviction and shall record his finding].

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.12.4 Summons Case Trial: Sns. 251 to 259.

A 'Summons Case' means a case relating to an offence
punishable with a term less than 2 years.
In summons case, the accused appears before the magistrate or
is brought before him. The Magistrate tells him the accusation and
asks whether he is guilty or desires to defend.
No formal charge is framed.
If he pleads guilty, it is recorded in the same words as possible,
and the Magistrate may, convict him, in his discretion.
If he refuses to plead or claims to be tried, the Magistrate shall
fix a date for the examination of the witnesses.
He shall take the evidence produced by the Prosecution. The
Prosecutor may examine his witnesses. The defence counsel may
cross-examine the witnesses of prosecution. The prosecutor may reexamine them. He sums up his arguments.
The accused now enters on his defence and produces his
evidence. His witnesses are examined; they may be cross-examined
by the prosecutor.(They may be re-examined by the defence counsel)
.
(v) The Defence Counsel sums up his argument. The prosecutor may reply. If the Magistrate finds that the accused is not guilty he
shall acquit him. If he finds him guilty, he shall pass sentence according to law i.e., he shall convict him.

Ch.l2.5.Summary Trials: Sn.260 to 265.

(i) Summary trials aim at a speedy disposal of cases.
The detailed procedures of other trials are dispensed with in
view of the petty nature or lesser gravity of the offence.
In these trials only a record, sufficient for the purpose of
justice, is made and summons case procedure is followed.
No charge is framed.
(ii) The First Class Magistrate; the Chief Judicial Magistrate
may try the case.
(iii) Offences : These are enumerated in Sn.260.

Page

39

e.g.: (a) Theft of property worth less than Rs.250.
(b) Receiving stolen property of worth less than Rs.250.
(c) Offences under Cattle Trespass Act.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

To the accused, the Magistrate tells the accusation and asks
him whether he is guilty or not. If he pleads guilty he is convicted.
If not he hears the prosecution and its evidence, and then the
accused and his evidence. If he finds not guilty he acquits,
otherwise he convicts him.
(iv) Special features:

(a) The sentence should not exceed 3 months.
(b) Record:
He records the serial number of the case, date of its
commission, date of report or commission, date of report or
complaint, name of complainant, name parentage and
residence of the accused,
the offence complained and proved if any
. A summary of the plea of the accused and his examination.
The Magistrate records his findings
and the order and the date of termination of the trial.
(c) Only the substance of the evidence is recorded.
(d) The judgment contains briefly the reasons.
Ch.12.6. Irregular Proceedings:
The Cr.P.C. has divided Irregular Proceedings into two classes
.(i) those which vitiate proceedings and
(ii) those which do not vitiate proceedings.
(i) A Magistrate, not empowered, may do any of the specified
things erroneously but in good faith.
Eg.: Issuing a Search-Warrant, issuing orders to investigate,
transfer of a case etc.
In such a case though there is technically an irregularity , the
order of the Magistrate is not to be set aside.
(ii) A magistrate, if not so empowered to do certain things,
does them, the proceedings are void and hence set aside on appeal.
(a) Demanding security to keep the peace.
(b) Demands security for good behaviour.
Error, omission or irregularity in framing charge, by itself will
not be set aside unless this results in grave injustice to the accused.

Page

40

(c) Tries an offender summarily etc.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.12.7. Do Novo Trial:
There is no provision for this in the Cr.P.C. 1973.
De Novo Trial means the new trial.
When a Magistrate who, in an inquiry or trial, party conducts it
and then is transferred to a different pace or assigned to exercise a
different jurisdiction, the new Magistrate (Successor) will take over.
Such a Successor could act on the evidence already recorded
by his predecessor.
This is subjected to an exception.
If the Magistrate is of the opinion that the evidence of any
person already recorded is necessary in the interest of justice, he may
re-summon such witness and examine him on oath.
De Novo Trail gives right to the Magistrate and to the accused.
Hence the accused may ask for the De Novo Trial. '
The Cr.P.C. 1973 has omitted this Provision.
Ch.12.8 Summons Case and Warrant Case:

These are defined in Sn .2 Cr.P.C.
A Warrant case is a case relating to an offence punishable with
death, life imprisonment or imprisonment exceeding two years.
A case relating to an offence punishable for a term below two
years is a Summons Case. The distinction is based on
punishment.
.
Summons Case

Warrant Case

(a) It is initiated on a
Complaint

(a) It is initiated on Police report
of complaint.

(b) No formal charge is
.

(b) Charge is essential.

necessary.
(c) The complainant may

(c) The Magistrate must proceed when

withdraw the case. The

he finds some elements of offence. He

accused is released.

may either discharge, acquit or convict

Page

41

The accused.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Ch.12.9.Dscharge and Acquittal distinguished:
A; person is said to have been discharged when he is
relieved from proceedings, by an order of the court. The
order is not a judgment.
There may be discharge, after a preliminary enquiry. If there is
no prima facie case against the accused, and if he has not been called
to defend himself he is to be discharged

A person discharged may be again subject to proceedings if
there is evidence
A person acquitted is protected under Sn. 300 and,
he cannot be tried again for the same offence.

Page

42

An acquittal is the judgment of the person charged,
that is he must be either acquitted or convicted .There
is no discharge of the accused.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 13
LIMITATION
Ch.l3.Period of Limitation:

(i) This is an innovation. Certain offences are not to be taken
cognisance after the lapse of a prescribed period by the criminal court
and the case is to be dismissed.
Offence
Period
Period when starts
(a) Punishable with fine
6 months Date of the offence,
only.

(b) Punishable for 1 year

1 year

(c) Punishable upto 3 years 3 years

Date of commission or
Date when it became
known to the police officer.
-do-

(ii) The period of limitation is not to be calculated in the
following:(a) Prosecuting in another court in good faith.
(b) Period of stay of prosecution , if any.
(c) Offender's absence from India.
(d) Period of sanction wherever necessary.
(e) Period when the accused is absconding or concealing
himself.

Page

43

(iii) If there is a valid reason for the delay and if the court feels
that in the interest of justice, the case is to be taken up, the time may
be extended by the Court.

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

CHAPTER 14
ADDITIONAL TOPICS
Ch. 14.1. Exceptions to the rule that any person may set criminal
law in motion:
One of the general principles of Criminal Law is, that any
person, who has the knowledge of the commission of an offence,
may set the criminal law in motion, by making a complaint, even
though, he is not personally interested in the case.
The objective is to bring the offenders to book.
This rule, though general, is subject to certain exceptions as
provided for in Sns.195 to 199 of Cr.P.C.
In these circumstances, the criminal courts will not take
cognisance of an offence, unless the complaint is initiated by the
public servant, or the court or the affected person or with the
previous sanction of the Central or State Government as the case
may be.
The reason is to prevent private individuals from wreaking
vengeance by misusing the machinery of the administration of
justice.
For examples in cases where the allegations are inspired by
vengence, against a judge or a magistrate, for acts done in the discharge of his official functions, the previous sanction of the Govt. is
essential.
The prestige and the dignity of the courts should not be
left to the whimsies or passions of private individuals.
Scope of Exceptions:
The exceptions apply to particular offences specified in Sns.195
to 199 Cr.P.C. and do not apply to others.
For example, no sanction is required when a public servant is
to be prosecuted for bribery under Sn.161 (I.P.C.)
Exceptions:

Page

44

(i) In respect of offences relating to contempt of legal authority
(Sns. 172 to 188 l.P.C. example, obstructing a public servant
Sn.186, or abatement or conspiracy thereof) no court should
take cognisance of the case, unless the complaint is made in
writing by the concerned public servant or his superior.

(ii) In respect of offences against public justice punishable under l.P.C. ( giving false evidence, fabricating false evidence etc.)
(193-196, 199, 200, 205-211 & 228, l.P.C.) the complaint must be
from the concerned court.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(iii) In respect of offences concerning documents given in
evidence (Sn. 463, Forgery etc.) the complaint must be from the
concerned court. (Court includes civil, criminal, revenue court or
tribunal).
(iv) In respect of offences, against the State, Sns 153 A & B,
295 A or 505 (spreading rumours to disturb public peace), or for
criminal conspiracy, (120 B) the sanction of the State Government
is necessary.
(v) In respect of offences committed by (a) Judge, (b) Magistrate (c) Public servant, acting in the official capacity, the previous
sanction of the Central or State Government as the case may be, is
necessary for instituting a case against them.

(vi) In respect of offences committed by Armed Forces, purporting to be done in the discharge of official duties, the sanction of
the Central Government is necessary.
(vii) In respect of offences, relating to marriage (Bigamy Sn.494
Adultery Sn.497 etc.), the complaint must be by the aggrieved
person.
Where the wife is the aggrieved party as in Bigamy, she may
make a complaint, or on her behalf, her father, mother, brother, sister,
son, daughter or her father's son mother's sister or brother may file a
complaint.
In adultery, the husband may file a complaint or with the
permission of the court, any person who had the care of the woman
may file a complaint.
(viii) For offences of defamation:

Page

45

The aggrieved person may file a complaint. But if he is an
idiot, lunatic, pardanishan lady or under 18 years of age, any
person, with the permission of the court may file a case on his
behalf.
(ix) Defamation of public servant (Sn.199) Where a person
commits an offence of defamation against the President, Vice-President, Governor, Administrator, a Minister or any public servant the
sessions court may take cognisance of a complaint made by the
public prosecutor. But, the previous sanction of the Central or State
Government is necessary before filing a complaint. The period of
limitation is 6 months to file the complaint. (The defamed person may
himself complain to the magistrate).,
Ch.14.2 Remand (S.167):
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

The Cr.P.C. deals with Remand to police custody in Sn.167 and
remand to jail custody in Sn.309.
Remand to Police Custody:
When a person is arrested and detained by a police officer and
if the officer finds that .investigation cannot be completed within 24
hours, and that the information is well founded then he should produce the accused before the magistrate, within 24 hours of the arrest.
He must, also submit a copy of his diary to the Magistrate.
The Magistrate whether he has jurisdiction or not may
remand the accused to the police custody for a period not exceeding
15 days in the whole, recording his reasons.
The Magistrate who has jurisdiction may authorise the
detention of the accused beyond 15 days, in jail custody for a
maximum period of 60 days from the date of arrest.
After this period, the accused is entitled to be released on bail.
But, if the accused refuses the bail, or is unable to furnish bail, the
detention will continue under a fresh remand order.
Jail Custody:
When the investigation is completed and the police report is
submitted, the magistrate takes cognisance of the case against the
accused.
If the accused is in custody, then the magistrate may, by a
warrant addressed to the jail superintendent, remand the accused to
jail custody recording his reasons, for a period not exceeding 15 days
at a time.
The Supreme Court has laid down that 'once the inquiry or
trial begins, it is not proper to let the accused remain under police
influence. He is an under trial prisoner.
Ch.14.3 Security for keeping the peace and for good behavior:
Chapter VIII of the Cr.P.C. deals with the preventive provisions to prevent breach of the peace or tranquility.
The objective is to prevent any potential danger to the
public.

Page

46

Security for keeping the peace, and security for good
behavior are inter alia two such provisions which are made in public
interest to preserve public order.
Security for keeping the peace:

There are two provisions:
(i) On conviction: (Sn. 106) If the sessions court, or the first
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

class magistrate is of the opinion, that the convicted accused should
execute a bond for keeping the peace, it may, at any time of passing
sentence, order him to execute such a bond. This may be with or
without sureties.
The maximum duration is 3 years. But, if the conviction is
set aside, the bond becomes void.
The offences for which the accused is convicted may be:
i) Those affecting the public tranquility
ii) Assault
iii) Criminal intimidation
iv) breach of the peace or
v) abatement of these offences.
ii) In other cases (Sn.107):
When the executive magistrate is informed that any person is
likely to commit a breach of the peace or public tranquility or any
wrongful act, to that end such magistrate may issue a show cause
notice to such a person, as to why he should not be ordered to
execute a bond. The maximum period of the bond is one year.
The order must be in writing setting forth the substance of the
information, amount of bond, the period and the nature of sureties
required.
The magistrate inquires into the truth of the information as in
summons cases. This must be completed within 6 months.
If he finds proof he orders to execute a bond, he asks the
order to do so. If he finds no evidence, he may discharge the
accused.
If after executing the bond, for keeping good behavior, the
person commits an offence or attempts or abets, then there is a breach
of the bond.
The magistrate, on holding an enquiry may refuse to accept
the sureties and demand for new sureties or commit the person to
prison.
ii) Security for good behavior (Sn. 108, 109 & 110)
The security for the good behavior of a person can be taken
from the following classes of persons:

Page

47

a) Sn.108:
Persons disseminating seditious matter, (Sn.l24A, I.P.C.), promoting enmity between classes (SN. 153A, IPC), out ranging
religious feelings (Sn.295,1.P.C) etc.,
b) Sn. 109:
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Suspected person who is trying to conceal himself.
c) Sn.110:
Habitual robber, house-breaker, thief, forger, receiver of stolen

property, habitual offender under any law relating to offences in
adulteration of Drugs, profiteering, hoarding etc.,
or a person who is desperate and dangerous to the community.
The magistrate may issue an order to show cause why he should
not be ordered to execute a bond with or without sureties.
The period of the bond is one year under Sns.108 & 109 and it
is 3 years under Sn.110.
The order must be in writing, and must set forth the
substance of the information, the amount of bond, the nature of
the sureties etc.
The magistrate conducts an inquiry, and, if he finds proof, he
may order the accused person to execute the bond. If there is no
proof he discharges the accused.
Bond for keeping the peace or for good behavior:
Whereas I, .......... .....residing at............. have been called upon
to enter into a bond to keep the peace or be of good behavior to
Govt. and all the citizens of Indian for a term of ........ year/s.
I hereby bind myself to be of good behavior/to keep the
peace and on making default, I bind myself to forfeit Rs ............ to
the Govt.
Date:
Place:

Signature

Ch.14.4 Death Sentence:
i) Confirmation:

Page

48

According to Cr.P.C. when the session judge passes a sentence
of death, he should submit the proceedings to the High Court. The
sessions judge should not execute his sentence unless it is confirmed
by the High Court. He should commit the convicted person to jail
custody under a warrant.
ii) Inquiry:
On such a reference, the High Court may, in its discretion, make
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

an inquiry on any point bearing on the guilt or innocence of the
convicted person. It may direct the Sessions Court to conduct the
enquiry if it so decides. The presence of the accused is not necessary in such an enquiry, if the High Court so decides.

(iii) High Court's powers:
The High Court, may confirm the sentence passed by the
Sessions Court, or any other sentence or may annul the conviction;
and pass any other sentence; it may acquit the accused.
When, it confirms, the officer of the High Court shall send a
copy of the order to the Sessions Court, duly attested and sealed.
This procedure of confirmation (Sn.306) will not apply, when
the convicted person himself prefers an appeal or revision to the High
Court from the Sessions Court.
(iv) Execution:
When the Sessions Court receives the order of confirmation, or
order of sentence of death, it should execute the same by issuing a
warrant. If the convicted person prefers an appeal to the Supreme
Court, the execution shall be stayed until the case is disposed of by
that Court.
Ch.14.5 Reference (Sn.395):
When any court, (subordinated to the High Court) is satisfied
that a case before it involves a question of the validity of any Act,
Ordinance or Regulation, and that there is necessity it may refer the
same to the High Court.
The lower Court must be of the opinion that the said Act,
Ordinance etc. is invalid, but not so declared by the High Court or
by the Supreme Court, The court must set out its opinion and the
reasons thereof in its reference to the court. During, this period, the

accused may be remanded to jail custody or bailed out as the
case may be.
The High Court shall pass such order as it thinks fit, and shall
send a copy of the order to the referring court.

Page

49

Ch.14.6. Revision (Sn.397 Cr.P.C.)
This is the exclusive power of the High Court to call for and
to examine the record of any proceeding before any court lower to it.
This is to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of
any finding, sentence or order; the court may direct the Lower Court
to suspend the execution of any sentence.
This power does not apply to interlocutory orders passed in
any appeal, enquiry, trial or other proceeding.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

On examining the records, the court may direct any Magistrate
to make or direct a "further enquiry"; into any complaint,
dismissed already.
Restrictions: i) No order should be made without giving an
opportunity to the accused of being heard.
ii) A finding of acquittal cannot be converted into one of
conviction.
iii) Where appeal is available, revision jurisdiction cannot be
exercised.
vi) In suitable cases, the High Court may treat revision
petition as an appeal.
Ch.14.7. Accused as a defence witness (Sn.315):

According to Cr.P.C. (Sn.315), the accused is a competent
.witness for his defence and like any other witness; he is entitled
to give evidence on oath. He may give evidence to disprove the
charges against himself or any co-accused.
Limitations:
1) The accused cannot be called as a witness, unless he requests
in writing.
2) His failure to give evidence should not be used to draw any
adverse inference against him.

3) This section applies to cases, specified in Cr.P.C. in Sn.315.
4) No influence, promise or threat should be used against the
accused, to induce him to disclose or withhold any matter.

Page

50

THE END

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

REFERENCE SECTION
SELECTED SECTIONS

Criminal Procedure Code 1973
Sn 39. Public to give information of certain offences.
(1) Every person, aware of the Commission of, or of the intention
of any other person to commit, any offence punishable under any
of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
namely :(i) sections 121 to 126, both inclusive, and section 130 (that is to
say offences against the State specified in Chapter VI of the said
Code);
(ii) sections 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 (that is to say, offences
against the public tranquillity specified in Chapter VIII of the said
Code);
(iii) sections 161 to 165A, both inclusive (that is to say, offences
relating to illegal gratification);
(iv). sections 272 to 278, both inclusive (that is to say, offences
relating to adulteration of food and drugs, etc.);
(v) sections 302, 303 and 304 (that is to say, offences affecting
life);
1

[(va) section 364A (that is to say, offence relating to kidnapping
for ransom, etc);]
(vi) section 382 (that is to say., offence of theft after preparation
made for causing, death, hurt or restraint in order to the
committing of the theft);
(Vii) sections 392 to 399, both inclusive, and section 402 (that is
to say, offences of robbery and dacoity);
(viii) section 409 (that is to say, offence relating to criminal breach
of trust by public servant, etc.);
(ix) sections 431 to 439, both inclusive (that is to say, offence of
mischief against property);

Page

51

(x) sections 449 and 450 (that is to say, offence of housetrespass);
(xi) sections 456 to 460, both inclusive (that is to say, offences of
lurking house trespass); and
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(xii) sections 489A to 489E, both inclusive (that is to say, offences
relating to currency notes and bank notes).
Shall, in the abstence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of
proving which excuse shall lie upon the person so aware, forthwith
give information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer of such
Commission or intention; 2) For the purposes of this section, the
term "offence" includes any act committed at any place out of
India, which would constitute an offence if committed in India.

41. When police may arrest without warrant.
(1) Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and
without a warrant, arrest any person :(a) who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against
whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of
his having been so concerned; or
(b) who has in his possession without lawful excuse, the burden of
proving which excuse shall lie on such person, any implement of
house-breaking; or
(c)who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code
or by order of the State Government; or
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably
be suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be
suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such
thing; or
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his
duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful
custody; or

Page

52

(f) who is reasonable suspected of being a deserter from any of the
Armed Forces of the Union; or(g) who has been concerned in, or
against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of
his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out
of India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable
as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to
extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in
custody in India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule
made under subsection (5) of section 356; or
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has
been received from another police officer, provided that the
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or
other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears there
from that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant
by the officer who issued the requisition.
(2) Any officer in charge of a police station may, in like manner,
arrest or cause to be arrested any person, belonging to one or more
of the categories of person specified in section 109 or section 110.
42. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence.
(1) When any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has
committed or has been accused of committing a non-cognizable
offence refuses, on demand of such officer, to give his name and
residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has
reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in
order that his name or residence may be ascertained.
(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been
ascertained, he shall be released on his executing a bond, with or
without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required:
Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall
be secured by a surety or sureties resident in India
(3) Should the true name and residence of such person not be
ascertained within twenty-four hours from the time of arrest or
should he fail to execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish
sufficient sureties, he shall forthwith be forwarded to the nearest
Magistrate having jurisdiction.
43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest.
(1) Any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any
person who in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable
offence, or any proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary
delay, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so
arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer,
take such person or cause him to be taken in custody to the nearest
police station.

Page

53

(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the
provisions of section 41, a police officer shall re-arrest him.
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a noncognizable offence, and he refuses on the demand of a police
officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name or
residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he
shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 42; but if there
is no sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any
offence, he shall be at once released.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

44. Arrests by Magistrate.
(1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a
Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, within his local
jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the
offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein
contained as to bail, commit the offender to custody.
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any
time arrest or direct the arrest, in his presence, within his local
jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the
time and in the circumstances to issue a warrant.

46. Arrest how made.(1) In making an arrest the police
officer or other person making the same shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a
submission to the custody by word or action.
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or
attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person
may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a
person who is not accused of an offence punishable with death or
with imprisonment for life.
1[(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be
arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such
exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall,
by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the
Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local
jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be made.]
47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.

Page

54

(1) If any person acting under a warrant of arrest, or any police
officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the
person to be arrested has entered into, or is within, any place, any
person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on
demand of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer,
allow him such free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable
facilities for a search therein.
(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section
(1), it shall be lawful in any case for a person acting under a
warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot
be obtained without affording the person to be arrested an
opportunity of escape, for a police officer to enter such place and
search therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to
break open any outer or inner door or window of any house or
place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

person, if after notification of his authority and purposes, and
demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain
admittance
Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual
occupancy of a female (not being the person to be arrested) who,
according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or
police officer shall, before entering such apartment, give notice to
such female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her
every reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break
open the apartment and enter it.
(3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest
may break open any outer or inner door or window of any house
or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who,
having lawfully entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is
detained therein.

49. No unnecessary restraint.
The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is
necessary to prevent his escape.
50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of
right to bail.
(1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person
without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full
particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds
for such arrest.
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other
than a person accused of a non-bailable offence, he shall inform
the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and
that he may arrange for sureties on his behalf.
50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the
arrest, etc. to a nominated person.

55

(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights
under sub-section (1) as soon as he is brought to the police
station.

Page

(1) Every police officer or other person making any under this
Code shall forthwith give the information regarding such arrest
and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his
friends, relatives or such other persons as may as may be disclosed
or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such
information.

(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

of such person shall be made in a book to be kept in the police
station insuch form as may be prescribed in this behalf by the
State Government.
(4) It shall be the duty of the magistrate before whom such
arrested person is produced to satisfy himself that the requirements
of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been complied within
respect of such arrested person.

51. Search of arrested persons.
(1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer under a
warrant which does not provide for the taking of bail, or under a
warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person
arrested cannot furnish bail, and whenever a person is arrested
without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant, and
cannot legally be admitted to bail, or is unable to, furnish bail.
The officer making the arrests or, when the arrest is made by a
private person, the police officer to whom he makes over the
person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe
Custody all articles, other than necessary wearing-apparel, found
upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person,
a receipt showing the articles taken in possession by the police
officer shall be given to such person.
(2). Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the
search shall be made by another female with strict regard to
decency
52. Power to seize offensive weapons.
The officer or other person making any arrest under this Code may
take from the person arrested any offensive weapons which he has
about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so taken to the
court or officer before which or whom the officer or person
making the arrest is required by this Code to produce the person
arrested.

Page

56

53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the
request of police officer.
1) When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence
of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such
circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that
an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the
commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered
medical practitioner, acting, at the request of a police officer not
below the rank of sub-inspector, and for- any person acting in
good faith in his aid and -under his direction, to make such all
examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

order to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence, and to
use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose.
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this
section, the examination shall be made only by, or under the
supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner.
1[Explanation (a) “examination” shall include the examination of
blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual offences,
sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings by the
use of modern and scientific techniques including DNA profiling
and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner
thinks necessary in a particular case;
53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical
practitioner.
53 A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical
practitioner. – (1) When a person is arrested on a charge of
committing an offence of rape or an attempt to commit rape and
there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of
this person will afford evidence as to the commission of such
offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner
employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local
authority and in the absence of such a practitioner within the
radius of sixteen kilometers from the place where the offence has
been committed by any other registered medical practitioner,
acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a
sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid
and under his direction, to make such an examination of the
arrested person and to use such force as is reasonably necessary
for that purpose.
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such
examination shall, without delay, examine such person and
prepare a report of his examination giving the following
particulars, namely:-(i) the name and address of the accused and of
the person by whom he was brought,
(ii) the age of the accused,(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the
person of the accused,
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the
accused for DNA profiling, and”.

Page

57

(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail. (3) The report
shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at.
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the
examination shall also be noted in the report.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay,
forward the report of the investigating officer, who shall forward it
to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the
documents referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (5) of that
section.]
57. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four
hours
No police officer shall detain in custody a person arrested without
warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case
is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special
order of a Magistrate under section 167, exceed twenty-four hours
exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest
to the Magistrate's Court

Page

58

125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and
parents,

(1) If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to
maintain—
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or
not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married
daughter) who has attained majority,
where such child is, by reason of any physical or mental
abnormality or injury unable to maintain
itself, or
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, a
Magistrate of the first class may ,upon proof of such neglect or
refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such
monthly rate not exceeding five hundred rupees in the whole, as
such magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as
the Magistrate may from time to time direct:
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor
female child referred to in
clause (b) to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if
the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female
child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient means
Explanation—For the purposes of this Chapter—
(a) "minor" means a person who, under the provisions of the
Indian Majority Act, 1875
(9 of 1875) is deemed not to have attained his majority;
(b) "wife" includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has
obtained a divorce from,
her husband and has not remarried
(2) Such allowance shall be payable from the date of the order, or,
if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to
comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the
manner provided for levying fines, and may sentence such person,
for the whole, or any port of each month's allowance remaining
unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner
made:
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any
amount due under this
section unless application be made to the Court to levy such
amount within a period of one year from the date on which it
became due:
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on
condition of her living
with him, and she refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may
consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an
order under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is
satisfied that there is just ground for so doing
Explanation—If a husband has contracted marriage with another
woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be considered to be just ground
for his wife's refusal to live with him
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an allowance from her
husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if,
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her,
husband, or if they are living separately by mutual consent
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been
made under this section is living in adultery, or that without
sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they
are living separately by mutual consent, the Magistrate shall
cancel the order

Page

59

126. Procedure
(1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any
person in any district—
(a) where he is, or
(b) where he or his wife resides, or
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with
the mother of the
illegitimate child
(2) All evidence to such proceedings shall be taken in the presence
of the person against whom an order for payment of maintenance
is proposed to be made, or, when his personal attendance is
dispensed with in the presence of his pleader, and shall be
recorded in the manner prescribed for summons-cases:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that the person against
whom an order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be
made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend
the Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and determine the
case ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good
cause shown on an application made within three months from the
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

60
Page

date thereof subject to such terms including terms as to payment of
costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and
proper
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 125 shall
have power to make such order as to costs as may be just
127. Alteration in allowance
(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person,
receiving, under section 125 a monthly allowance, or ordered
under the same section to pay a monthly allowance to his wife,
child, father of mother, as the case may be, the Magistrate may
make such alteration in the allowance as he thinks fit:
Provided that if he increases the allowance, the monthly rate of
five hundred rupees in the whole shall not be exceeded
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any
decision of a competent civil Court, any order made under section
125 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as
the case may be, vary the same accordingly
(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of
a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce
from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that—
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried,
cancel such order as from
the date of her remarriage;
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has
received, whether
before or after the date of the said order, the whole of the sum
which, under any
customary or personal law applicable to the parties, was payable
on such divorce, cancel such order—
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from
the date on which
such order was made,
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any,
for which
maintenance has been actually paid by the husband to the woman;
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that
she had voluntarily
surrendered her rights to maintenance after her divorce, cancel the
order from the date
thereof
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any
maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a monthly
allowance has been ordered to be paid under section 125, the civil
Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or
recovered by, such person as monthly allowance in pursuance of
the said order

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

128. Enforcement of order of maintenance
A copy of the order of maintenance shall be given without
payment to the person in whose favour it is made, or to his
guardian, if any, or to the person to whom the allowance is to be
paid; and such order may be enforced by any Magistrate in any
place where the person against whom it is made may be, on such
Magistrate being satisfied as to the identity of the parties and the
nonpayment of the allowance due.

Page

61

Public Nuisance
133. Conditional order for removal of nuisance (1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional Magistrate
or any other Executive
Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State
Government on receiving the report of a police officer or other
information and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit,
considers—
(a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed
from any public place or from any way, river or channel which is
or may be lawfully used by the public; or
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation or the keeping of
any goods or
merchandise; is injurious to the health or physical comfort of the
community, and that in
consequence such trade or occupation should be prohibited or
regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or the
keeping thereof regulated; or
(c) that the construction of any building, or the disposal of any
substance, as is likely to
occasion conflagration or explosion, should be prevented or
stopped; or
(d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a
condition that it is likely to
fall and thereby cause injury to persons living or carrying on
business in the
neighbourhood or passing by, and that in consequence the
removal, repair or support of
such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such
tree, is necessary; or
(e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or
public place should be
fenced in such manner as to prevent danger arising to the public;
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

62
Page

or
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or
otherwise disposed of,
such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the
person causing such
obstruction or nuisance, or carrying on such trade or occupation,
or keeping any such
goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such
building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or
owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a time to be fixed
in the order—
(i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such
manner as may be
directed, such trade or occupation, or to remove such goods or
merchandise, or to
regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may be directed; or
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter
the disposal of
such substance; or
(iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or
to remove or
support such trees; or
(v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or
(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the
manner
provided in the said order; or, if he objects so to do, to appear
before himself or
some other Executive Magistrate subordinate to him at a time and
place to be
fixed by the order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter
provided, why the
order should not be made absolute
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be
called in question in any civil Court
Explanation—A "public place" includes also property belonging
to the State, camping grounds and grounds left unoccupied for
sanitary or recreative purposes
134. Service or notification of order (1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against
whom it is made, in the manner herein provided for service of a
summons
(2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by
proclamation, published in such manner as the State Government
may, by rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be stuck up at such
place or places as may be fittest for conveying the information to
such person
135. Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

The person against whom such order is made shall—
(a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the
order, the act directed
thereby; or
(b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against
the same

Page

63

URGENT CASES
144. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or
apprehended danger
(1) In cases where, in the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Subdivisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially
empowered by the State Government in this behalf, there is
sufficient ground for proceeding under this section and immediate
prevention or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by
a written order stating the material facts of the case and served in
the manner provided by section 134, direct any person to abstain
from a certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain
property in his possession or under his management, if such
Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or
tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance or injury to any person
lawfully employed, or danger to human life,
health or safety, or a disturbance of the public tranquillity, or a
riot, or an affray
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in
cases where the circumstances do not admit of the serving in due
time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is
directed, be passed ex parte
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular
individual, or to persons residing in a particular place or area, or to
the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place
or area
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more
than two months from the making thereof: Provided that, if the
State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing
danger to human life, health or safety or for preventing a riot or
any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a
Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further
period not exceeding six months from the date on which the order
made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as
it may specify in the said notification
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the
application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order
made under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate
to him or by his predecessor-in-office
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order
made by it under the proviso to subsection

Page

64

(7) Where an application under sub-section (5), or sub-section (6)
is received, the Magistrate, or the State Government, as the case
may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of
appearing before him or it, either in person or by pleader and
showing cause against the order, and if the Magistrate or the State
Government, as the case may be, rejects the application wholly or
in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons for so doing.
145. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is
likely to cause breach of peace
(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of
a police officer or upon other information that a dispute likely to
cause a breach of the peace exists concerning any land or water or
the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he shall make
an order in writing, stating the grounds of his being so satisfied,
and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his
Court in person or by pleader, on a specified date and time, and to
put in written statements of their respective claims as respects the
fact of actual possession of the subject of
Dispute (2) For the purposes of this section, the expression "land
or water" includes
buildings, markets, fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and
the rents or profits of any such property
(3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by
the Code for the service of a summons upon such person or
persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall
be published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or
near the subject of dispute
(4) The Magistrate shall then, without reference to the merits or
the claims of any of the parties, to a right to possess the subject of
dispute, peruse the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive
all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further
evidence, if any as he thanks necessary, and, if possible, decide
whether and which of the parties was, at the date of the order
made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the subject of
dispute:
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has
been forcibly and
wrongfully dispossessed within two months next before the date
on which the report of a police officer or other information was
received by the Magistrate, or after that date and before the date of
his order under sub-section (1), he may treat the party so
dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the date of
his order under sub-section (1)
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

attend, or any other person interested, from showing that no such
dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and in such case the
Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings
thereon shall be stayed, but, subject to such cancellation, the order
of the Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be final.
(6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or
should under the proviso to subsection
(4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject, he
shall issue an order
declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof until
evicted therefrom in due course of law, and forbidding all
disturbance of such possession until such eviction; and when he
proceeds under the proviso to sub-section (4), may restore to
possession the party forcibly and wrongfully dispossessed
(b) The order made under this sub-section shall be served and
published in the manner laid down in sub-section (3)
(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate
may cause the legal
representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the
proceeding and shall thereupon continue the inquiry, and if any
question arises as to who the legal representative of a deceased
party for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming
to be representatives of the deceased party shall be made parties
thereto
(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of
the property, the subject of dispute in a proceeding under this
section pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay,
he may make an order for the proper custody or sale of such
property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such
order for the disposal of such property, or the sale proceeds
thereof, as he thinks fit
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the
proceedings under this section, on the application of either party,
issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to
produce any document or thing
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of
the powers of the Magistrate to proceed under section 107

Page

65

Investigation
162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements
in evidence
(1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the
course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to
writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such
statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any
purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such
statement was made:
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in
such inquiry or trial
whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any
part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused,
and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to
contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any
part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such
witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred
to in his cross-examination
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any
statement falling within the
provisions of clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act,

Page

66

164. Recording of confessions and statements
(1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may,
whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any
confession or statement made to him in the course of an
investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the
time being in force, or at any time afterwards before the
commencement of the inquiry or trial:
Provided that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer
on whom any power of a Magistrate has been conferred under any
law for the time being in force
(2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession,
explain to the person making it that he is not bound to make a
confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence
against him; and the Magistrate shall not record any such
confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has
reason to believe that it is being made voluntarily
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person
appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not willing to
make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the
detention of such person in police custody
(4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided
in section 281 for recording the examination of an accused person
and shall be signed by the person making the confession; and the
Magistrate shall make a memorandum at the foot of such record to
the following effect:—
"I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a
confession and that, if he does so, any confession he may make
may be used as evidence against him and I believe that this
confession was voluntarily made It was taken in my presence and
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted
by him to be correct, and it contains a full and true account of the
statement made by him
(Signed) AB
Magistrate"

Page

67

(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under subsection (1) shall be recorded in such manner hereinafter provided
for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the
Magistrate,best fitted to the circumstances of the case; and the
Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person
whose statement is so recorded
(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this
section shall forward it to the Magistrate by whom the case is to be
inquired into or tried
167. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in
twenty-four hours
(1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and
it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the
period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 57, and there are
grounds for believing that the accusation or information is
well-founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the
police officer making the
investigation, if he is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall
forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the
entries in the diary hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and
shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under
this section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the
case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in
such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, a term not exceeding
fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the
case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention
unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a
Magistrate having such jurisdiction:
Provided that—
(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused
person, otherwise than in
the custody of the police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is
satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no
Magistrate shall authorise the
detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph
for a total period
exceeding—
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence
punishable with
death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

68
Page

than ten years;
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other
offence, and, on the
expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case
may be, the
accused person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and
does furnish bail,
and every person released on bail under this sub-section shall be
deemed to be to
released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes
of that Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under
this section unless the
accused is produced before him;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in
this behalf by the High Court, shall authorise detention in the
custody of the police
Explanation I—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared
that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in
paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as
he does not furnish bail
Explanation II—If any question arises whether an accused person
was produced before the Magistrate as required under paragraph
(b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his
signature on the order authorising detention
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), the officer in charge of the police station or the
police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank
of a sub-inspector, may, where a Judicial Magistrate is not
available, transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom
the powers of a Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate
have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter
prescribed relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward
the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and thereupon such
Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
authorise the detention of the accused person in such custody as he
may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in the aggregate;
and on the expiry of the period of detention so authorised, the
accused person shall be
released on bail except where an order for further detention of the
accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make
such order; and, where an order for such further detention is made,
the period during which the accused person was detained in
custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under
this sub-section, shall be taken into account in computing the
period specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub-section (2):
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the
Executive Magistrate shall
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

69

transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate the records of the case
together with a copy of the entries in the diary relating to the case
which was transmitted to him by the officer in charge of the police
station or the police officer making the investigation, as the case
may be (3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention
in the custody of the police shall record his reasons for so doing
(4) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate
making such order shall forward a copy of his order, with his
reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the
investigation is not concluded within a period of six months from
the date on which the accused was arrested, the Magistrate shall
make an order stopping further investigation into the offence
unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate
that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the
continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months
is necessary (6) Where any order stopping further investigation
into an offence has been made under subsection
(5), the Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application
made to him or
otherwise, that further investigation into the offence ought to be
made, vacate the order made under sub-section (5) and direct
further investigation to be made into the offence subject to such
directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify.
Suicide
174. Police to inquire and report on suicide, etc
(1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some other
police officer specially
empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives
information that a person has committed suicide, or has been
killed by another or by an animal or by machinery or by an
accident, or has died under circumstances raising a reasonable
suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he
shall immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive
Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless otherwise
directed by any rule prescribed by the State Government, or by
any general or special order of the District or Sub-divisional
Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such
deceased person is, and there, in the presence of two or more
respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood shall make an
investigation, and draw up a report of the apparent cause of death,
describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of
injury as may be found on the body, and stating in what manner,
or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to
have been inflicted
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other
persons, or by so many of them as concur therein, and shall be
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

70

forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Subdivisional Magistrate
(3) When—
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her
marriage; or
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of
her marriage in any
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other
person committed an
offence in relation to such woman; or
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of
her marriage and any relative of the woman has made a request in
this behalf; or
(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or
(v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so
to do, he shall, subject to such rules as the State Government may
prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, with a view to its being
examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualifiedmedical
man appointed in this behalf by the State Government, if the state
of the weather and the distance admit of its being so forwarded
without risk of such putrefaction on the road as would render such
examination useless
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests,
namely, any District Magistrate
or Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate
specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government or the
District Magistrate
175. Power to summon persons
(1) A police officer proceeding under section 174 may, by order in
writing, summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose
of the said investigation, and any other person who appears to be
acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so
summoned shall be bound to attend and to answer truly all
questions other than questions the answers to which have a
tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a forfeiture
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which
section 170 applies, such persons shall not be required by the
police officer to attend a Magistrate's
176. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death – [Custody
death](1) When any person dies while in the custody of the police
or when the case is of the nature referred to in clause (i) or clause
(ii) of sub-section (3) of section 174, the nearest Magistrate
empowered to hold inquests shall, and in any other case mentioned
in sub-section (1) of section 174, any Magistrate so empowered
may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in
addition to, the investigation held by the police officer; and if he
does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it which he
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

would have in holding an inquiry into an offence
(2) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the
evidence taken by him in connection therewith in any manner
hereinafter prescribed according to the circumstances of the case
(3) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an
examination of the dead body of any person who has been already
interred, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate
may cause the body to be disinterred and examined
(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the
Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, inform the relatives of the
deceased whose names and addresses are known, and shall allow
them to remain present at the inquiry
Explanation—In this section, the expression "relative" means
parents, children brothers, sisters and spouse

Page

71

197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants –
(1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a
public servant not removable from his office save by or with the
sanction of the Government is accused of any offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in
the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance
of such offence except with the previous sanction—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be,
was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with
the affairs of the Union,
of the Central Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be,
was at the time of
commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with
the affairs of a State, of
the State Government:
Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a
person referred to in clause (b) during the period while a
Proclamation issued under clause (1) of Article 356 of the
Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will apply as if for
the expression "State Government" occurring therein, the
expression "Central Government" were substituted
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have
been committed by any member of the Armed Forces of the Union
whole acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official
duty, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the
provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to such class or category
of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of
public order as may be specified therein, wherever they may be
serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

apply as if for the expression "Central Government" occurring
therein, the expression "State Government" were substituted
prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or public servant is to be
conducted, and may specify the Court before which the trial is to
be held
Complaints
200. Examination of complainant A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint shall
examine upon oath the
complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of
such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed
by the complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate:
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the
Magistrate need not examine
the complainant and the witnesses—
(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge
of his official duties or a
Court has made the complaint; or
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to
another Magistrate under
section 192:
Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to
another Magistrate under
section 192 after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the
latter
Magistrate need not re-examine them
203. Dismissal of complaint If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the
complainant and of the wit nesses and the result of the inquiry or
investigation (if any) under section 202, the Magistrate is of
opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall
dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly
record his reasons for so doing

Page

72

THE CHARGE
211. Contents of charge –
(1) Every charge under this Code shall state the offence with
which the accused is charged
(2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name,
the offence may be described in the charge by that name only
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any
specific name so much of the definition of the offence must be
stated as to give the accused notice of the matter
with which he is charged
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

73

(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is
said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the charge
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement
that every legal condition required by law to constitute the offence
charged was fulfilled in the particular case
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any
offence, is liable, by reason of such previous conviction, to
enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a
subsequent offence, and it is intended to prove such previous
conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment which the
Court may think fit to award for the subsequent offence, the fact
date and place of the previous, conviction shall be stated in the
charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add
it at any time before sentence is passed
Illustrations
(a) A is charged with the murder of B This is equivalent to a
statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder given in
sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); that it
did not fall within any of the general exceptions of the said Code;
and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section
300, or that, if it did fall within Exception 1, one or other of the
three provisos to that exception applied to it
(b) A is charged under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860) with voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B by means of an
instrument for shooting This is equivalent to a statement that the
case was not provided for by section 335 of the said Code, and
that the general exceptions did not apply to it
(c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or
criminal intimidation, or using a false property-mark The charge
may state that A committed murder, or cheating, or theft, or
extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or that he used a
false property-mark, without reference to the definition, of those
crimes contained in the Indian Penal Code; but the sections under
which the offence is punishable must, in each instance, be referred
to in the charge
212. Particulars as to time, place and person (1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to the time and
place of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom,
or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed, as are
reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter with
which he is charged (2) When the accused is charged with
criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money or
other moveable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross
sum or, as the case may be, described the movable property in
respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed,
and the dates between which the offence is alleged to have been
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

committed, without specifying particular items or exact dates, and
the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one
offence within the meaning of section 219:
Provided that the time included between the first and last of such
dates shall not exceed
one year
213. When manner of committing offence must be stated When the nature of the case is such that the particulars mentioned
in sections 211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice
of the matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also
contain such particulars of the manner is which the alleged offence
was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose
Illustrations
(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time
and place The charge need not set out the manner in which the
theft was effected
(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place The
charge must be set out the manner in which A cheated B
(c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place
The charge must set out that portion of the evidence given by A
which is alleged to be false
(d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the
discharge of his public functions at a given time and place The
charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in the
discharge of his functions
(e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place The
charge need not state the manner in which A murdered B

Page

74

SUMMARY TRIALS
260. Power to try summarily (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code—
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(b) any Metropolitan Magistrate;
(c) any Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this
behalf by the High Court, may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary
way all or any of the following offences:—
(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for
a term exceeding two years;
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), where the value of the property stolen does not
exceed two hundred
rupees;
(iii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the
Indian Penal
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

75

Code (45 of 1860), where the value of the property does not
exceed two hundred
rupees;
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property,
under section 414
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) where the value of such
property does not
exceed two hundred rupees;
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860);
(vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under
section 504 and
criminal intimidation, under section 506 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860);
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
(viii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when
such attempt is an
offence;
(ix) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a
complaint may be
made under section 20 of the Cattle-Trespass Act, 1871(1 of
1871).
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the
Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is undesirable
to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who
may have been examined and proceed to re-hear, the case in the
manner provided by this Code.
261. Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class The High Court may confer on any Magistrate invested with the
powers of a Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily
any offence which is punishable only with fine or with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without
fine, and any abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence.
262. Procedure for summary trials (1) In trial under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Code
for the trial of summons-case shall be followed except as
hereinafter mentioned.
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three
months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under this
Chapter.
263. Record in summary trials In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such
form as the State Government
may direct, the following particulars, namely:—
(a) the serial number of the case;
(b) the date of the commission of the offence;
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

(c) the date of the report of complaint;
(d) the name of the complainant (if any);
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused;
(f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any ) proved, and
in cases coming under clause
(ii), clause (iii) or clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 260, the
value of the property in respect of which the offence has been
committed;
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);
(h) the finding;
(i) the sentence or other final order;
(j) the date on which proceedings terminated.
264. Judgment in cases tried summarily In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead
guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence
and a judgment containing a brief statement of the reasons for the
finding.
265. Language of record and judgment (1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the
language of the Court.

Page

76

Double Jeopardy
300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for
same offence.
(1) A person who has once been tried by a Court of competent
jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such
offence shall, while such conviction or acquittal remains in force,
not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the
same facts for any other offence for which a different charge from
the one made against him might have been made under subsection
(1) of section 221, or for which he might have been convicted
under sub-section (2) thereof.
(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be
afterwards tried, with the consent of the State Government for any
distinct offence for which a separate charge might have been made
against him at the former trial under sub-section (1) of section
220.
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act
causing consequences which, together with such act, constituted a
different offence from that of which he was convicted, may be
afterwards tried for such last-mentioned offence, if the
consequences had not happened or were not known to the Court to
have happened, at the time when he was convicted.
(4) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence constituted by
any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or conviction be
subsequently charged with, and tried for, any other offence
constituted by the same acts which he may have committed if the
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the
offence with which he is subsequently charged.
(5) A person discharged under section 258 shall not be tried again
for the same offence except with the consent of the Court by
which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the firstmentioned Court is subordinate.
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of section 188 of
this Code.
Explanation—The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of
the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes of this section
Illustrations
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and acquitted. He
cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in force, be charged
with theft as a servant, or upon the same facts, with theft simply,
or with criminal breach of trust.
(b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted. The person
injured afterwards dies. A may be tried again for culpable
homicide.
(c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of the
culpable homicide of B. A may not afterwards be tried on the
same facts for the murder of B.
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and
convicted by him of voluntarily causing hurt to B. A may not
afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on
the same facts, unless the case comes within sub-section (3) of this
section.
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and
convicted by him of, theft of property from the person of B. A
may subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the
same facts.

Page

77

301. Appearance by public prosecutors.
(1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge
of a case may appear and plead without any written authority
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry, trial or
appeal.
(2) If any such case any private person instructs a pleader to
prosecute any person in any Court, the Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the
prosecution, and the pleader so instructed shall act therein under
the directions of the Public
Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, with the
permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the
evidence is closed in the case.
306. Tender of pardon to accomplice. APPROVER
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

78
Page

(1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed
to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an
offence to which this section applies, the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate at any stage of the
investigation or inquiry into, or the
trial of, the offence, and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring
into or trying the offence, at any, stage of the inquiry or trial, may
tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making a full
and true disclosure of the whole of the circumstances within his
knowledge relative to the offence and to every other person
concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in the commission
thereof.
(2) This section applies to—
(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by
the Court of a Special
Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952
(46 of 1952).
(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to seven years or with a more severe sentence.
(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub-section (1)
shall record—
(a) his reasons for so doing;
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to
whom it was made, and shall, on application made by the accused,
furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost.
(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under subsection (1)—
(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate
taking cognizance of the offence and in the subsequent trial, if
any;
(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until
the termination of the
trial.(5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon made
under sub-section (1) and has been examined under sub-section
(4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without
making any further inquiry in the case.—
(a) commit it for trial—
(i) to the Court of Session if the offence is triable exclusively by
that Court or if
the Magistrate taking cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate;
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law
Amendment
Act 1952 (46 of 1952), if the offence is triable exclusively by that
Court;
(b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate who shall try
the case himself.
Comments
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

79
Page

(i) Once an accused is granted pardon under section 306 he ceases
to be an accused and becomes
a witness for the prosecution; State (Delhi Admn.) v. Jagjit Singh,
1989 Cr LJ 980: AIR 1989 SC 989.
(ii) Section 306 (4) clearly reveals that the person accepting a
tender of pardon should be examined as a witness first in the Court
of Magistrate and subsequently in the trial Court; Murlidharan v.
State of Tamil Nadu, (1997) 1 Crimes 515 (Mad).
307. Power to direct tender of pardon.
At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is
passed, the Court to which the commitment is made may, with a
view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any person supposed
to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any
such offence, tender a pardon on the same condition to such
person.
308. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.
(1) Where, in regard to a person who has accepted a tender of
pardon made undersection 306 or section 307, the Public
Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion such person has, either by
wilfully
concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not
complied with the condition on which the tender was made, such
person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the pardon
was so tendered or for any other offence of which he appears to
have been guilty in connection with the same matter, and also for
the offence of giving false evidence:
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the
other accused:
Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence
of giving false
evidence except with the sanction of the High Court, and nothing
contained in section 195 or section 340 shall apply to that offence.
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of
pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under section 164 or by a
Court under sub-section (4) of section 306 may be given in
evidence against him at such trial.
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has
complied with the condition upon which such tender was made, in
which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the
condition has not been complied with.
(4) At such trial the Court shall—
(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and
explained to the accused;
(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate before the evidence of the
witnesses for the
prosecution is taken, ask the accused whether he pleads that he has
complied with the
conditions on which the tender of pardon was made.
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

80

(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea
and proceed with the trial and it shall, before passing judgment in
the case, find whether or not the accused has complied with the
conditions of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complied, it
shall notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, pass
judgment of acquittal.
320. Compounding of offences.
(1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table
next following may be compounded by the persons mentioned in
the third column of that Table.
(2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the table
next following may, with the permission of the Court before which
any prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by
the persons mentioned in
the third column of that table:—
(3) When any offence is compoundable under this section, the
abetment of such offence or an attempt to commit such offence
(when such attempt is itself an offence) may be compounded in
like manner.
(4)(a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to
compound an offence under this section is under the age of
eighteen years or is an idiot or a lunatic, any person competent to
contract on his behalf, may, with the permission of the Court
compound such offence.
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to
compound an offence under this section is dead, the legal
representative, as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5
of 1908) of such person may, with the consent of the Court
compound such offence. (5) When the accused has been
committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is
pending no composition for the offence shall be allowed without
the leave of the Court to which he is committed, or, as the case
may be, before which the appeal is to be heard.
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its
powers of revision under section 401 may allow any person to
compound any offence which such person is competent to
compound under this section.
((7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason
of a previous conviction, liable either to enhanced punishment or
to a punishment of a different kind for such offence.
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the
effect of an acquittal of the accused with whom the offence has
been compounded.
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

section

Page

81

321. Withdrawal from prosecution.
The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of
a case may, with the consent of the Court at any time before the
judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the prosecution of any
person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the
offences for which he is tried;
and upon such withdrawal,—
(a) If it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall
be discharged in
respect of such offence or offences;
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this
Code no charge is
required he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or
offences:
Provided that where such offence—
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive
power of the Union extends, or
(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment
under the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to,
any property
belonging to the Central Government, or
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central
Government while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
his official duty, and the prosecutor in charge of the case has not
been appointed by the Central Government he shall not, unless he
has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the
Court for its consent to withdraw from the
prosecution and the Court shall, before according consent, direct
the Prosecutor to
produce before it the permission granted by the Central
Government to withdraw
from the prosecution.
368. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul
conviction.
In any case submitted under section 366, the High Court—
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence
warranted by law, or
(b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any
offence of which the Court of Session might have convicted him,
or order a new trial on the same or an amended charge, or
(c) may acquit the accused person:
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

section until the period
allowed for preferring an appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is
presented within such period,until such appeal is disposed of.
369. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges.
In every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or
any new sentence or order passed by the High Court, shall when
such Court consists of two or more Judges, be made, passed and
signed by at least two of them.

Page

82

389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of
appellant on bail.
(1) Pending any appeal by a convicted person, the Appellate Court
may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the
execution of the sentence or order appealed against be suspended
and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail, or on
his own bond.
(2) The power conferred by this section on an Appellate Court
may be exercised also by the High Court in the case of an appeal
by convicted person to a Court
subordinate thereto.
(3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is
convicted that he intends to present an appeal, the Court shall,—
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment
for a term not
exceeding three years, or
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is
a bailable one, and he is on bail, order that the convicted person be
released on bail unless there are special reasons for refusing bail,
for such period as will afford sufficient time to present the appeal
and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1),
and the
sentence of imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on
bail, be deemed to be
suspended.
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment
for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time during which he is
so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he
is so sentenced.
438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.
(1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested
on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he
may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for direction
under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in
the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a
direction under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in
such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

Page

83

may thinks fit, including—
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for
interrogation by a police
officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly,
make any inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the
case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court
or to any police officer;
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the
previous permission of
the Court;
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3)
of section 437, as if
the bail were granted under that section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an
officer in charge of a police station on such accusation, and is
prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the
custody of such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail,
and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that
a warrant should issue in the first instance against that person, he
shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of
the Court under sub-section (1).
460. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings.
If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of the
following things, namely:—
(a) to issue a search-warrant under section 94;
(b) to order, under section 155, the police to investigate an
offence;
(c) to hold an inquest under section 176;
(d) to issue process under section 187, for the apprehension of a
person within his local
jurisdiction who has committed an offence outside the limits of
such jurisdiction;
(e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 190;
(f) to make over a case under sub-section (2) of section 192;
(g) to tender a pardon under section 306;
(h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 410; or
(i) to sell property under section 458 or section 459, erroneously in
good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside
merely on the ground of his not being so empowered.
461. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings.
If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, does
any of the following things,namely:—
(a) attaches and sells property under section 83;
(b) issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other thing in
msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

the custody of a postal or telegraph authority;
(c) demands security to keep the peace;
(d) demands security for good behaviour;
(e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour;
(f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;
(g) makes an order for maintenance;
(h) makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance;
(i) prohibits, under section 143, the repetition or continuance of a
public nuisance;
(j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X;
(k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section
(1) of section 190;
(l) tries an offender;
(m) tries an offender summarily;
(n) passes a sentence, under section 325, on proceedings recorded
by another Magistrate;
(o) decides an appeal;
(p) calls, under section 397, for proceedings; or
(q) revises an order passed under section 446, his proceedings
shall be void.
LIMITATION
468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of
limitation.
(1) Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Code, no
Court, shall take cognizance of an
offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the
expiry of the period of limitation.
(2) The period of limitation shall be—
(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;
(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year;
(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for
a term exceeding one
year but not exceeding three years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in
relation to offences which may be tried together, shall be
determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with
the more severe punishment or, as the case may be, the most
severe punishment.

Page

84

THE END

msrlawbooks

Criminal Pro Code >>>>>

