Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

CUSTODIAL VIOLENCE AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE: A
STUDY OF POLICE POWERS, CONSTRAINTS, AND
ACCOUNTABILITY
D.R. Rajath & Subhiksha Bharath, MKPM RV Institute of Legal Studies, Bengaluru

ABSTRACT
The custodial violence is one of the most contentious issues within the
criminal investigation system, this paper expresses regarding the concept of
historical evolution of custodial practices and the recent developments to the
laws. The study adopts the police perspectives of the complexities faced
during the investigation. The paper revolves around the research question
how can the Indian legal framework effectively balance the prevention of
custodial violence with practical challenges faced by police during criminal
investigations and further examines the complexities surrounding false
allegations of custodial torture and the legal protection available to the public
servants acting in good faith. The paper concludes by various suggestions
and recommendations for the implication to the existing laws which can
resolve foregoing problem.
Keywords: Custodial violence, Torture, Investigation, Legal Frameworks,
Harassment

Page: 2633

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

1.

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

Introduction:

The custodial violence is one of the most debated and essential aspect of the criminal justice
system where it limits the powers to the police officers also provides the rights to the accused
which both acts in the balanced way. Most generally people get confused between the arrest
and custody which are indeed has a difference based on the duration of the detention. The
police have various functions to be discharged such as maintaining public order, preventing
crime, conducting effective investigation1 whereby during to act in accordance with the
obligations various allegations are being made over the powers namely physical abuse,
harassment, torture, custodial death. The police are meant as the protector and guardians of the
law whereby provided with various powers exercised based on the discretion but must not act
in the arbitrary way, which the custodial violence is also averse to the human rights which is
being rendered under The Constitution of India, 19502.
2.

Custody:

The term Custody is derived from the Latin term “custodia” which means “Guardianship,
safekeeping, protection” Custody includes physical surrender by the accused before the court
coupled with submission to the jurisdiction and the orders of the court, He who is under the
control of the court or is in the physical hold of an officer with coercive power. The term
custody is very elastic and may mean actual imprisonment or physical detention or mere power,
legal or physical, of imprisoning or of taking manual possession.3 The violence which occurs
in the custody mean “the use of physical force accompanied by fury, vehemence, or outrage
especially physical force unlawfully exercised with the intent to harm4”. “Every person who is
being accused of being committed a crime is placed under the custody where such custody is
divided into two types i.e. Police custody and Judicial custody whereas the police custody the
accused is held in the police station or in police lockup whereas in judicial custody, he is locked
in jail under the custody of magistrate”5.

1

The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023, ss.168,172,176
The Constitution of India,1950 Art.20,22
3
Tapash Gan Choudhury, Legal and commercial dictionary 213 (Eastern Law House, New Delhi, 6th edn. 2014)
4
Bryan A Garner, Black’s Law Dictionary 1801 (Thomson Reuters, 10th edn. 2014)
5
Dr. N.V. Paranjape, The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 272 (Central Law Agency, Prayagraj, 9th
edn., 2025)
2

Page: 2634

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

3.

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

Tracing the Historical Roots of Custodial Violence:

The phenomenon of custodial crime is not a new practice in India as we had reference of torture
and violence with the police in India even since the Vedic age, “Kautilya’s Artha shastra speaks
about speaks about various kinds of torture such as burning of limbs, tearing by wild animals,
tramping to death by elephants and bulls, cutting of limbs and mutilation”6. During the ancient
times, Narada referred the “inhuman practice of pouring hot oil into the mouth, ears and
thrusting red-hot iron into the mouth of a criminal sentenced to death”7 During the postIndependence Era all the “committees and commissions had revealed the tale of third degree
or torture in police custody due to political ends, practice of corruption and lack of
infrastructure support of scientific aids and training”8. Whereby in the present day situation of
the domestic framework for combating custodial crimes where the framework in India both
constitutional and statutory contains provisions relating to safeguards arrest, detention,
custodial torture and other crimes in the custody which also is been provided in
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Sakshya
Adhiniyam 2023, Protection of Human Right Act, 1993 and also India has ratified, acceded
and signed the International declarations, Covenants, Conventions and treaties.
4.

Custodial Policing: Challenges, Responsibilities, and Legal Constraints:

The public-police relationship generally has the lack of trust where the individuals are being
mistrusted the police as they may not be able to perform their duties in the pursuit of justice
which critically issues driven by incidents of police misconduct, lack of accountability,
political interference, ineffective investigation. “The general credibility of the police and the
investigation agencies in the country is very low, whereas it is abhorrent that all police are
mistrusted by default under law which leads to that police would not be able to perform their
duties in pursuit of justice”9 Unfavourable opinion of the police during any event involving the
matter of public interest would also lead to the lack in trust towards the police.

6

R Chakraborty, Law on custodial death and Torture 28 (Kamal Publishers, New Delhi, 2018)
Dr. Asifa Parveen, Dr. Naaz Aktar Siddique, “Historical Perspective of custodial tortures in India”, 8 Journal of
emerging technologies and innovative research 864 (2021)
8
Supra note 6
9
R Sri. Kumar, “Trusting the police: Challenges of criminal Investigation and trials in India” Daksh India
(2018)
7

Page: 2635

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

The limitation period for the investigation of an accused to the police is 15days in the custody
and can be authorised in whole or in parts during the term of 40 to 60days from the date of
arrest10 due to this limitation police face significant limitation for the interrogation which leads
to the inability to repeatedly interrogate an accused for the verification of the statements being
made by the accused which leads to the coercive methods.11 Sometimes the suspect may remain
silent and gives false information related to the crimes which might lead to the misleading of
the case where use of coercive method act as essential aspect.
The interference from the individuals from the political background is also a main stumbling
block for the functioning of the criminal interrogation where the supreme court12 laid down 7
guidelines by the constitution of a state security commission where one among such a directive
is to “Ensure that the state government does not exercise unwarranted influence or pressure on
the police”.
The exigent problem of the police in the investigation is securing evidence due to lack of proper
investigation tools, hostility of witness, trust on police leads to the letdown and low conviction
of the offenders. The conviction rate for the IPC crimes in the country has shown a mixed trend
with the conviction rate of 42.4% to 46.9% from 2005 to 201613 which is a very less in number
which causes to hamper the justice to be delivered. The primary complexity faced is to capture
all the evidence but “India’s outdated forensic facilities hinder effective evidence collection
and analysis where it has the requirement for modern forensic resource and development
investments”14 There are a significantly low number of forensic labs in the country there are
many states wherein the FLs are less than 3 in number15.
Balancing Effective Interrogation and Legal Safeguards in Serious Crime Investigation:
Jeremy Bentham has frequently been regarded as the father of the ticking bomb argument in
defence of interrogational torture where the jurist states that torturing one person to save many
lives is justified. “Much of the literature on torture in recent years takes the position of
10

The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023, s.187
Niharika Srivastava & Dr. Prashant Kumar Varun, “Custodial Interrogation and the risk of torture: A critical
examination” 5 International Journal of advanced research in science, communication and technology 293
(2025)
12
Prakash Singh & ors. V. UOI & ors. (2006) 8 SCC 1
13
Ministry of Home Affairs, “Lok Sabha Unstarred Questions” 2(2017)
14
Md. Imran wahab, “Challenges encountered by police officers during criminal investigation” 6 International
Journal on Multidisciplinary Research 7 (2024)
15
Ministry of Home Affairs, “Forensic Labs” (2024)
11

Page: 2636

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

denouncing torture as a basic rule, while allowing for exceptions to the rule in extreme
circumstances”16. As per the idiom of ‘The lesser of two evils’ states that to choose the less
harmful or undesirable option when faced with two bad choices where the prominent scholar
like Richard Posner stated that “if torture is the only way to prevent a catastrophic event it
should be used to protect the greater good”.
The police officers believe that “punishing criminals hamper them from committing more
crimes which the prisoners also believes that the prison do not have a deterrent effect on the
criminals”17 The prison officials also believe in the practice of custodial violence while dealing
with the criminals especially while handling the cases involved in the heinous crimes such as
terrorism, rape, murders. Non-violent method of interrogation techniques is ineffective against
criminals who are trained to resist questioning.
5.

False Allegations of Custodial Violence: Legal and evidentiary challenges for

police:
Courts have noted instances where individuals fabricate claims of custodial torture to escape
lawful investigation which also hinders the investigation process and brings unnecessary
hurdles. In the Gauhati High Court before Hon’ble Justice C.R. Sarma where the case related
to the murder of the deceased, where the court held that the “custodial torture is false and
concocted”18. The law provides both the legal & Human rights and the power of investigation
to the police officers whereas both must be balanced.
Judicial vigilance functions by ensuring that police are not subjected to false accusation which
hinder the legitimate investigation but this is balanced against the need to prevent the abuse of
power provided. The Allahabad High Court dismissed a case where a “family alleged custodial
torture following a death, after the court noticed that the deceased had been arrested after an
exchange of fire was immediately produced before the magistrate where the criminal
proceedings initiated without prior sanction were erroneous and illegal”19.

16

Vittorio Bufacchi & Jean Maria Arrigo, “Torture, Terrorism and the state: a Refutation of the Ticking Bomb
Argument” Journal of applied philosophy 357 (2006)
17
Syed Asfar Alam, “Custodial Violence in India” 7 International Journal of Law Management & Humanities
1271 (2024)
18
Amitava Sinha v. The State of Assam and anr. 2015 SC (Gau) 353
19
Akhilesh vs State of U.P. Crl. No. 1554 of 1985

Page: 2637

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhitha,202320 provides the immunity to the judges,
magistrates and the public servants from the prosecution for offenses committed while acting
in the discharge of the official duty. The section to be applied must qualify the two-pronged
test wherein on satisfaction of which the concerned public officer must procure a sanction from
the government. The two conditions for the applicability are that the “accused must be a public
servant removable from his office by and the second condition is that the offence alleged
against the public servant should have been committed by him while acting in the discharge of
his official duty”21. The blanket of protection does not extend its protection to every act of the
“public servant exercised during the service instead it is restricted to only those acts which are
done in the discharge of official duties”22.
7. Evolving Legal Framework on Custodial Violence: Recent Developments & Challenges
The implementation of the new criminal laws had let to the evolution and developments in the
aspect of custodial violence and led to various changes even through the judicial functioning.
After the recent Supreme Court23 judgement being provided the administrative guidelines
which mandated that every police station be equipped with the night vision CCTV cameras
which must preserve the footage for a minimum of one year which is bedrock of the
individual’s dignity in the custodial spaces.
The Police act24 also provides into the area of custodial violence which outlines the penalties
for police misconduct, neglect of duty, violence against the persons in the custody. The
prevention of torture bill which also aims in the criminalization of the torture by the public
officials where the bill has been also passed in the Lok Sabha but had been lapsed in the Rajya
Sabha select committee. The Prisons Act, 1894 is related to the custodial violence where the
supreme court interpreted the provisions of the act and stated the provisions are outdated and
can facilitate abusive behaviour, physical torture which must be regulated.
8. Ensuring accountability while supporting effective policing: Recommendations and
suggestions
There is no specific dedicated statute that defines “custodial violence” in India while the term
20

The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 s.218
Directorate of Enforcement v. Bibhu Prasad Acharya 3181 (2025) 1 SCC 404
22
Shadakshari v. State of Karnataka AIR 2024 SC 590
23
Paramvir Singh v. Baljit singh AIR 2021 SC 64
24
The police Act, 1861 s.29
21

Page: 2638

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

is most essential in case of the custodial torture to be established, despite signing the UN
convention against torture (UNCAT) by India in 1997 has not ratified into the domestic laws.
There must be a separate cadre of police for investigation and separate for the maintenance of
public order whereas this system is being practiced in many developed countries such as the
United States of America25 which is named as Federal Bureau of Investigation which is a
separate wing which resolves various issues faced during the investigation.
There must be removal of political interference with the utmost exercise of separation of
powers and must be removal of political interference with the utmost exercise of separation of
powers which must be based on political neutrality and democratic control which must ensure
that there must be an absence of arbitrary control and political interference. The Japanese police
investigations follow strict hierarchical structure and follow deeply ingrained culture of social
conformity26.
Modernize the forensic capability where the investigation must shift from the technique of
“confession based” to the “evidence based” which requires for the upgradation of the forensic
labs and establish the greater number of forensic labs at most as possible as there are a
significantly low number of forensic labs in the country there are many states wherein the FLs
are less than 3 in number26. The individuals responsible for the commission of crimes are
utilizing the modern technology but the police who needs to curb that act use the outdated
practice.
There must be prior sanction and preliminary scrutiny before prosecution of officers being
exercised in good faith where the legal defence supports the officers under malicious
complaints. There is a huge burden over the individual officers where the government must
ensure to fill all the vacancies and reduce the number of cases per officer, due to the high case
load which leads to the risk of mismanagement.
9. Conclusion:
The custodial violence is one of the most serious challenges faced during the criminal
investigation where it must act in the balanced interest of protecting the fundamental rights of
25

Justice Thomas P Joseph, Justice of High Court of Kerala, Puthoor Gopalkrishnan Memorial Lecture, 2013
Japan Police legislation model, legislating for the security sector, Geneva centre for the democratic control
of armed forces, 2011
26
Supra note 15
26

Page: 2639

Indian Journal of Integrated Research in Law

Volume VI Issue II | ISSN: 2583-0538

the accused and must also protect the law and public order, but it must also be mentioned that
the police officers work under.
The custodial violence is one of the most serious challenges faced during the criminal
investigation where it must act in the balanced interest of protecting the fundamental rights of
the accused and must also protect the law and public order, but it must also be mentioned that
the police officers work under many constrains such as the workload, limited resources, public
pressure, political influence. There has been into various legal developments such as the
judicial monitoring, surveillance of the police station but there needs to be various changes and
laws to solve the existing issue.

Page: 2640

