https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

The Law of Evidence (PB), 27th ed

Ratanlal & Dhirajlal: Law of Evidence (PB), 27th ed / THE LAW OF EVIDENCE

Currency Date: 22 April 2020
© 2020 LexisNexis

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

Law College Notes & Stuffs
For more stuff like this, Join here.
Law College Notes & Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
THE INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT
(Act I of 1872)1
[Received the Governor General's assent on March 15, 1872]
Preamble.—WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate, deﬁne and amend the law of
Evidence; it is hereby enacted as follows:—
COMMENT
The object of the preamble of an Act is to indicate what, in general terms, was the
object of the Legislature in passing the Act. The preamble here shows that the Indian
Evidence Act is not merely a fragmentary enactment, but a consolidatory one.
The Act reduces the English law of evidence to the form of express propositions
arranged in their natural order with some modiﬁcations rendered necessary by the
peculiar circumstances of India. It is in the main, drawn on the lines of the English law
of evidence.
The word "evidence" is derived from the Latin word evidens or evidere, which means "to
show clearly; to make clear to the sight; to discover clearly; to make plainly certain; to
ascertain; to prove".
Before the passing of the Indian Evidence Act, the principles of English law of evidence
were followed by the courts in India in presidency-towns. In the mofussil,
Mohammedan law of evidence was followed for some time by British Courts, but
subsequently various regulations, dealing with principles of evidence, were passed for
the guidance of mofussil courts. Act II of 1855 partially codiﬁed the law of evidence.
But it did not affect the practice in vogue in mofussil courts. In 1868, Mr Maine
(afterwards Sir Henry Sumner) prepared a Draft Bill of the Law of Evidence, but it was
abandoned as it was not suited to the country. In 1871, Mr Stephen (afterwards Sir
James Fitz-James) prepared a new draft which was passed as Act I of 1872.
One great object of the Evidence Act is to prevent laxity in the admissibility of evidence,
and to introduce a more correct and uniform rule of practice than was previously in
vogue. The Act is not intended to do more than prescribe rules for the admissibility or
otherwise of evidence on the issues as to which the courts have to record ﬁndings.
The main principles which underlie the law of evidence are—
(1) evidence must be conﬁned to the matter in issue;
(2) hearsay evidence must not be admitted; and
(3) best evidence must be given in all cases.

The Indian Evidence Act is not exhaustive of the rules of evidence.2 For the
interpretation of the sections of the Act the court can look to the relevant English
common law,3 but the law of evidence which is a complete Code does not permit the
importation of any principle of English Common Law relating to evidence in criminal
cases to the contrary.4

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Once a statute is passed, which purports to contain the whole law of evidence
applicable in India, it is imperative. It is not open to any Judge to exercise a dispensing
power, and admit evidence not admissible by the statute, because it appears to him
that the irregular evidence would throw light upon the issue. The principles of exclusion
of evidence adopted by the Act must be applied strictly and cannot be relaxed at the
discretion of the court.5
The Evidence Act has no application to enquiries by Tribunals, even though they may be
judicial in character. And the law only requires that rules of natural justice should be
observed in the conduct of enquiries and if they do so the decisions of Tribunals are
not liable to be impeached.6
The law of evidence is an adjective law, and, as such, has retrospective effect.7
1 For Statement of Objects and Reason, see the Gazette of India, 1868, p 1574. 1
2 Re Rudolf Stallmann, (1911) 39 Cal 164; King-Emperor v Tun Hlaing, (1923) 1 Ran 759 FB; Re

Annavi Muthiriyan, (1915) 39 Mad 449.
3 State of Punjab v SS Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371.
4 HH Advani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1971 SC 44 : 73 Bom LR 112 : 1971 Cr LJ 5.
5 Sris Chandra Nandy v Rakhalananda, (1940) 43 Bom LR 794 : 68 IA 34 : (1941) 1 Cal 468;

Emperor v Parbhoo, (1941) All 843 (FB).
6 UOI v TR Varma, (1958) SCJ 142.
7 Data Xiva v State, AIR 1967 Goa 4.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
[s 1] Short title, extent and commencement.—
This Act may be called the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
It extends to the whole of India[s 1.1] 1[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir2] and
applies to all judicial proceedings[s 1.2] in or before any Court,[s 1.3] including Courts
martial, 3[other than Courts-martial convened under the Army Act], 4[the Naval
Discipline Act] 5[***] or the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934, 6[or the Air Force Act]
but not to aﬃdavits[s 1.4] presented to any Court or oﬃcer, nor to proceedings before
an arbitrator;[s 1.5]
And it shall come into force on the ﬁrst day of September, 1872.

COMMENT
The Indian Evidence Act applies to all judicial proceedings before (a) any court, or (b) a
court-martial (other than the courts-martial held under the speciﬁed Acts). It does not
apply to (a) aﬃdavits, and (b) proceedings before arbitrators.
"The law of evidence is the lex fori which governs the Courts. Whether a witness is
competent or not; whether a certain matter requires to be proved by writing or not;
whether certain evidence proves a certain fact or not; that is to be determined by the
law of the country where the question arises, where the remedy is sought to be
enforced, and where the Court sits to enforce it."7 The law of evidence is a part of the
law of procedure.

[s 1.1] "India".—
"India" means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.8

[s 1.2] "Judicial proceedings".—
An inquiry is judicial if the object of it is to determine a jural relation between one
person and another, or a group of persons; or between him and the community
generally; but, even a Judge, acting without such an object in view, is not acting
judicially.9 An enquiry in which evidence is legally taken is included in the term judicial
proceeding.10 An inquiry about matters of fact, where there is no discretion to be
exercised and no judgment to be formed but something is to be done in a certain event
as a duty, is not a judicial but an administrative inquiry. Similarly, proceedings before a
Magistrate not authorised to conduct any inquiry,11 or before a Collector under the
Land Acquisition Act12 or an inquest proceeding before the Coroner under the
Coroners Act, 1871,13 are not judicial proceedings.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 1.3] "Court".—
This word includes Judges and Magistrates and all persons, except arbitrators, legally
authorised to take evidence (Section 3). A family court is a court within the meaning of
this expression.14 The court said:15 "In order to constitute a court, a State's sovereign
judicial powers must be conferred on it by a statute for deciding a dispute in the judicial
manner so as to decide the rights of the parties in a deﬁnitive judgment. To decide a
dispute in a judicial manner and to declare the rights of the parties in a deﬁnitive
judgment is essential sine qua non of a court. The decision in a judicial manner
contemplates that parties are entitled as of right (i) to be heard in support of their
claim; (ii) and to adduce evidence in proof of it, and (iii) to decide the matter on
consideration of evidence in accordance with the law." The court of the Lokayukta is a
civil court and, therefore, the protection of section 132 is available to a witness before
it who has been compelled to answer a question.16

[s 1.4] "Aﬃdavits".—
Aﬃdavits are conﬁned to such facts as the deponent is able of his own knowledge to
prove. Matters to which aﬃdavits are conﬁned are regulated by O XIX, rules 1, 2 and 3,
etc. of the Code of Civil Procedure, and by section 297 etc. of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. An aﬃdavit ﬁled by a party suo motu and not under directions from
the court could not be termed as evidence. As action under the Penal Code could not
be taken against the deponent.17
A declaration in the shape of an aﬃdavit cannot be received as evidence of the facts
stated in it.18 An aﬃdavit cannot be used as evidence unless the law speciﬁcally
permits certain matters to be proved by aﬃdavit. The reason is that the deponent of an
aﬃdavit is not available to be cross-examined in respect of his declarations in the
aﬃdavit. 19
Where the party denied execution of documents alleged to have been stated in the
aﬃdavit, the deponent can be cross-examined only if the party seeking crossexamination shows reasons and prejudice if such relief is not granted. An application
for cross-examination which seemed to the court to have been ﬁled only to delay
proceedings was held to be something which ought to be rejected.20

[s 1.5] "Arbitrator".—
The provisions of the Evidence Act do not apply to proceedings before an arbitrator.
Arbitrators are bound to conform to the rules of natural justice. They are unfettered by
technical rules of evidence.21

1 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "except Part B States".

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
2 The Act now extends to the Union Territories of (1) Dadra and Nagar Haveli (vide Regulation 6

of 1963); (2) Goa, Daman and Diu (vide Regulation 11 of 1963); (3) Pondicherry (vide Regulation
7 of 1963) and (4) Lakshdweep (vide Regulation 8 of 1965).
3 Ins. by Act 18 of 1919, section 2 and Sch. I. See section 127 of the Army Act (44 and 45 Vict.,

c. 58).
4 Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, section 2 and Schedule
5 The words "that Act as modiﬁed by" omitted by the A.O. 1950.
6 Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, section 2 and Sch. I.
7 Bain v Whitehaven and Furness Junction Railway Co, (1850) 3 HLC 1, 19.
8 Act III of 1951, section 3.
9 Queen-Empress v Tulja, (1887) 12 Bom 36, 42. Section 3(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973.
10 Ibid
11 Queen-Empress v Bharma, (1886) 11 Bom 702 FB.
12 Ezra v The Secretary of State, (1902) 30 Cal 36 .
13 Tanajirao v HJ Chinoy, (1969) 71 Bom LR 732 .
14 Munna Lal v State of UP, AIR 1991 All 189 : 1991 Cr LJ 1838 .
15 Ibid, at p 192.
16 Rajendra Manubhai Patel v State of Gujarat, AIR 1992 Guj 10 : (1992) 1 GLR 223 .
17 Delhi Lotteries v Rajesh Aggarwal, AIR 1998 Del 332 : 1999 97 Comp Cas 758 Delhi : 69

(1997) DLT 543 : 1997 (43) DRJ 448 .
18 Re Iswar Chunder Guho, (1887) 14 Cal 653 .
19 Nirmala v Hari Singh, AIR 2001 HP.
20 Veer Singh Kothari v State Bank of India, AIR 2009 Ori 29 (DB).
21 Suppu v Govindacharyar, (1887) 11 Mad 85, 87; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v Jagan Nath

Ashok Kumar, AIR 1987 SC 2316 : (1987) 4 SCC 497 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
[s 2] Repeal of enactments.—
[Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), sec. 2 and Sch.]

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
[s 3] Interpretation clause.—
In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following senses,
unless a contrary intention appears from the context:—
"Court".—
"Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except arbitrators,
legally authorized to take evidence.

COMMENT
[s 3.1] Court.—
This deﬁnition is not meant to be exhaustive.22 The word "Court" means not only the
Judge in a trial by a Judge with a jury, but includes both Judge and jury.23 A Magistrate
holding a preliminary inquiry under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in a
police investigation does not exercise the functions of a Court;24 but a Magistrate
committing a case to the Court of Session is a "Court".25 An Industrial Tribunal set up
under section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act is a "Court".26 Authorities under the MP
Madhyastham Adhiniyam, 1983 have been held to be a court.27

22 MV Rajwade v Dr SM Hasan, (1954) Nag 1.
23 Empress v Ashootosh Chuckerbutty, (1878) 4 Cal 483 FB; Jury stands abolished.
24 Queen-Empress v Bharma, (1886) 11 Bom 702 FB.
25 Atchayya v Gangayya, (1891) 15 Mad 138 FB.
26 Raghu Singh v Burrakur Coal Co Ltd, AIR 1966 Cal 504 .
27 State of MP v Anshuman Shukla, AIR 2008 SC 2454 : (2008) 7 SCC 487 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Fact."—
"Fact" means and includes—
(1) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived by

the senses;
(2) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.

ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain

place, is a fact.
(b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.
(c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.
(d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good

faith or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is
or was at a speciﬁed time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact.
(e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.

COMMENT
[s 3.2] Fact.—
Clause (1) refers to external facts which can be perceived by the ﬁve senses. See
illustrations (a), (b) and (c). Clause (2) refers to internal facts which are the subject of
consciousness. Thus, facts are either physical or psychological. See illustrations (d)
and (e).
A misrepresentation as to the intention of a person is a misrepresentation of a "fact".28
See illustration (d). The state of a man's mind is as much a fact as the state of his
digestion.29
Facts and events which have neither occurred in the past, nor are occurring in presenti
but are likely to occur in future do not fall within the deﬁnition of a fact.30
"Matter of fact" is anything which is the subject of testimony. "Matter of law" is the
general law of the land, of which the courts will take judicial cognizance. Denning LJ
stated the distinction between "Law" and "Fact" in the following words:31 "Primary facts
are facts which are observed by witnesses and proved by oral testimony or facts
proved by the production of a thing itself, such as original documents. Their

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
determination is essentially a question of fact for the tribunal of fact, and the only
question of law that can arise on them is whether there was evidence to support the
ﬁnding. The conclusions from primary facts are, however, inference deducted by a
process of reasoning from them. If, and insofar as those conclusions can as well be
drawn by a layman (properly instructed on the law) as by a lawyer, they are conclusions
of fact for the tribunal of fact; and the only questions of law that can arise on them are
whether there was a proper direction in point of law and whether the conclusion is one
that could reasonably be drawn from the primary facts. If, and insofar as the correct
conclusions to be drawn from the primary facts requires, for its correctness,
determination by a trained lawyer, the conclusion is a conclusion of law."

28 Re Jaladu, (1911) 36 Mad 453; The Crown v Mussammat Soma, (1916) PR No. 17 of 1916

(Cr); Saleh v Mussammat Bakhtawar, (1916) PR No. 3 of 1917 (Civil).
29 Per Bowen, LJ, in Edgington v Fitzmaurice, (1885) 29 Ch D 459 , 483.
30 Dueful Laboratory v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4534 (Raj) : 1999 (1) WLC 498 .
31 British Launderers' Assn. v Hendon Rating Authority, (1949) 1 KB 462 at pp 471-472.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Relevant".—
One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in
any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Act relating to the relevancy of
facts.

COMMENT
[s 3.3] Relevant fact.—
The word "relevant" means that any two facts to which it is applied are so related to
each other that, according to the common course of events, one, either taken by itself
or in connection with other facts, proves or renders probable the past, present or future
existence or non-existence of the other. "Relevant", strictly speaking, means admissible
in evidence. Erroneous admission of any evidence does not make it relevant.
The word "relevant" is used in the Act with two distinct meanings: (a) as admissible, (b)
as connected.32
Of all rules of evidence, the most universal and the most obvious is this—that the
evidence adduced should be alike directed and conﬁned to the matters which are in
dispute, or which form the subject of investigation. The theoretical propriety of this rule
never can be a matter of doubt, whatever diﬃculties may arise in its application. The
Tribunal is created to determine matters which either are in dispute between
contending parties, or otherwise require proof; and anything which is neither directly
nor indirectly relevant to those matters ought at once to be put aside as beyond the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal, and as tending to distract its attention and to waste its time.
Evidence may be rejected as irrelevant for one or two reasons: First, that the
connection between the principal and evidentiary facts is too remote and conjectural.
Second, that it is excluded by the state of the pleadings, or what is analogous to the
pleadings; or is rendered superﬂuous by the admissions of the party against whom it is
offered.33
Questions which may be put in cross-examination may not always be determinative of
the suit of the accused person, but they may be relevant to the guilt in question.34

[s 3.4] Drawing of inference of "particeps criminis"
[s 3.4.1] Factors relevant.—
In a case of bride burning the mother-in-law and the husband were accused of
murdering the deceased-wife in the matrimonial home and the possibility of presence
of the accused-husband at the time of occurrence was not ruled out as no one else

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was present in the house. On the facts and circumstances, it was impossible for the
mother-in-law of the deceased alone to commit the crime. The conduct of the husband
was also unnatural and inculpatory. It was inferred that the accused-husband was
"particeps criminis"35 and was convicted.

[s 3.4.2] Proof of drunkenness.—
Blood or urine test is not a must for proving the charge of drunkenness. Drunkenness is
a question of fact and smelling of alcohol, unsteady gait, dilation of pupils, incoherent
speech would all be relevant considerations.36

32 Lala Lakmi Chand v Sayid Haidar Shah, (1899) 4 Cal WN 82 PC.
33 Best, 12th Edn, sections 215, 252, p 232.
34 Jesu Aeir Singh v State, AIR 2007 SC 3015 : (2007) 12 SCC 19 .
35 Sarojini v State of MP, 1993 Supp (4) SCC 632 : 1993 Cr LJ 1648 (SC).
36 George Kutty v State of Kerala, 1992 Cr LJ 1663 (Ker).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Facts in issue".—
The expression "facts in issue" means and includes—any fact from which, either by
itself or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent
of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding,
necessarily follows.
Explanation. —Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force
relating to Civil Procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted
or denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
ILLUSTRATIONS
A is accused of the murder of B.
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:—
That A caused B's death;
That A intended to cause B's death;
That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B;
That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature.

COMMENT
[s 3.5] Facts in issue—Deﬁned.—
"Facts in issue" are facts out of which some legal right, liability, or disability, involved in
the inquiry, necessarily arises, and upon which, accordingly, decision must be arrived at.
Matters which are aﬃrmed by one party to a suit and denied by the other may be
denominated facts in issue; what facts are in issue in particular cases, is a question to
be determined by the substantive law or in some cases by that branch of the law of
procedure which regulates the law of pleadings, civil or criminal.37

[s 3.5.1] Criminal cases.—
As regards criminal cases, the charge constitutes and includes "facts in issue". See
Chapter XVII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.

[s 3.5.2] Civil cases.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
As regards civil cases, "facts in issue" are determined by the process of framing issues.
See O XIV, rules 1-7, Code of Civil Procedure.

37 STEPHEN'S INTRODUCTION TO THE EVIDENCE ACT, pp 12, 13.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Document."—
"Document" means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means
of letters, ﬁgures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used,
or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.
ILLUSTRATIONS
A writing is a document;
Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents;
A map or plan is a document;
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document;
A caricature is a document.

COMMENT
[s 3.6] Document.—
This deﬁnition is similar to the deﬁnition in section 29 of the Indian Penal Code.
Under the term "document" are properly included all material substances on which the
thoughts of men are represented by writing, or any other species of conventional mark
or symbol. Thus the wooden score on which bakers, milk-men, etc., indicate by notches,
the number of loaves of bread or quarts of milk supplied to their customers are
documents as much as the most elaborate deeds.38
Compact disc is a document.39 Articles like Memory Card, Hard Disc, CD, Pen-drive,
etc. containing relevant data in electronic form are also documents.40

[s 3.6.1] Photograph, evidentiary value of.—
If the court is satisﬁed that there is no trick photography and the photograph is above
suspicion, the photograph can be received in evidence. But the evidence of
photographs to prove writing or handwriting can only be received if the original cannot
be obtained and the photographic reproduction is faithful and not faked or false.41

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
38 Best, 12th Edn, sections 215, 216, pp 199, 200.
39 Shamsher Singh Verma v State of Haryana, 2016 Cr LJ 364 , para 14 (SC) : 2016(1) Ren CR

(Crim)167.
40 K Ramajayam v Inspector of Police, Chennai, 2016 Cr LJ 1542 , para 8 (Mad-DB) : 2016 (2 )

Mad LJ (Crl) 715.
41 L Choraria v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 938 : (1967) 70 Bom LR 575 : 1968 Cr LJ

1134 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Evidence."—
"Evidence" means and includes—
(1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by

witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry; such statements are
called oral evidence;
(2) 42 [all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of

the Court;]
such documents are called documentary evidence.

COMMENT
[s 3.7] Evidence.—
The word "evidence", considered in relation to law, includes all the legal means,
exclusive of mere argument, which tend to prove or disprove any matter of fact, the
truth of which is submitted to judicial investigation. This term and the word proof are
often used as synonyms, but the latter is applied by accurate logicians rather to the
effect of evidence than to evidence itself. "Evidence" has been deﬁned to be any matter
of fact, the effect, tendency, or design of which is to produce in the mind a persuasion,
aﬃrmative or disaﬃrmative, of the existence of some other matter of fact. "'Evidence"
means the testimony, whether oral, documentary or real, which may be legally received
in order to prove or disprove some fact in dispute."43 It also includes the content of that
testimony.
The deﬁnition of evidence provided under section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872 is an
exhaustive deﬁnition. Wherever the words "means and includes" are used, it is an
indication of the fact that the deﬁnition "is a hard-and-fast deﬁnition", and no other
meaning can be assigned to the expression other than that is laid down in the
deﬁnition. It indicates an exhaustive explanation of the meaning which, for the
purposes of the Act, must invariably be attached to these words or expression.44
The juristic conception of the term "evidence" in the case of the oral testimony of
witnesses is that the party against whom it is used has had the right and opportunity of
cross-examining the witnesses. So long as the accused is not allowed the right and
opportunity of cross-examining the witnesses, any statements made by them can only
be described as statements but cannot be digniﬁed with the name of evidence.45
Evidence is "the means from which an inference may logically be drawn as to the
existence of a fact. It consists of proof by testimony of witnesses, on oath, or by writing
or records."46

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The deﬁnition of "evidence" covers (a) the evidence of witnesses,47 and (b)
documentary evidence. "… evidence can be both oral and documentary and electronic
records can be produced as evidence. This means that evidence, even in criminal
matters, can also be by way of electronic records. This would include videoconferencing".48 The word "evidence" does not cover everything that a court has before
it. There are certain other media of proof; e.g., the statements of the parties, the result
of local investigation, facts of which the court takes judicial notice, and any real or
personal property, the inspection of which may be material in determining the question
at issue, such as weapons, tools or stolen property.49 A newspaper report as to prices
of property in the neighbourhood has been held to be no evidence of the value of
property for the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.50 The deﬁnition of
"evidence" is considered to be incomplete as it does not include the whole material on
which the decision of the Judge may rest.51 Electronic record can also be received as
evidence.52
A person who has not been charge-sheeted, has to be summoned on the basis of
evidence available on record. The word "evidence" includes the statement of witness
who has not been tested on cross-examination. However, the court should exercise
such power in rarest of rare cases.53
Hence, the word "evidence" in its relation to law includes all the legal means exclusive
of mere arguments which tend to prove or disprove any fact the truth of which is
submitted to judicial investigation. This term and the word "proof" are often used as
synonymous, but the latter is applied by accurate logicians rather to the effect of
evidence, than to evidence itself.54

[s 3.7.1] Speeches of Ministers and Members.—
Speeches delivered by members and Ministers in the Legislative Assembly are not
admissible in a court of law when the court is considering the provisions of the
enactment in question.55

[s 3.7.2] Investigation.—
The result of an investigation is not a legal evidence.56 A ﬁnding of guilt cannot be
based on the result of police investigation. The evidence produced at the trial as a
result of an investigation constitutes evidence for the purposes of formulating judicial
conclusions.57
While the services of a sniffer dog may be taken for the purpose of investigation, its
faculties cannot be taken as evidence for the purpose of establishing the guilt of an
accused.58

[s 3.7.3] Statements made in court in an attempt for conciliation.—
The statements made in the court in the attempt for conciliation are not evidence
before the court and will not be used as such.59

[s 3.8] Circumstantial evidence.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
It is one of the established principles of law that a witness may lie but not the
circumstances. Direct ocular evidence is not necessary for proving the person behind
the crime. The guilt of a person can be proved by circumstantial evidence also.60
However, the court must adopt a cautious approach while basing its conviction purely
on circumstantial evidence.61 As evidence there is no difference between direct and
circumstantial evidence. The only difference is in that as proof, the former directly
establishes the commission of the offence whereas the latter does so by placing
circumstances which lead to irresistible inference of guilt.62 Circumstantial evidence is
an indirect mode of proof by drawing inference from facts closely connected to the fact
in issue.63 The standard of proof required to convict a person on circumstantial
evidence is well-established by a series of decisions of the Supreme Court. According
to that standard the circumstances relied upon in support of the conviction must be
fully established64 and the chain of evidence furnished by those circumstances must
be so far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent
with the innocence of the accused65 and further it must be such as to show that within
all human probability the act must have been done by the accused.66 Some of these
principles were applied by the Supreme Court in Hanumant Govind Narjundkar v State of
MP.67 The court said: In dealing with circumstantial evidence the rules specially
applicable to such evidence must be borne in mind. In such cases there is always the
danger that conjecture or suspicion may take the place of legal proof and, therefore, it
is right to recall the warning addressed by BARON ALDERSON to the jury in Reg v
Hodge,68 wherein his Lordship said: "The mind was apt to take a pleasure in adapting
circumstances to one another and even in straining them a little, if need be to force
them to form parts of one connected whole; and more ingenious the mind of the
individual, the more likely was it, considering such matters, to overreach and mislead
itself, to supply some little link that is waiting to take for granted some fact consistent
with its previous theories and necessary to render them complete."69
The crime scene has to be scientiﬁcally dealt with, without any error. In criminal cases,
especially based on circumstantial evidence, forensic science plays a pivotal role,
which may assist in establishing the element of crime, identifying the suspect,
ascertaining the guilt or innocence of the accused. One of the major activities of the
investigating oﬃcer at the crime scene is to make thorough search for potential
evidence that have probative value in the crime. The investigating oﬃcer may be guided
against potential contamination of physical evidence, which can grow at the crime
scene during collection, packing and forwarding. Proper precaution has to be taken to
preserve evidence and also against any attempt to tamper with the material or causing
any contamination or damage.70
It is not necessary that every one of the proved facts must in itself be decisive of the
complicity of the accused or point conclusively to his guilt. Therefore, when deciding
the question of suﬃciency, what the court has to consider is the total cumulative effect
of all the proved facts each one of which re-enforces the conclusion of guilt.71 In such
cases, the court must guard against the danger of allowing conjecture or suspicion to
take the place of legal proof.72 There is this basic rule of criminal jurisprudence that if
two views are possible on the evidence adduced in a case of circumstantial evidence,
one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the court should
adopt the view favourable to the accused.73
In reference to cases where there is no direct evidence and the decision has to rest on
circumstantial evidence, the Supreme Court in a line of decisions has consistently held
that such evidence must satisfy the following tests:
(1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn must

be cogently and ﬁrmly established;

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(2) those circumstances should be of a deﬁnite tendency unerringly pointing

towards the guilt of the accused;
(3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that

there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the
crime was committed by the accused and none else;74 and
(4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must be complete and

incapable of explanation on any other hypothesis than that of the guilt of the
accused and such evidence should not only be consistent with the guilt of the
accused but should be inconsistent with his innocence.75
Where a case is to be proved solely on circumstantial evidence, the court said that the
presumption of innocence of the accused must have a dominant role. The facts
evolving out of the proven circumstances must not admit any inference except that of
guilt of the accused.76
Abscondence of the accused is not a circumstance which can be taken as a conclusive
proof of guilt. The fact that the panchayat was held after the incident and it had
pardoned the accused was held by the Supreme Court to be not a circumstance
charging him with the crime.77

[s 3.8.1] Last seen together.—
Last seen together by itself is not a conclusive proof but along with other
circumstances surrounding the incident, may lead to the inference of guilt of the
accused.78 The doctrine of "last seen together" shifts the burden of proof on the
accused, requiring him to explain how the incident had occurred. Failure on the part of
the accused to furnish any explanation in this regard, would give rise to a very strong
presumption against him.79

[s 3.8.2] False defence pleas.—
False pleas raised by the accused can be taken as a circumstance against the accused.
False and inconsistent defences taken by the accused charged of murder were held to
be additional circumstances against him strengthening the chain of circumstances
already ﬁrmly established.80 Inﬁrmity or lacuna in the prosecution case cannot be
cured by false defence pleas.81

[s 3.9] Aﬃdavit.—
An aﬃdavit is not evidence within the meaning of this section. It cannot be used as
evidence unless the court has ordered under the Code of Civil Procedure any particular
facts to be proved by such aﬃdavit.82 Where the contents of an aﬃdavit were not
assailed at the time when they were tendered in evidence, they were deemed to have
been admitted by the accused.83
An aﬃdavit is not "evidence" within the meaning of section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872.
Aﬃdavits are, therefore, not included within the purview of the deﬁnition of "evidence"
as has been given in section 3 of the Evidence Act, and the same can be used as
"evidence" only if, for suﬃcient reasons, the court passes an order under Order 19 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Thus, the ﬁling of an aﬃdavit of one's own

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
statement, in one's own favour, cannot be regarded as suﬃcient evidence for any court
or tribunal, on the basis of which it can come to a conclusion as regards a particular
fact situation.
However, in a case where the deponent is available for cross-examination, and
opportunity is given to the other side to cross-examine him, the same can be relied
upon. Such view, stands fully aﬃrmed particularly, in view of the amended provisions of
O XVIII, rules 4 and 5 CPC.84

[s 3.10] Evidentiary value of FIR.—
In Gulshan Kumar v State, it was held that though an FIR is not a substantive piece of
evidence, it can be used to corroborate or contradict the statement of maker thereof
and also to judge trustworthiness of the prosecution story.85 For the purpose of
summoning a person whose name is mentioned in the FIR but has not been chargesheeted, the FIR can be taken into consideration because it is evidence at that stage.86
Where the FIR was registered on the basis of a written complaint submitted to the
police and there was no mention of the presence of some persons as eye-witnesses in
it, it was held that the presence of those eye-witnesses was rightly disbelieved.87

[s 3.11] Inquest Report.—
Omission to mention in the inquest report the crime number, names of accused, penal
provisions applicable to the offence has been held to be not fatal to the prosecution
case. Such omissions do not lead to the inference that the FIR was ante-timed. The
evidence of eye-witness could not be discarded if their names did not ﬁgure in the
inquest report. Inquest report being not a substantive evidence, it may be used to
contradict the witnesses of inquest.88

[s 3.11.1] Report of scientiﬁc oﬃcer.—
The report of a junior scientiﬁc oﬃcer on the point whether the material seized was
charas was held to be of no evidentiary value unless the signatory was examined.89

[s 3.11.2] Confessions of co-accused whether evidence.—
The confession of an accused person against a co-accused is not evidence in the
ordinary sense of the term. It does not come within the meaning of evidence contained
in this section inasmuch as it is not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of
the accused, and cannot be tested by cross-examination. It is a much weaker type of
evidence than the evidence of an approver which is not subject to any of these
inﬁrmities. Such a confession can only be used to lend assurance to other evidence
against a co-accused. The proper way to approach a case of this kind is, ﬁrst, to
marshal the evidence against the accused excluding the confession altogether from
consideration and see whether if it is believed, a conviction could safely be based on it.
If it is capable of belief independently of the confession, then it is not necessary to call
the confession in aid. But cases may arise where the Judge is not prepared to act on
the other evidence as it stands even though, if believed, it would be suﬃcient to sustain
a conviction. In such an event the Judge may call in aid the confession and use it to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
lend assurance to the other evidence and thus fortify himself in believing what without
the aid of the confession he would not be prepared to accept.90

[s 3.11.3] Written statement of accused.—
A statement of an accused in the written statement ﬁled by him is not strictly evidence,
even though the court may consider it.91

[s 3.11.3.1] Statement of accused under section 313, CrPC—
The statement of the accused recorded under section 313, CrPC, cannot be treated as
evidence. Further the entire prosecution evidence need not be put to the accused.92
In a case under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, there was
recovery of huge quantity of "charas" that was concealed in a car in which two persons
were travelling. In the trial, accused took the plea that he had taken lift in the car and,
therefore, he could not be said to be in conscious possession of the contraband. Once
possession of the contraband is established, the person who claims that it was not in
conscious possession must establish it, because how he came into possession is
within his special knowledge. However, in the above case, the accused's statement
under section 313 CrPC was that he had taken a lift in the car. It was held by the
Supreme Court that statement under section 313 of the CrPC is taken into
consideration to appreciate the truthfulness or otherwise of the prosecution case, but it
is not evidence.93

[s 3.11.4] Evidence taken in another case.—
The evidence given in one case upon the issues raised in that case cannot be taken
into consideration in another case in which other issues arise but parties may agree
that evidence taken in one suit shall be treated as evidence in another.94

[s 3.11.5] Unregistered deed.—
Unregistered lease deed, though not allowed to be produced in evidence, it could be
used by the carrier to explain the character of the possession.95

[s 3.11.6] Evidence of Judge.—
If, in a case, a Judge wishes to give evidence and intends the court to act on his
statement of facts, he should make that statement in the same manner as any other
witness and not merely introduce it in his judgment. A Judge cannot, without giving
evidence as a witness, import into a case his own knowledge of particular facts.96

[s 3.12] Police witness.—Credibility of.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
When independent evidence is not available for any reason, the court will have to
examine the evidence of police witnesses carefully and scrutinise the same and, if
found reliable, conviction can be based on such evidence. In the instant case, other
witnesses had become hostile.97 The mere fact that police personnel belong to the
police department cannot be a ground to reject their testimony if it otherwise inspires
conﬁdence and no hostility of the police with the accused is shown.98 A witness is
normally considered to be independent unless he springs from sources which are likely
to be tainted and this usually means that the said witness has caused to bear such
enmity against the accused so as to implicate him falsely. Therefore, there can be no
prohibition to the effect that a policeman cannot be a witness or that his deposition
cannot be relied upon if it inspires conﬁdence.99 Evidence of police witnesses cannot
be discarded merely on the ground that they belong to police force and are interested in
the investigation and desire to see the success of the case. Prudence however requires
that the evidence of police oﬃcials who are interested in the outcome of the case,
needs to be carefully scrutinized and independently appreciated. Mere fact that they
are police oﬃcials does not by itself give rise to any doubt about their
creditworthiness.100 Where weapons of assault were recovered pursuant to the
statement of the accused and there was no animosity between the accused and the
police nor any suggestion was made that the police foisted the recoveries, it was held
that it would be safe to believe uncorroborated statement of the Police Inspector, the
solitary witness, in respect of recoveries.101 Where there was discrepancy in the
depositions of the two police oﬃcers as to the number of cartridges recovered and
independent witnesses though available were not examined, such discrepancy would
not inspire conﬁdence about reliability of the prosecution case.102 The accused ﬁred at
the victim and the police party escorting him. Some of the policemen also received
injuries. They were thus the eye-witnesses to the incident. The court said that they
could not be regarded as oﬃcial witnesses who were interested in the success of the
investigation or prosecution. Their testimony was worthy of credence and, therefore,
could be acted upon.103 The court noted the observations of the Supreme Court in
Pradeep Narayan Madgaonhar v State of Maharashtra,104 which were to the effect that
prudence dictates that their (police personnel) evidence needs to be subjected to strict
scrutiny and as far as possible corroboration of their evidence in material particulars
should be sought. Their desire to see the success of the case requires greater care in
appreciating their testimony. Where a police witness does not have any grudge or
rancour against the accused, the presumption that a person acts honestly would
equally apply to such a witness.105 There is no principle of law that the testimony of
police personnel cannot be relied upon without independent corroboration. The
presumption that every person acts honestly applies in favour of police personnel also.
It would not be a proper judicial approach to distrust them and hold them in suspicion
without any good grounds.106

[s 3.12.1] Associates of Accused as Circumstance.—
The close nature of association of the accused with certain persons is a very important
piece of evidence where the case is based upon circumstantial evidence. Evidence of
phone calls made by various accused to one another was held to be very relevant and
admissible piece of evidence.107

[s 3.12.2] Naturality of Conduct.—
In a case of multiple murders, the witness was one amongst those who were abducted,
taken to the riverside, where they were killed and thrown into the river one by one. The
witness, though seriously injured, survived and swam to side. This was a sheer miracle.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The accused were members of an upper caste. The witness remained in hiding to save
his life. That was a normal human instinct. The delay in giving his statement was
therefore quite natural for him. The court said that the testimony of such a witness
could not be disbelieved. His evidence was that of an eye-witness. He ﬁled the FIR. This
evidence was supported by that of the head constable who told that he met the
accused some hours before the incident and was told that they were going to the
village of the deceased. This was held to be suﬃcient for conviction.108

[s 3.13] Oﬃcial witness.—
In the trial of an offence under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, the evidence
was that of the Food Inspector. It was held that such evidence could not be rejected on
the ground that the oﬃcial witness was interested in the success of his case. It would
have to be proved for rejecting his evidence that he acted in a mala ﬁde manner against
the party who was facing the charge.109

[s 3.13.1] Institutional witness.—
It was held to be not necessary that persons appearing as witnesses on behalf of a
bank in a suit ﬁled by it, should carry a power of attorney or written authorisation.110

[s 3.14] Being witness against oneself.—
Where some strands of hair of the assailant were found in the hands of the deceased
and an objection was raised to the taking of sample of hair of the accused for
comparison, it was held that by mere taking of sample of hair the accused did not
become a witness and he was not furnishing evidence against himself.111

[s 3.15] Independent witness.—
In a case of suicide of a newly-wed wife, evidence about physical and mental torture of
the deceased was given by the mother, elder brother and other close relations, it was
held that such depositions need not be discarded simply on the score of absence of
corroboration by independent witness.112 Where two persons boarded the last trip of
the bus and therefore became acquainted with the conductor and the next morning one
of them came back and told the conductor that his companion had been murdered, the
bus conductor was held to be an independent witness, neither connected with the
accused, nor the deceased. The court said that his evidence could not be doubted.113
In a case involving raid and search under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, the
fact that the independent witness had an acquaintance with the police or that he had
helped police action, would not by itself discredit his evidence.114
Where the evidence of an independent witness fully corroborated the evidence of eyewitnesses, its veracity could not be doubted only on the ground that the brother of the
accused had lost an election against the independent witnesses.115 The fact that an
independent witness turned hostile was held to be not a ground in itself for
acquittal.116
Where a case involved police raid and search, the fact that the independent witness
was acquainted with the police or that he had helped police action was held as not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
suﬃcient to discredit his evidence.117 Where the incident occurred inside the house in
the late hours of the night, the court said that it could not be expected of the
prosecution that they would be able to produce any independent witnesses.118
Prosecution version cannot be discarded merely on ground of lack of independent
witness.119

[s 3.16] Chance witness.—
Where the eye-witness was inimical towards the accused and he was also a chancewitness, it was necessary to have had a closer scrutiny of his evidence.120
Where all the three eye-witnesses, who were villagers belonging to the same village,
gave reasons as to why they were in the town of occurrence, it was held that they were
not chance-witnesses as it is a matter of common knowledge that villagers belonging
to the same village move together when they visit town.121
The evidence of a chance witness requires a very cautious and close scrutiny. He must
adequately explain his presence at the place of occurrence.122 Deposition of a chance
witness whose presence at the place of incident remains doubtful should be
discarded.123 The conduct of the chance witness subsequent to the incident may also
be taken into consideration particularly as to whether he informed anyone else in the
village about the incident.124
Where the presence of the witnesses was natural at the place where they professed to
be, the court said that they could not be dubbed as chance witnesses.125 Where the
incident happened during broad day light and the witnesses being residents of the
locality, their presence at the place of occurrence could not be considered unnatural.
They had no cause to give false evidence. Their testimony could not be disregarded by
treating them as chance witnesses.126
The expression "chance witnesses" is borrowed from countries where every man's
home is considered his castle and every man must have an explanation for his
presence elsewhere or in another man's castle. It is a most unsuitable expression in a
country, where people are less formal and more casual. To discard the evidence of
street hawkers and street vendors on the ground that they are "chance witnesses" even
where murder is committed in a street, is to abandon good sense and take a shallow
view of the evidence.127

[s 3.16.1] Witness bringing in unrelated things.—
In a prosecution for rape and murder, it was held that the case of the prosecution could
not be discarded on the mere ground that the prosecution witnesses brought into
evidence other circumstances which were not related with the cause of death in
question.128

[s 3.17] Natural witnesses.—
The Supreme Court observed on the facts of a case:129 "The consistency in the
evidence of the eye-witnesses is also understandable in the facts of this case. The
witnesses were known to each other and they also knew the appellants and their
victims. The occurrence took place in the morning and there was suﬃcient light to
enable the witnesses to identify the appellants and the deceased. The assault on the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
victims was not simultaneous. They were shot dead one after the other. The witnesses
were only 10 to 15 steps behind the assailants, and had therefore the opportunity to
notice the manner in which the occurrence took place and the role played by the
appellants. There was therefore no scope for any confusion in the mind of the
witnesses. Their statements were recorded immediately after the arrival of the
investigating oﬃcer. In these circumstances the case of the prosecution cannot be
disbelieved merely because the testimony of the eye-witnesses is consistent by raising
a suspicion that they may be got up or tutored witnesses."
"In order to appreciate evidence, the court is required to bear in mind the set up and
environment in which the crime is committed and the level of understanding of the
witnesses. There is often over jealousness on the part of some of near relations to
ensure that everyone even remotely connected with the crime be also convicted.
Everyone has the different way of narration of same facts. These are only illustrative
instances. Bearing in mind these broad principles, the evidence is required to be
appreciated to ﬁnd out what part out of the evidence represents the true and correct
state of affairs. It is for the courts to separate the grain from the chaff."130

[s 3.18] Injured eye-witness.—
The evidence of an injured eye-witness cannot be discarded in toto on the ground of
inimical disposition towards the accused particularly where his evidence, when tested
in the light of broad probabilities, it can be concluded that he was a natural eye-witness,
and had no reason to concoct a case against the accused.131
The court should not discriminate injured witnesses as against those who were not
injured as to their capacity for identifying the accused persons while in action.132 The
injuries of a witness may best assure of his presence at the spot but his truthfulness
has to be demonstrated. He should not have any reason to falsely implicate the
accused person.133 His testimony cannot be doubted merely because he is related to
the informant.134 But, there is no immutable rule that the evidence of an injured eyewitness should be mechanically accepted.135 Where the eye-witness is also an injured
person, due credence to his version needs to be accorded.136 The testimony of an
injured witness holds more credence.137 Some of the eye-witnesses were injured in the
incident. Their presence thus became established beyond all doubt. The court said that
their testimony could not be rejected just only because they were inimical to the
accused. Enmity is a double-edged weapon. It could as much be a motivation for falsity
as compulsive to see that the real culprits should not escape.138
Where the testimony of the injured witnesses was natural, cogent and trustworthy, nonexamination of the other two injured witnesses, did not in any way affect the
prosecution case.139

[s 3.18.1] Injured Accused.—
Failure on the part of the prosecution to explain injuries on the person of the accused is
not always fatal.140

[s 3.19] Interested, relative or partisan witnesses.—
A close relative who is a natural witness cannot be regarded as an interested witness
having a direct interest in having the accused somehow or the other convicted.141

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Relationship can never be a factor to affect the credibility of the witness as it is always
not possible to get an independent witness.142 The evidence of witnesses cannot be
discarded for the mere fact that he was an interested witness. The relationship or the
partisan nature of the evidence only puts the court on its guard to scrutinise the
evidence more carefully.143 The relative of the deceased cannot be regarded as an
untruthful witness. The Supreme Court said that some reason has to be shown if the
plea of partiality is raised.144
Where the sole eye-witness was a close relative of the deceased and his conduct was
unnatural and his evidence contradictory to medical evidence, it was held that his
testimony could not be relied upon without some independent corroboration.145

[s 3.19.1] Enmity.—
Where the witness stood in a state of hostile relations with the accused, the Supreme
Court said that the testimony of such a witness needs to be subjected to careful
scrutiny.146

[s 3.20] Delay in reporting.—
Where the eye-witness was spared by the accused only on an assurance that he would
not reveal about the incident to anybody but the witness mustered strength to
approach the investigating oﬃcer only after the CBI took up the investigation and
revealed the facts pertaining to the incident, his evidence cannot be eschewed from
consideration only on the ground that there was delay in reporting his version to the
investigating oﬃcer.147

[s 3.21] Child witness.—
Testimony of child witness is not to be rejected outright, but it is to be scrutinised with
greatest caution.148
Where the children of the deceased ﬁgured as eye-witnesses and their evidence was
recorded after putting to them preliminary questions to satisfy whether they could
answer intelligently and fearlessly and they gave all details of occurrence and
withstood the test of cross-examination, it was held that their evidence was
acceptable.149 Failure to hold preliminary examination to ascertain the level of
understanding of a minor child does not necessarily introduce a fatal inﬁrmity in his
evidence.150
A child witness who testiﬁed to the ghastly honour killing of several persons, an event
which he witnessed several years ago in his tender years, could not be disbelieved on
the ground that he could not recapitulate details of such old incident. One of the
witnesses was the youngest member of the family which was subjected to the honour
killings. He was sleeping in the same room in which other members were killed. The
court said that his evidence was not to be discarded because his elder brother and
sister were not examined by the prosecution. Corroboration of his testimony was
considered to be not necessary because he narrated things in a simple manner.151
In the case of child witnesses of rape and murder, the trial court had the opportunity of
watching demeanour and conduct of the witnesses and found them to be truthful. They
also stood the test of cross examination. Their evidence was also supported by

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
circumstances like recovery of articles with blood stains of the victim's blood at the
instance of the accused. The Supreme Court restored the conviction recorded by the
trial court and said that it was not proper for the High Court to ignore such evidence
and disbelieve the evidence of child witnesses.152

[s 3.22] Defence witnesses.—
The issue of credit and trustworthiness of defence witnesses is to be tested by the
standards as are applicable to prosecution witnesses. A lapse on the part of a defence
witness cannot be treated differently from any such lapse on the part of a prosecution
witness.153

[s 3.22.1] Character of witness not material.—
The fact that a witness is, in his personal life, a person of easy virtue, does not
constitute a ground to throw overboard his testimony, if otherwise it is found to be
believable.154

[s 3.23] Rustic witnesses.—
The evidence of rustic witnesses must be read bearing their simple background in
mind. Their evidence cannot be rejected on minor inconsistencies.155

[s 3.23.1] Allegation of second marriage.—
Divorce was sought on the ground of cruelty. The wife levelled the charge of second
marriage against the husband placing reliance on the voter's list. The court said that an
electoral roll could not be cogent evidence to prove the charge of second marriage.
Electoral roll is hearsay evidence. It cannot be accepted as conclusive evidence.156

[s 3.24] Panch witness or stock witness.—
Because of appearing as police witnesses in number of cases and they being pliable
and untrustworthy, their evidence cannot be relied upon.157

[s 3.25] Contradictions and discrepancies in depositions of witnesses.—
Criminal courts should not expect set reactions from eye-witnesses on seeing an
incident like a murder.158 Unless the discrepancies and contradictions are so material
and substantial and they are also in respect of the vitally relevant aspects of the facts
deposed, the witnesses cannot be straightway condemned and their testimony
discarded in its entirety.159
The post event conduct of a witness could not be predicted on speciﬁed lines. It varied
from person to person as different person reacted differently under different
situations.160 Where the witnesses were villagers and they differed as to the distance
from which the shots were ﬁred and they saw the incident, the same was considered to
be immaterial. There was nothing against their evidence otherwise.161

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.25.1] Material and normal discrepancies.—
In the exercise of appreciation of evidence, the court has to distinguish between
normal and material discrepancies. While normal discrepancies do not corrode the
credibility of a party's case, material discrepancies would do so. The maxim falsus in
uno falsus in omnibus is not a rule of law. It is only a rule of caution. The maxim has no
application in India.162 Where the evidence of a witness was not accepted in reference
to some of the accused persons, the court did not accept the argument that his
testimony should be rejected against all accused persons. A witness cannot be taken
to be false in all respects when he has been shown to be false in one respect.163 It is
therefore not required that the entire testimony of a witness be disregarded because
one portion of such testimony is found to be false. Thus, the court can separate the
truth from the false statements in the witnesses' testimony.164
Even where a major portion of the evidence is found to be deﬁcient, if the residue is
suﬃcient to prove the guilt of the accused, his conviction can be sustained
notwithstanding the acquittal of a number of his co-accused.165

[s 3.25.2] Improvements made by witness in his testimony.—
Improvements made by the witness in his testimony related to irrelevant details. The
court said that such improvements could not be labelled as omissions or
contradictions.166

[s 3.26] Accomplice witness.—
Where the testimony of an approver was not accepted in respect of one of the coaccused for want of independent corroboration, it was held that this did not have the
effect of introducing any inﬁrmity in her evidence or creating any doubt regarding her
reliability as a witness.167 Where the evidence of an approver implicated several
accused persons, there should have been corroboration not only generally but also qua
each accused. But corroboration from independent source of each and every
circumstance was not necessary.168

[s 3.26.1] Failure of witness to appear.—
The police in its charge sheet enlisted the name of a person amongst its witnesses. He
was summoned for examination. But he could not appear because he was shifted to
Hong Kong and not staying in India. The court held that it could not be said that the
prosecution did not deliberately examine him.169

[s 3.27] Witness failing at identiﬁcation.—
Where the incident took place during the broad day light and an identiﬁcation parade
was held within a gap of 20 days where the witness could not identify the accused, it
was held that no sanctity could be attached to the fact that the witness named the
accused in his statement in the trial court.170 The court said that such failure
considerably distracts from the value to be attached to their evidence.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The incident happened in court premises. The eye-witness informant claimed that he
knew the murderer by name. But even so the name was not given in the FIR lodged
immediately after the incident. He failed to identify at TI parade also. A court constable
identiﬁed him but he had seen the culprit when he was produced in the court. The third
witness identiﬁed by the scar on the forehead and no such person was put up in the
line. The testimony of the eye-witnesses was held to be not reliable.171

[s 3.28] Non-examination of immaterial witness.—
The non-examination of the investigating oﬃcer was held to be of no consequence
where the defence had failed to shake the credibility of the eye-witnesses or to point
out any material contradiction in the prosecution case.172

[s 3.28.1] Belated examination.—
Where there was suﬃcient cause to explain delay in examination of witnesses in
whose presence the dying declaration was recorded, their evidence was not rejected on
the ground of delay.173
Delay in the examination of a witness is not a ground to throw out his testimony.174
Where witnesses were examined after a gap of ﬁve years from the date of the incident
and were subjected to lengthy cross-examination, number of persons were involved
including injured witnesses, assailants and the deceased, the court said that some
discrepancy as to injuries and weapons of offence in the statement of witnesses was
likely. They could not be disbelieved unless the discrepancies were very serious, vital
and signiﬁcant.175

[s 3.29] Panchnama.—
Persons summoned as witnesses during a police investigation are called panchas. A
panchnama is merely a record of what a panch sees. The only use to which it can
properly be put is that when the panch goes into the witness box and swears to what he
saw, the panchnama can be used as a contemporary record to refresh his memory. If
the police want to rely on a panchnama they must call a panch to prove it.176 The
panchnama of a search of premises is not evidence of what was found on the search
unless the panchas are examined as witnesses.177
No statutory provision requires taking the signature of the accused on the recovery
panchnama. Absence of his signature on it does not make it inadmissible.178
Where a recovery memo is prepared at the police station,179 or where the panch
witnesses are found to have signed the recovery memo at the police station,180 it loses
its sanctity.

[s 3.30] Tape-recording.—
Tape recorded conversation is admissible provided the conversation is relevant to the
matters in issue, there is identiﬁcation of the voice and the accuracy of the tape
recorded conversation is proved by eliminating the possibility of erasing the tape
record.181 Tape recordings can be legal evidence by way of corroborating the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
statements of a person who deposes that the other speaker and he carried on that
conversation or even of the statement of a person who may depose that he overheard
the conversation between the two persons and what they actually stated had been tape
recorded.182 The time, place and accuracy of the recording must be proved by a
competent witness and the voices must be properly identiﬁed.183 A previous statement
made by a person and recorded on tape, can be used not only to corroborate the
evidence given by the witness in court but also to contradict the evidence given before
the court, as well as to test the veracity of the witness and also to impeach his
impartiality.184 For the tape-recorded evidence to be acceptable, the tape must have
been sealed at the earliest point of time and not opened except under orders of the
court.185
A tape record of speeches (election) has been held to be a document. Tapes are more
easily susceptible to tampering than any other documentary evidence. The standard of
proof about their authenticity and accuracy has to be more stringent.186

[s 3.31] Dog tracking.—
Evidence of dog tracking, even if admissible, is not ordinarily of much weight.187 In a
case of alleged murder of the wife by the accused-husband, the dogs of the police
dogs squad pointed towards the husband. It was held that it was not a circumstance
compatible only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused husband.188 Evidence
relating to the movements of the tracker dogs is admissible as its reliability depends
upon the acceptability of testimony of persons who manned the dog and those who
witnessed its movements and conduct.189 In Babu Maqbul Shaikh v State of
Maharashtra,190 it was held that tracker dog's evidence must pass the test of scrutiny
and reliability as in the case of any other evidence. The following guidelines must be
borne in mind:
(a) There must be a reliable and complete record of the exact manner in which the

tracking was done and a panchnama in respect of the dog tracking evidence will
have to be clear and complete. It will have to be properly proved and will have to
be supported by the evidence of the handler.
(b) There must be no discrepancies between the version as recorded in the

panchnama and the evidence of the handler as deposed before the court.
(c) The evidence of the handler will have to pass the test of cross-examination

independently.
(d) Some material will have to be placed before the court by the handler, such as

the type of training imparted to the dog, its past performance, achievements,
reliability, etc. supported, if possible, by documents. In a case of murder, the
chappal and knife were found near the place of the incident. Both the articles
were wrapped in a paper to preserve original scent. Identiﬁcation parade was
held within twenty four hours and after smelling the chappal and knife the police
dog immediately picked up the two accused from amongst the persons in the
parade. It was held that the evidence provided by the dog was suﬃcient to link
those two items with the accused.191
Genuineness of dog tracking evidence need not necessarily be tested in restricted
terms of availability or non-availability of a drawn panchnama supported by testimony
of dog handler.192
In its decision in Gade Lakshmi Mangaraju v State of AP,193 the Supreme Court again
emphasised that the evidence based on sniffer dogs has inherent frailties. The

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
possibility of error on the part of a dog or its master is the ﬁrst among them. The
possibility of misunderstanding between the dog and its master is close to its heels.
The possibility of a wrong inference from the behaviour of the dog could not be ruled
out.
The services of a sniffer dog may be taken for purposes of investigation. But its
faculties cannot be taken as evidence for the purpose of establishing the accused's
guilt.194
The High Court of Delhi has observed that the fact a dog squad has been called does
not necessarily lead to the inference that perpetrators of the crime were not
identiﬁed.195

[s 3.31.1] Restraint expected of court towards witness.—
A witness committed some mistake in his narration. The court said that that part could
be disbelieved by the court below. But only for that reason alone, the court should not
have made disparaging remarks that there was falsehood on the part of the
witness.196

42 Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–1(a), for "all documents produced for the

inspection of the Court" (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
43 PHIPSON ON EVIDENCE, 15th Edn, 2000, p 2.
44 Hardeep Singh v State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 , para 63 : AIR 2014 SC 1400 .
45 Syed Mohammad Husain Afqar Mohani v Mirza Fakhrullah Beg, (1932) 8 Luck 135 .
46 TOMLIN'S LAW DICTIONARY, Vol 2, p 1811.
47 The employees of a company are not identiﬁable with the legal person of the company,

when they appear as witness against the company the constitutional protection against selfincrimination as contained in Article 20(3) of the Constitution Godrej Soap Ltd v State of WB,
1991 Cr LJ 828 (Cal).
48 State of Maharashtra v Dr Praful B Desai, AIR 2003 SC 2053 at p 2059 : 2003 Cr LJ 2033 . The

police had recorded evidence by video conferencing.
49 FIELD, 8th Edn, p 17. Evidence of a voluntary witness cannot be ignored for that reason

alone. Ladies Corner v State of Karnataka, 1987 Cr LJ 2078 (Karn). Evidence of a police oﬃcer
cannot be rejected for that reason alone. Jagdamba Pd Tewari v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 1883
(All), a police report is not an evidence for the purposes of S. 138 Cr PC; Raju Parshad Gupta v
State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 2899 (Del) no reliance on police witnesses. Mahadeo v State, 1990 Cr LJ
858 : 1989 All LJ 475, no presumption that police oﬃcers are liars. State of Assam v Muhim
Barkatali, 1987 Cr LJ 152 : AIR 1987 SC 98 . Asst. Collector of Central Excise v Duncan Agro
Industries, 1992 Cr LJ 231 , statements of witnesses recorded by excise oﬃcers is not evidence.
50 Ratan Kumar Tandon v State of UP, AIR 1996 SC 2710 : (1997) 2 SCC 161 .
51 Arun Dube v State of MP, 1991 Cr LJ 840 (MP), meaning of "evidence" in section 319, CrPC

and this section taken together.
52 KK Velusamy v N Palanisamy, (2011) 11 SCC 275 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
53 Sivrani v Suryanarain, 1994 Cr LJ 2026 (All).
54 TAYLOR ON EVIDENCE, 1 (11th Edn), cited by the MP High Court in Phoolchand Garg v

Gopaldas Agarwal, AIR 1990 MP 135 , 137.
55 SR Mehrotra (Dr.) v State of HP, AIR 1997 HP 51 .
56 Kaptan Singh v State of MP, AIR 1997 SC 2485 : 1997 Cr LJ 2987 .
57 Vijender v State of Delhi, (1997) 6 SCC 171 .
58 Dinesh Borthakur v State of Assam, (2008) 5 SCC 697 .
59 Mayank Pathak v State (Government of NCT of Delhi), (2015) 11 SCC 798 , para 5.
60 Vilas Pandurang Patil v State of Maharashtra, (2004) 6 SCC 158 : AIR 2004 SC 3562 .
61 State of Haryana v Ved Prakash, AIR 1994 SC 468 : 1994 Cr LJ 140 ; State of Karnataka v

Hanumantha, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 254 (Kant), weak link of circumstances, the witness ran away on
seeing the accused, leaving the victim alone, last seen together not conclusively proved,
recovery of the instrument was also inconclusive. Bodh Raj v State of J&K, 2002 Cr LJ 4664 (SC),
circumstantial evidence can be the sole basis of conviction. The court stated the conditions to
be satisﬁed. Dharyashil v State of Maharashtra, 2003 Cr LJ 317 (Bom), circumstantial evidence,
the accused was last seen with the deceased, motive also proved, conviction, the entire
testimony of a hostile witness was not thrown away.
62 Makbul Ahammad v Abdul Rahaman Akand, (1953) 1 Cal 348 ; Debar Kundu Rama Krishna

Rao v State of WB, 1988 Cr LJ 345 (Cal), conviction of husband for strangulating his wife,
evidence circumstantial. Narayan Chandra Dey v State of WB, 1988 Cr LJ 387 (Cal), conviction of
father for drowning his 2½ year old child, evidence circumstantial. Dayaram v State, 1988 Cr LJ
865 : AIR 1988 SC 615 , accused apprehended by passers-by with knife in hand and bloodstained clothes, circumstances admitted hypothesis of guilt only. Nanahau Ram v State of MP,
1988 Cr LJ 936 : AIR 1988 SC 912 , proper identiﬁcation of the accused by the deceased in his
dying declaration and by his son and wife. Sardar Hussain v State of UP, 1988 Cr LJ 1807 : AIR
1988 SC 1766 , where the circumstantial evidence fell short of required standards. Nanak Chand
v State of Delhi, 1992 Cr LJ 55 , no member of public produced as a witness, even when
available, charge doubtful. Mananiga Digal v State of Orissa, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 152 (Ori) : (2001)
20 OCR 594 , the deceased and the accused were last seen together, the witnesses heard
groaning sounds, the ornaments worn by her were recovered at the instance of the accused.
The court said that even if the extra-judicial confession was excluded from evidence, other
evidence pointed towards the guilt of the accused.
63 Liyakat v State of Uttaranchal, AIR 2008 SC 1537 : (2008) 16 SCC 148 . Kusuma Ankama Rao

v State of AP, AIR 2008 SC 2819 : (2008) 13 SCC 257 , conditions precedent for acting on
circumstantial evidence stated. Ram Singh v Sonia, AIR 2007 SC 1218 : (2007) 3 SCC 1 , chain of
circumstances found to be complete. Harish Chandra Ladaku Thange v State of Maharashtra, AIR
2007 SC 2957 : (2007) 11 SCC 436 , chain of circumstances was not complete because of
missing links e.g. body lying undetected at the adjoining ﬁeld for 5 days, recovery of weapon
unreliable.
64 Govinda Reddy v State of Mysore, AIR 1960 SC 29 : 1960 Cr LJ 137 .
65 Deonandan Mishra v The State of Bihar, (1955) 2 SCR 570 : 1955 Cr LJ 1647 : AIR 1955 SC

801 . Followed in Laxman Naik v State of Orissa, AIR 1995 SC 1387 : 1995 Cr LJ 2692 , also
relied on Sharad v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1738 and Dhananjaya
Chatterjee v State of WB, (1994) 1 JT (SC) 33 : (1994) 2 SCC 200 . An example of a chain of
circumstances indicative of guilt was found in R. v George, 2002 EWCA Crimes 1923 (CA Crimes
Div.). The accused was charged with the murder of a journalist and television presenter. The
eye-witness was able to make only a qualiﬁed identiﬁcation at the identiﬁcation parade. The
court said: "In the instant case there was evidence, other than the qualiﬁed identiﬁcation, to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
support the prosecution's case, including a particle of ﬁrearm discharge in the coat, a ﬁbre on
the victim consistent with the accused's clothing, his association with ﬁrearms, his obsession
with the victim and other female television presenters, lies, he had told in questioning, and his
ﬂawed alibi statement. The evidence was compelling and therefore the conviction safe. Arun
Bhakta v State of West Begal, AIR 2009 SC 1228 : (2008) 17 SCC 367 , burden lies on the
prosecution to show that the chain of circumstances is complete. Conviction permissible only
when all the circumstances lead to the hypothesis of guilt of the accused. Mohd Azad v State of
WB, AIR 2009 SC 1307 : (2008) 15 SCC 449 , all the circumstances to be incompatible with
innocence of accused, if two views are possible, one favouring the accused has to be accepted,
false defence pleas cannot cure inﬁrmities in the prosecution case, time gap between last seen
together and incident should not be large; Vithal Eknath Adlinge v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009
SC 2087 : (2008) 12 SCC 701 ; Raju v State, AIR 2009 SC 2171 : (2009) 11 SCC 111 ,
circumstances must be closely connected with the principal fact. Baldev Singh v State of
Haryana, AIR 2009 SC 963 , earlier rulings as stated above reiterated State of Goa v Pandurang
Mohite, AIR 2009 SC 1066 : (2008) 16 SCC 714 , another ruling of the same kind, KT Palanisami v
State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2008 SC 1095 : (2008) 3 SCC 100 , the deceased, on the advice of the
appellant performed puja by the river side. He did not return home. One of the circumstances
was that he was last seen with the appellant from whom his gold chain was recovered. Dead
body was not recovered. All witnesses were relatives. No report of missing was lodged.
Conviction of the accused was not proper. Kusuma Ankama Rao v State of AP, AIR 2008 SC 2819
: (2008) 13 SCC 257 , the gap between the point of time when the accused and deceased were
seen together and deceased found dead should not be large; Roopsena Khatoon v State of West
Bengal, 2011 Cr LJ 3597 (SC), where deceased was last seen with accused one day earlier and
the body of deceased was found next day, since prosecution had not ﬁxed time of death it was
held that there was no proximity between time when deceased was last seen together with
accused and time of death. Circumstance, even if incriminating, was insigniﬁcant to hold the
accused guilty.
66 Bakshish Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1971 SC 2016 : 1971 Cr LJ 1452 . See Ganpat v State,

1987 Cr LJ 6 (Del), where circumstantial evidence was contrary to medial evidence, hence
acquittal. From the circumstantial evidence there should be inevitable conclusion of the guilt of
the accused beyond reasonable doubt and the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. If two views are possible, the court should adopt
the view favourable to the accused. State of HP v Diwana, 1995 Cr LJ 3002 (HP); Bishikeshan
Nag. v State of Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ (NOC) 76 (Ori) : (2000) 19 OCR 276 , circumstantial evidence,
alleged killing of the owner by the domestic servant for robbing him of cash and ornaments, the
servant did not run away, other missing links in the chain of circumstances, acquittal.
Panchanan Muduli v State, 2001 Cr LJ (NOC) 81 (Ori). G Parshwanath v State of Karnataka, AIR
2010 SC 2914 : (2010) 8 SCC 593 , each circumstance must be fully established individually,
cumulative effect of all the proved facts must be inference of guilt, this does not mean that each
and every hypothesis suggested by the accused must be excluded by proved facts. Shivaji v
State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 56 : (2008) 15 SCC 269 , conviction is justiﬁed when all
incriminating facts and circumstances are proved beyond reasonable doubt and are found
incompatible with innocence of the accused or guilt of any other person. Asraf Sk v State of
West Bengal, AIR 2009 SC 271 : (2008) 15 SCC 597 , circumstances to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt and shown to be connected with the principal fact, conviction can be based.
Mula Devi v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2009 SC 655 : (2008) 14 SCC 511 , conviction possible on
the basis of circumstantial evidence if the requirements laid down by the Supreme Court from
time to time are satisﬁed; Raju v State, AIR 2009 SC 2171 : (2009) 11 SCC 111 . Krishna Ghosh v

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
State of WB, AIR 2009 SC 2279 : (2009) 12 SCC 413 , circumstances connecting with the
principal fact have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, cruelty and murder of wife, injuries on
person noted by witnesses, dead body in husband's home, husband's plea of alibi found to be
false, absconding after the incident was a further inculpating circumstances, doctor's opinion
death due to asphyxia resulting from throttling, conviction. Gamparai Hrudayaraju v State of AP,
AIR 2009 SC 2364 : (2009) 13 SCC 740 , circumstances to be incompatible with the innocence
of the accused. No circumstances which could fasten guilt on the accused.
67 Hanumant Govind Narjundkar v State of MP, AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1953 Cr LJ 129 .
68 Reg v Hodge, (1838) 2 Lewin 227.
69 These principles have been restated in Sudama Pandey v State of Bihar, (2002) 1 SCC 679 :

AIR 2002 SC 293 : AIR 2001 SCW 5012 : 2002 Cr LJ 582 : AIR Jhar. HCR 451 and Subhash Chand
v State of Rajasthan, (2002) 1 SCC 702 : AIR 2001 SCW 4209 and followed in Ashish Batham v
State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 3206 : 2002 Cr LJ 4676 .
70 Dharam Deo Yadav v State of UP, (2014) 5 SCC 509 (para 27) : 2014 (2 ) Mad LJ (Crl) 435.
71 State of AP v IBSP Rao, AIR 1970 SC 648 : 1970 Cr LJ 733 . Again emphasised in State of UP

v Ashok Kumar Srivastva, AIR 1992 SC 840 : 1992 Cr LJ 1104 : 1992 AIR SCW 640 : 1992 All LJ
1115, which was a circumstances linked story of wife-burning, nobody helping her at the
moment, all of them disappearing afterwards, preceding ill-treatment and torture for dowry,
conviction under sections 302/34, IPC. Sooraj v State of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 1155 (Ker),
considering only one or two sentences from deposition not suﬃcient. State of Maharashtra v
Vilas Pandurang, 1999 Cr LJ 1062 , where at pp 1065-1066 the court presented a similar version
of the points which have to be kept in mind in processing circumstantial evidence. Gade
Lakshmi Mangraju v State of AP, AIR 2001 SC 2677 at p 2681, one circumstance cannot be called
out of the rest to give a different meaning to it because every circumstance has to be taken as a
part of the rest of circumstances and what has to be watched is the cumulative effect.
72 Charan Singh v State of UP, AIR 1967 SC 520 : 1967 Cr LJ 525 ; Insuﬃcient circumstantial

evidence, beneﬁt of doubt, State of UP v Sukhbasi, AIR 1985 SC 1224 : 1985 Supp SCC 79 : 1985
Cr LJ 1479 ; Hukam Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1977 SC 1063 : 1977 Cr LJ 639 ; Mahmood v
State of UP, AIR 1976 SC 69 : 1976 Cr LJ 10 , explains the requirements as to circumstantial
evidence.
73 Harendra Narain Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1991 SC 1842 , 1845 : 1991 Cr LJ 2666 . Only

those accused ought to be convicted in reference to whom evidence is clear, the rest are
entitled to beneﬁt of doubt. Budhwa v State of MP, 1990 Cr LJ 2597 : AIR 1991 SC 4 .
74 Lakshmi Kirsani v State, 2001 Cr LJ 3648 (Ori) : (2001) 91 Cut LT 223, the circumstances did

not form a complete chain in a murder case, death was alleged to have been caused by hitting
with an arrow, medical examination report was that neither the arrow nor the clothes of the
deceased were stained with blood, witnesses gave contradictory account Pabitra Pradhan v
State of Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 3798 (Ori), doubtful circumstances. Manjunath Chennabasappa
Madalli v State of Karnataka, AIR 2007 SC 2080 : (2007) 9 SCC 160 , husband charged of killing
his wife at night at in-law's place, prosecution relied upon two circumstances, unnatural death
and dying declaration, the tehsildar stated that the dying declaration could not be recorded
because the doctor opined that the victim was not in ﬁt state to make statement. Conviction not
maintained. Abubucker Siddiqui v State and State v MP Raﬁq Ad, AIR 2011 SC 91 : (2011) 2 SCC
12 , case registered against the accused persons for blasting a Hindu Organisation, the bomb
was supposed to be made of material of which no trace was found at the sight, no
circumstantial link-up.
75 As summarised by S Ratnavel Pandian J in Ashok Kumar v State of MP, AIR 1989 SC 1890 at

1896 : 1989 Cr LJ 2124 . Reiterated in State of UP v Ravindra Prakash Mittal, AIR 1992 SC 2045 :

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1992 Cr LJ 3693 . See also Kartik Sahu v State of Orissa, 1994 Cr LJ 102 (Ori), Ashoke Gavade v
State of Goa, 1995 Cr LJ 943 (Bom) and Ganpat Kisan v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 792
(Bom). The court cited the following authorities: Rama Nand v State of Himachal Pradesh, AIR
1981 SC 738 ; Gambhir v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1982 SC 1157 : 1982 Cr LJ 1243 ; Prem
Thakur v State of Punjab, AIR 1983 SC 61 : 1983 Cr LJ 155 ; Earabhadrapa v State of Karnataka,
AIR 1983 SC 446 : (1983) 2 SCC 330 : 1983 Cr LJ 846 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 447 ; Gian Singh v State of
Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 1921 : 1987 Cr LJ 1918 ; Balbir Singh v State of Punjab, 1991 Cr LJ 3286 :
AIR 1991 SC 2231 ; Balwinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 350 : 1986 Cr LJ 329 ; Sharad
v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1738 ; Prakash Sen v State, 1988 Cr LJ
1275 Cal, last seen together, not suﬃcient in itself. Where testimony of the eye-witness for
invoking the principle of "last seen" together was not considered trustworthy, Lal Chand v State
of HP, 1992 Cr LJ 1946 (HP). Witnesses stating that they saw the accused taking away
deceased child to the backyard of house, whereafter the child went missing and was found
dead next morning, and no explanation offered by the accused for his taking away the child.
Besides, he confessed to crime and incriminating articles were recovered at his insistences. He
was held guilty, Ramesh v State, AIR 2014 SC 2852 , para 16 : 2014 (9) SCJ 496 . State of
Maharashtra v Champalal Panjaji Shah, AIR 1981 SC 1675 : 1981 Cr LJ 1273 : (1981) 3 SCC 610 ,
an unreasonable suggestion or explanation on the part of the defence would not be acceptable
or disprove the guilt of the accused where circumstances clearly prove the guilt of the accused,
Yedlapati v Raghavendra Prasad v State of AP, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 77 (AP) : (2001) 2 Andh LD 720,
failure on the part of the prosecution to prove its case. Niranjan Mallick v State of Orissa, 2002 Cr
LJ 108 (Ori) : (2000) 18 OCR 203 , unreliable prosecution witness, Gurucharan Dusadh v State of
Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 1459 (Pat), prosecution failure to prove its case. Links in chain of
circumstances not established, conviction reversed, Durga Burman Roy v State of Sikkim, (2014)
13 SCC 35 (paras 19 and 20) : 2014 (8) SCJ 217 . See also Vijay Thakur v State of HP, (2014) 14
SCC 609 (paras 18 to 21) : 2014 AIR SCW 5625.
76 Musheer Khan v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 ; Vithal Eknath Adilinge v

State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 2067 : (2009) 11 SCC 637 , conditions for conviction on basis
of circumstantial evidence restated. Where two views are possible, the view which goes in
favour of the accused should be accepted. Chattar Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2009 SC 378 :
(2008) 14 SCC 667 , the point of time at which the accused and deceased were seen together
alive and the time of death must be small according to the circumstances of the case.
Venkatesan v State of TN, AIR 2008 SC 2369 : (2008) 8 SCC 456 , conditions precedent for acting
on circumstantial evidence stated.
77 Paramjeet Singh v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2011 SC 200 : (2010) 10 SCC 439 .
78 Ashok v State of Maharashtra, 2015 Cr LJ 2036 (para 13) (SC) : (2015) 4 SCC 393 .
79 Rohtash Kumar v State of Haryana, 2013 Cr LJ 3183 (para 25) (SC) : 2013 (7 ) Scale 472 . See

also Ram Kumar v State of Chhattisgarh, 2014 Cr LJ 2679 (paras 16 and 17) (Chh-DB) : 2014 (2)
CGLJ 393 .
80 G Parshwanath v State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 2914 : (2010) 8 SCC 593 .
81 Arun Bhakta v State of West Bengal, AIR 2009 SC 1228 : (2008) 17 SCC 367 ; Vithal Eknath

Adlinge v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 2067 : (2009) 11 SCC 637 .
82 Federal India Assurance Co Ltd v Anandrao, AIR 1944 Nag 161 : (1944) Nag 436.
83 Krishan Lal v State of Haryana, 1996 Cr LJ 1401 (P&H).
84 Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2013 SC 58 : (2013) 4 SCC 465 .
85 Gulshan Kumar v State, 1993 Cr LJ 1525 (Del) : (1993) ILR 2 Del 168.
86 Sivrani v Suryanarain, 1994 Cr LJ 2026 (All).
87 Bhimappa Jinnappa Naganur v State of Karnataka, AIR 1993 SC 1469 : 1993 Cr LJ 1801 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
88 Brahm Swaroop v State of MP, AIR 2011 SC 280 : (2010) 11 JT 437 : 2011 Cr LJ 306 .
89 State of HP v Edward Samual Chareton, 2001 Cr LJ 1356 (HP) : 2001 (3) RCR (Criminal) 129.
90 Kashmira Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh, (1952) SCR 526 : 1952 Cr LJ 839 : AIR 1952 SC

129 .
91 Emperor v Tuti Babu, AIR 1946 Pat 373 : (1945) 25 Pat 33.
92 Sidharth Vashist @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC 1 .
93 Dehal Singh v State of Himachal Pradesh, AIR 2010 SC 3594 : (2010) Cr LJ 4715 : (2010) 9

SCC 85 .
94 Re Lubeck, (1905) 7 Bom LR 894 : 32 IA 217 : 33 Cal 151.
95 Kousalya Ammal v Valli, AIR 1988 Mad 287 .
96 Hurpurshad v Sheo Dyal, (1876) 3 IA 259 .
97 Rifakatalikhan v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3844 (Bom).
98 Prithvi Nath Pandey v State of UP, 1994 Cr LJ 3623 (All). Girja Prasad v State of MP, AIR 2007

SC 3106 : (2007) 7 SCC 625 , a police witness is not always to be disbelieved. The presumption
of honest behaviour applies equally to police oﬃcials. A conviction can be based on such
testimony.
99 Madhu v State of Karnataka, AIR 2014 SC 394 : 2014 (2) Kant LJ 158 .
100 Baldev Singh v State of Haryana, 2016 Cr LJ 154 , para 10 (SC).
101 Bhimsha Subanna Pawar v State of Maharashtra, 1996 (1) Bom CR 212 : 1996 AIHC 1

(Bom).
102 Megha Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1995 SC 2339 : 1995 Cr LJ 3988 .
103 Ravindra Shantaram Sawant v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2461 : (2002 )5SCC 604 :

[2002] 3 SCR 881 .
104 Pradeep Narayan Madgaonhar v State of Maharastra, AIR 1995 SC 1930 : 1995 Cr LJ 3213 :

AIR 1995 SCW 2088 : (1995) 4 SCC 255 .
105 Gopal Mahadeo Tambada v State of Maharashtra, 1997 Cr LJ 2425 (Bom) ; Ram Kumar v

State (NCT) of Delhi, AIR 1999 SC 2259 : 1999 Cr LJ 3522 , the accused ﬁred at and killed his
victim outside the village no witness was present at the spot. Evidence was collected through
police search and seizures and was found to be reliable. The evidence was not allowed to be
discarded on the ground that no independent witness was examined.
106 Karamjit Singh v State (Delhi Admn), AIR 2003 SC 1311 : 2003 Cr LJ 2021 . The evidence in

this case under TADA (now replaced) was that of search and seizure by police of which the
testimony was also that of the raiding party only.
107 Sidharth Vashist @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC 1

.
108 State of UP v Ram Sajivan, AIR 2010 SC 1738 : (2010) 1 SCC 529 . Balasaheb Appa Rao Patil

v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 1461 : (2008) 17 SCC 425 , the eye-witness, instead of
reporting to police, went to the house of his uncle, conduct not unnatural, so impairment.
109 Gautam v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 3104 (MP).
110 Central Bank of India v Tarseema Compress Wood Mfg Co, AIR 1997 Bom 225 : 1997 (2)

Bom CR 267 .
111 Neeraj Sharma v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 2266 (All). The court referred to State of Bombay v

Kathi Kalu, AIR 1961 SC 1808 : (1961) 2 Cr LJ 856 where the Apex Court explained the
expressions "furnishing evidence" and "to be a witness".
112 State of West Bengal v Orilal Jaiswal, AIR 1994 SC 1418 : 1994 Cr LJ 2104 : (1994) 1 SCC 73

: 1994 SCC (Cri) 107 . Non-examination of independent eye-witness, not a ground to reject the
testimony of interested eye-witnesses, State of Punjab v Nazar Singh, 1992 Cr LJ 1796 (P&H).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Evidence of independent eye-witness corroborated by medical evidence, conviction sustained,
Dharam Deo Singh v State of UP, AIR 1993 SC 2654 : 1993 Cr LJ 3676 . Abdulla Haﬁz v State of
Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 1422 : AIR 1998 SC 1451 : (1998) 1 SCC 526 , witness not shown to be
interested in the prosecution of criminal to accused person, naturally disinterested and
independent witness, evidence accepted. Balram Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2003 SC 2213 :
2003 (1) ALD (Cri) 1032, independent witnesses were not considered necessary in a family feud
where one person lost life. Evidence of the injured children of the deceased served the purpose.
State of Karnataka v Vishwanatha S Anchan, 2003 Cr LJ 2743 (Kant) : 2003 (3) Kant LJ 215 ,
testimony of injured eye-witness found to be reliable.
113 Kothakalava Naga Subba Reddy v Public Prosecutor, AIR 2000 SC 3480 : 2000 Cr LJ 3452

(SC). State of MP v Sardar, 2001 Cr LJ 3984 (SC), statement of independent witnesses who ﬁrst
went to the spot and saw the doors broken open by the accused aggressors accused, relied
upon. Kasam Abdullha Haﬁz v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1998 SC 1451 : (1998) 1 SCC 526 : 1998
Cr LJ 1422 , an independent witness because he was not related either way, nor anything could
be shown against him, nor it was shown that any other witnesses were there who were not
examined.
114 State of UP v Zakaullah, AIR 1998 SC 1474 : (1998) 1 SCC 557 : 1998 Cr LJ 863 .
115 Leela Ram v State of Haryana, AIR 1999 SC 3717 : (1999) 9 SCC 525 .
116 Bhola Ram Kushwaha v State of MP, AIR 2001 SC 229 . Sanjay v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR

2001 SC 979 : 2001 (3) SCC 193 , the fact that the accused was not immediately after the
independent witness made a statement before the police was held to be immaterial to his
testimony. State of UP v Man Singh, AIR 2003 SC 62 , the fact of murder proved through
testimony of witnesses, but at the High Court stage the theory of fog was introduced which was
supposed to have prevented the witnesses from observing the identity of the killers, theory
found to be wrong, reversal of acquittal by the High Court set aside.
117 State of UP v Zakaullah, 1998 Cr LJ 863 : AIR 1998 SC 1474 : (1998) 1 SCC 557 (SC).
118 Naresh Yadav v State of Bihar, 2000 Cr LJ 2041 (Pat).
119 Yogesh Singh v Mahabeer Singh, 2017 Cr LJ 291 , para 50 (SC) : 2016 (10) JT 332 , relying

on Darya Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1965 SC 328 : [1964] 3 SCR 397 .
120 Patel Chela Viram v State of Gujarat, AIR 1994 SC 1250 : 1994 Cr LJ 2252 ; see also

Bhagwati Prasad v State, 1994 Cr LJ 2310 (All). Evidence of a chance-witness which is reliable
corroborated reliable, cannot be discarded on the sole ground of being a chance witness,
Parappurath Cholayil Beeran v State of Kerala, 1992 Cr LJ 2225 (Ker). Baldev Singh v State of MP,
AIR 2003 SC 2098 : 2003 Cr LJ 880 , both eye-witnesses to a murder were chance witnesses.
The circumstances did not justify their presence at the spot, not relied upon.
121 Lakhbir Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1994 SC 1029 : 1994 Cr LJ 1374 : 1994 Supp (1) SCC

524 .
122 Jarnail Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2010 SC 3699 : (2009) 9 SCC 719 , citing on this point

Satbir v Surat Singh, (1997) 4 SCC 192 : 1997 AIR SCW 1170 : AIR 1997 SC 1160 ; Harjinder Singh
v State of Gujarat, (2004) 11 SCC 253 : 2004 AIR SCW 4356 : AIR 2004 SC 3962 ;
Acharaparambath Pradeepan v State of Kerala, (2006) 13 SCC 643 : 2007 AIR SCW 6843.
123 Ibid, citing Sarvesh Narain Shukla v Daroga Singh (2007) 13 SCC 360 : 2007 AIR SCW 3437 :

AIR 2008 SC 320 .
124 Jarnail Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2010 SC 3699 : (2009) 9 SCC 719 , citing Thangiya v

State of Tamil Nadu, (2005) 9 SCC 650 : 2005 AIR SCW 761 : 2005 Cr LJ 684 .
125 Vikram Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2010 SC 1007 : (2010) 3 SCC 56 .
126 Ramvir v State of UP, AIR 2009 SC 3185 : (2009) 15 SCC 254 ; Sarvesh Narain Shukla v

Daroga Singh, AIR 2008 SC 320 : (2007) 13 SCC 360 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
127 Venkatesha v State of Karnataka, 2016 Cr LJ 501 , para 16 (Kar).
128 Shyam Singh Hada v State, 2002 Cr LJ 1437 (Raj) : RLW 2003 (3) Raj 1918 , 2002 (1) WLC

382 .
129 Ram Anup Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3006 .
130 Ganesh K Gulve v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 3068 at 3071; Shanker Mahto v State of

Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 2987 , Children in the home who saw three members of their family being
killed were considered to be the most natural witnesses and it was immaterial that the fact of
their being also injured in the incident was neither on record nor mentioned in the FIR. Rachhpal
Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2002 SC 2710 , witnesses found to be present naturally at the roof
of the house of the deceased where he was shot dead. Podapati v State of AP, AIR 2002 SC 2724
, village witnesses, contradictions in their statement as to the distance from where they saw the
incident was considered to be not material, reliable otherwise. State of UP v Hari Mohan, AIR
2001 SC 142 : 2001 Cr LJ 170 , letters written by the deceased married woman to her brother
asking him to take her away otherwise she would be killed by her in-laws, the fact that other
letters were also written but not produced and the fact that the accused did not ask for testing
of handwriting nor it was otherwise tested, was immaterial. Sewa Kaur v State of Punjab, AIR
1997 SC 1843 : 1997 Cr LJ 1833 , the victim was killed by his wife and her paramour. The son of
the victim was produced as a natural eye-witness. His version was corroborated by medical
evidence and recovery of dead body. Evidence and conviction was found to be proper. Gajula
Venkateswara Rao v State of AP, 2000 Cr LJ 3565 (SC) witnesses naturally there, presence
established their evidence not to be discarded only because they belonged to or connected with
the party of the victim.
131 Suresh Sitaram Surve v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2003 SC 344 at 346. Dalip Singh v State of

Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 2985 : 1997 Cr LJ 3647 , there was an incident of assault in a dispute about
the construction of a channel, eye-witnesses included persons who were injured on the spot.
Their presence being natural, their testimony was found to be believable. Rukona v Jala, AIR
1997 SC 3907 : 1997 Cr LJ 4641 (SC), an explanation of the circumstances in which injured eyewitnesses should be trusted. Their testimony in this case was in the content of the right of
private defence.
132 Binay Kumar Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1957 SC 322 : 1997 Cr LJ 362 ; Pyara v State, 1997

Cr LJ 1065 (Raj), non-explanation of injuries on the person of the prosecution witness did not
affect the prosecution case. Veeran v State, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) (MP), injured eye-witness is best
witness, he would not substitute wrong persons for his actual assailant, he should not be
disbelieved for minor discrepancies.
133 Sujit Gulab Sohatre v State, 1997 Cr LJ 454 (Bom). Ramesh Bhagwan Manjrekar v State,

1997 Cr LJ 796 (Bom), natural injuries on the person of a witness assure his presence at the
spot.
134 Muttaicose v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2017 SC 3117 : 2017 8 SCC 598 .
135 Narayan Ranu Datavale v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1788 (Bom).
136 Baleshwar Mahto v State of Bihar, AIR 2017 SC 873 : 2017 (1) Scale 443 : 2017(1) crimes 26

(SC).
137 Vijay Shankar Shinde v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2008 SC 1198 : (2008) 2 SCC 670 .
138 State of Maharashtra v Tulshiram Bhanudas, Kamble, AIR 2007 SC 3042 : 2007 Cr LJ 4319 .

Brahm Swaroop v State of UP, AIR 2011 SC 280 : 2011 Cr LJ 306 , witness to the occurrence was
also injured in the occurrence. His presence at the spot could not be doubled. Immediately after
lodging FIR, he was put through grueling cross-examination but nothing could be elicited to his
discredit.
139 Balwan v State of Haryana, AIR 2014 SC 3644 (para 16) : 2014 Cr LJ 4321 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
140 Ram Sunder Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC 3117 : 1998 Cr LJ 4558 . Chandrappa v

State of Karnataka, AIR 2008 SC 2323 : (2008) 11 SCC 328 , non-explanation of insigniﬁcant
injury on the person of only one accused, does not dislodge the prosecution story.
141 Kartik Malhar v State of Bihar, 1996 Cr LJ 889 : 1996(1) SCC 614 . See also SG Gundegowda

v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr LJ 852 (Kant). Kailash v State of UP, 1997 Cr LJ 3511 : (1997) 11
SCC 525 : AIR 1997 SC 2835 , prosecution witness had no enmity with the accused, his
testimony not to be brushed aside simply because of relationship with the family of the
deceased. Harpal Singh v Devinder Singh, (1997) Cr LJ 3561 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2914 : (1997) 6
SCC 660 , testimony of the partisan witness was corroborated by other evidence, relied upon for
reversing order of acquittal. Dharampal Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ 3372 (Raj), eye-witnesses,
close relative of the deceased, not a ground in itself for rejecting their evidence unless some
serious inﬁrmity is found which raises considerable doubt in the mind of the judge. Rizan v State
of Chhatisgarh, AIR 2003 SC 976 , relationship is not a factor to affect credibility of a witness.
Shyam Sunder v State of Chhatisgarh, AIR 2002 SC 2292 , strained relationship, criminal litigation
pending testimony of interested witnesses to be subjected to close scrutiny. Ravishwar Manjhi v
State of Jharkhand, AIR 2009 SC 1262 : (2008) 16 SCC 561 , a witness is not to be disbelieved
only for being a relative Paramjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2008 SC 441 : (2007) 13 SCC 530 ,
eye-witness was son of the deceased, the fact that he could not spell out accurately the situs of
injuries on the dead body, did not make his presence at the spot doubtful. The presence of the
witnesses could not be doubted by reason of the fact that, they did not make any attempt to
rescue the deceased. Gali Venkataiah v State of AP, AIR 2008 SC 462 , relationship does not
affect credibility, foundation has to be laid for suggesting falsehood. D Sailu v State of AP, AIR
2008 SC 505 : (2008) Cr LJ 686 , relative witnesses are more particular in assuring that real
culprits do not escape. Kapildeo Mandal v State of Bihar, AIR 2008 SC 533 : (2008) Cr LJ 730 ,
credibility of a witness is not to to be judged merely on the basis of his relationship with the
deceased and strained relations with the accused. Ponnam Chandraiah v State of AP, AIR 2008
SC 3209 : (2008) 11 SCC 640 , relationship does not affect credibility. More often than not a
relative would not conceal the actual culprit and inculpate an innocent person. Ashok Kumar
Chaudhary v State of Bihar, AIR 2008 SC 2436 : (2008) 12 SCC 173 , relative witness is not the
something as an interested witness, producing public witnesses is not a compulsory
requirement. Injured witness in the case was found to be reliable. Kalegura Padma Rao v State of
AP, AIR 2007 SC 1299 : (2007) 12 SCC 48 , relationship is not a factor to affect credibility of the
witness. Boddu Satyavathi v Boddu Ramakrishna Rao, AIR 2007 NOC 220 (AP), a suit for speciﬁc
performance, no enmity between the plaintiff's witness and defendant, testimony could not be
rejected merely because he was a classmate of the plaintiff. Amit Singh Bhikam Sing Thakur v
State of Maharashtra, AIR 2007 SC 676 : (2007) 2 SCC 310 , servant going back from the shop
with his master, master, attacked with gunshot and killed, master identiﬁed the culprit at the TI
parade also, evidence not to be discarded because of the relationship.
142 Sudhakar v State, AIR 2018 SC 1372 : LNIND 2018 SC 105 .
143 State of AP v Punati Ramulu, AIR 1993 SC 2644 : 1993 Cr LJ 3684 . To the same effect,

Bolineedi Venkataramaiah v State of AP, AIR 1994 SC 76 : 1994 Cr LJ 61 . Evidence of interested
witness is to be scrutinised with care, Shaukat v State of UP, 1996 AIHC 634 (All). Karuppiah v
State of Tamil Nadu, 1993 Cr LJ 1688 (Mad), to be weighed in golden scale before being relied
upon. See also, Jai Narain v State of UP, 1995 Cr LJ 2333 (All). Hostility or interestedness does
not require outright rejection of evidence, only deeper scrutiny is necessary, Kulamani Sahu v
State of Orissa, 1994 Cr LJ 2245 (Ori); Jayalal Sahu v State of Orissa, 1994 Cr LJ 2254 ; Raju v
State of MP, 1994 Cr LJ 2167 ; Sher Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1994 SCC (Cr) 783 : 1994 Cr LJ
1980 ; Brijpal Singh v State of UP, AIR 1994 SC 1624 : 1994 Cr LJ 2082 ; DD Suvarna v State of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 3602 . Raj Kumar Yadav v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 2075 (All), there is no
rule of law that the testimony of interested witnesses cannot be believed. Bur Singh v State of
Punjab, AIR 2009 SC 157 : (2008) 16 SCC 65 , relationship is not a factor to affect credibility, the
only thing is that the court has to adopt a careful approach and examine cogency. Also to the
same affect, Bhupendra Singh v State of UP, AIR 2009 SC 3265 : (2009) 12 SCC 447 . Sudhakar v
State, AIR 2018 SC 1372 : LNIND 2018 SC 105 , In such cases the Courts have to be cautious
while evaluating the evidence to exclude the possibility of false implication.
144 Rajesh Kumar v State of UP, AIR 2009 SC 1 . Murugan v State, AIR 2009 SC 72 : (2008) 16

SCC 40 , reliable eye-witnesses, they had gone with the person (injured) to the village well for
morning bath, they arranged taxi for taking him to hospital, hence could not be false. State v
Sarvanan, AIR 2009 SC 152 : (2008) 17 SCC 587 , relatives would not generally conceal actual
culprit and rope in an innocent person. Also to the same effect: Ganapathi v State of Tamil Nadu,
AIR 2018 SC 1635 : LNIND 2018 SC 162 , foundation has to be laid if plea of false implication is
made.
145 Anil Phukan v State of Assam, AIR 1993 SC 1462 : 1993 Cr LJ 1796 .
146 Shyam Sunder v State of Chhattisgarh, 2002 Cr LJ 4315 (SC) : (2002) 8 SCC 39 .
147 Dharam Pal v State of Haryana, AIR 2017 SC 3720 .
148 State of Maharashtra v Prabhu Barku Gade, 1995 Cr LJ 1432 (Bom). The following cases

were referred, State of Bihar v Kapil Singh, AIR 1969 SC 53 : 1969 Cr LJ 279 ; Ratna Munda v
State of Orissa, 1986 Cr LJ 1363 (DB—Ori) and Abbas Ali Shah v Emperor, AIR 1933 Lah 667 (DB):
(1933) 34 Cr LJ 606 . See also Mangoo v State of MP, AIR 1995 SC 959 : 1995 Cr LJ 1461 .
Narayan Kanu Datavale v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1788 (Bom), evidence of child witness to be accepted
with greatest caution and circumspection. National Commission for Women v State of UP, 1998
Cr LJ 4044 : AIR 1998 SC 2726 : (1998) 7 SCC 177 , evidence of a child witness cannot be
rejected if it is otherwise reliable. Zafar v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 3786 (All), testimony to be
scrutinised with great caution, where there was no likelihood of tutoring no corroboration of his
statement was considered necessary. Balram Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2003 SC 2213 ,
evidence of the injured children of the deceased who were eye-witnesses was found reliable in
all respects.
149 Baby Kandayanathil v State of Kerala, AIR 1993 SC 2275 : 1993 Cr LJ 2605 . Nandeshwar v

State of Maharashtra, 2001 Cr LJ 4351 (Bom), the minor son of the couple saw how his father
beat up his mother to death, abandoned her in a forest and went away with the son to the place
of a person whose daughter he intended to marry. Evidence was found to be reliable. It was
corroborated with the proof of motive. State of MP v Bhagwan Singh, 2002 Cr LJ 3169 (MP),
murder of the mother of the child, assailants surrounded here and set her on ﬁre. The child got
afraid and retreated to the cot. But his evidence was quite clear. Relied upon Jhunka Sao v State
of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 4230 (Jhar), child accompanying her mother and aunt to river for water, on
the way the accused attacked and killed the mother. The child was found by the court to be
competent witness. Dalbir Singh v State of Haryana, 2003 Cr LJ 1878 (P&H), a child witness of 8
years & sole eye-witness to the murder of his mother, reliable, giving full details and veriﬁed by
other evidence. Testimony accepted.
150 JV Wagh v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 803 (Bom). Sudesh Dhaku v KCJ, 1998 Cr LJ

2428 (Delhi), a child witness, victim of sexual assault, the court stated the precautions to be
taken in recording statements of such witnesses. State of HP v Prem Chand, 2003 Cr LJ 872 :
AIR 2003 SC 708 , clear and cogent of child witness, he already knew the accused as his uncle.
Panchhi & National Commission for Women v State of UP, AIR 1998 SC 2726 , the evidence of a
child witness was not rejected because the evidence was found to be reliable.
151 State of UP v Krishna Master, AIR 2010 SC 3071 : (2010) 12 SCC 324 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
152 State of Maharashtra v Bharat Fakira Dhiwar, AIR 2002 SC 16 : (2002) 1 SCC 622 : 2002 (1)

Crimes 164 (SC).
153 Munshi Prasad v State of Bihar, AIR 2001 SC 3031 at 3033. State of Haryana v Ram Singh,

2002 Cr LJ 987 (SC), a defence witness is entitled to an equal treatment with prosecution
witnesses.
154 Shyam Sunder v State, 1997 Cr LJ 35 (Del).
155 Sukhwinder Singh v State of Punjab, 2014 Cr LJ 446 (para 9) (SC).
156 Raj Kumari Jaiswal v Ramesh Kumar Jaiswal, AIR 2007 Cal 94 : [ LNIND 2006 Cal 679 ].
157 State of Gujarat v KP Singh, 1995 Cr LJ 3623 (SC).
158 State of Karnataka v K Varappa, 2000 Cr LJ 400 : AIR 2000 SC 185 : (1998) 8 SCC 715 .
159 Joseph v State of Kerala, 2000 Cr LJ 2467 : AIR 2000 SC 1608 ; Narayan Chetanram

Chaudhury v State of Maharashtra, 2000 Cr LJ 4640 : (2000) 8 SCC 457 , minor contradictions in
statements of witness under section 161, CrPC, and deposition made by him before the
investigating oﬃcer and in the court were held to be not fatal to his testimony. No material
improvement was made by him in his testimony.
160 State of Orissa v Dibakar Naik, 2002 Cr LJ 2826 : AIR 2002 SC 2148 .
161 Podapati Malakondaiah v State of AP, 2002 Cr LJ 3555 : AIR 2002 SC 2724 .
162 Jayaseelan v State of TN, AIR 2009 SC 1901 : (2009) 12 SCC 275 .
163 Ponnam Chandraiah v State of AP, AIR 2008 SC 3209 : (2008) 11 SCC 640. Dinesh Kumar v

State of Rajasthan, AIR 2008 SC 3259 : (2008) 8 SCC 270 , the evidence of was found to be
exaggerated against the co-accused. But his testimony was cogent, truthful and credible
against the other accused (appellant). The court said that the appellant could be convicted on
the basis of his evidence.
164 Prabhu Dayal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2018 SC 3199 : 2018 (104) ACC 630 .
165 Kalegura Padma Rao v State of AP, AIR 2007 SC 1299 : (2007) 12 SCC 48 ; Kulesh Mondal v

State of WB, AIR 2007 SC 3228 : (2007) 8 SCC 578 , a discrepancy not expected of a normal
person are material discrepancies. Witnesses were close relatives of the deceased, no ground
for rejection of testimony. Kulwinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2007 SC 2868 : (2007) 10 SCC
455 , the maxim "falsus…" does not apply.
166 State of Rajasthan v Om Prakash, AIR 2007 SC 2257 : (2007) 12 SCC 381 .
167 Ranadhir Basu v State of West Bengal, 2000 Cr LJ 1417 : AIR 2000 SC 908 : (2000) 3 SCC

161 .
168 A Deivendran v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1998 SC 2821 at p 2834 : (1997) 11 SCC 720 : 1998

Cr LJ 814 .
169 Sidharth Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC

1.
170 Suresh Pandurang Tigare v State of Maharashtra, (1997) Cr LJ 157 (Bom).
171 Siddanki Ram Reddy v State of AP, AIR 2010 SC 3000 : (2010) 7 SCC 697 ; Musheer Khan v

State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 , presence of eye-witness at the spot doubtful
because the star witness testiﬁed that he saw no body around.
172 Bahadur Naik v State of Bihar, 2000 Cr LJ 2466 : AIR 2000 SC 1582 : (2000) 9 SCC 153 .
173 Malik Ram Bhoi v State of Orissa, 1993 Cr LJ 984 (Ori).
174 Sidhartha Vashisht@Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC

1 ; Abuthagir v. State, AIR 2009 SC 2797 : 2009 Cr LJ 3987 , plausible explanation offered for
delayed examination, no ground for doubting veracity of prosecution case, witnesses were
independent, neither anti-accused nor pro-prosecution, revealing truth long time after seeing
photographs of accused, no ground to discard evidence.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
175 BK Channappa v State of Karnataka, AIR 2007 SC 432 : (2006) 12 SCC 57 .
176 Emperor v Mohanlal Bababhai, (1940) 43 Bom LR 163 .
177 Emperor v Rustom Lam, (1931) 34 Bom LR 267 .
178 Kishore Bhadke v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2017 SC 279 , paras 22 and 23 : 2017 (1) Scale

270 .
179 Varun Chaudhary v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2011 SC 72 .
180 Mustkeem v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2011 SC 4920 : AIR 2011 SC 2769 .
181 RM Malkani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 157 : 1973 Cr LJ 228 : (1973) 1 SCC 471 :

1973 SCC (Cri) 399 . All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v LK Tripathi, AIR 2009 SC 1314 :
(2009) 5 SCC 417 , tests for determining admissibility of tape recorded evidence explained.
182 PER RAGHUBAR DAYAL AND MUDHOLKAR JJ in Pratap Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1964

SC 72 : 1964(4) SCR 733 .
183 Yusufalli v State of Maharashtra, (1967) 70 Bom LR 76 SC : [1967] 3 SCR 720 .
184 Rama Reddy v VV Giri, AIR 1971 SC 1162 : 1970(2) SCC 340 .
185 CR Mehta v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 2863 (Bom).
186 Tukaram S Dighole v Manikrao Shivaji Kokate, AIR 2010 SC 965 : (2010) 4 SCC 329 .
187 Abdul Razak v The State, (1969) 72 Bom LR 646 SC; Jit Singh v State of Punjab, 1988 Cr LJ

39 (P&H), where the evidence of the dog in tracing the accused was rejected because there was
no evidence to show whether the dog was earlier taken to the scenting points.
188 Surinder Pal Jain v Delhi Administration, AIR 1993 SC 1723 : 1993 Cr LJ 1871 .
189 Bhadran v State of Kerala, 1995 Cr LJ 676 (Ker).
190 Babu Maqbul Shaikh v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 2808 (Bom) : Mah LJ 1118.
191 Pandian K Nadar v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3883 (Bom). The court discussed the

Evidentiary Value of Dog Tracking Evidence at length.
192 Ashok Gavade v State of Goa, 1995 Cr LJ 943 (Bom).
193 Gade Lakshmi Mangaraju v State of AP, AIR 2001 SC 3677 : 2001 Cr LJ 3317 .
194 Dinesh Borthakur v State of Assam, AIR 2008 SC 2205 : (2008) 5 SCC 697 .
195 Vishnu v State (NCT of Delhi), 2001 Cr LJ 4006 (Delhi).
196 Kishan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2008 SC 233 : (2007) 14 SCC 204 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Proved".—
A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man
ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition
that it exists.

[s 3.32] Standard of proof.—
The word "proof" seems properly to mean anything which serves, either immediately or
mediately, to convince the mind of the truth or falsehood of a fact or proposition; and
the proofs of matters of fact in general are our senses, the testimony of witnesses,
documents, and the like. "Proof does not mean proof to rigid mathematical
demonstration, because that is impossible; it must mean such evidence as would
induce a reasonable man to come to the conclusion."197 Proof beyond reasonable
doubt does not mean perfect proof, which may sound artiﬁcial.198 "A reasonable doubt
is that quality or kind of doubt which when you are dealing with matters of importance
in your own affairs allow to inﬂuence you one way or another."199 Doubts are
reasonable if they are free from zest for abstract speculation. Reasonable doubt is not
an imaginary, trivial or merely a possible doubt, but a fair doubt based upon reason and
common sense. What degree of probability amounts to proof is an exercise particular
to each case.200 There is no absolute standard of reasonable doubt. A reasonable
doubt is a fair doubt based on reason and common sense and must grow out of
evidence in the case. The concept of probability cannot by expressed with
mathematical precision. It involves subjective element and rests on common sense.201
The degree of certainty which must be arrived at before a fact is said to be proved is
that described in this section.202 In human affairs everything cannot be proved with
mathematical certainty and the law does not require it.203 The deﬁnition of "proof"
centres round probability.204 The court said in this case that the preponderance of
probability and normal human behaviour is to be kept in mind drawing reasonable
inference from other facts established by evidence. Such inferences cannot be termed
as surmises and conjectures.205 What is required is production of such materials on
which the court can reasonably act to reach the supposition that a fact exists. Proof of
a fact depends upon the degree of probability of its having existed. The standard
required for reaching the supposition is that of a prudent man acting in any important
matter concerning him.206 Thus an accused in establishing his plea of private defence
may discharge his burden by evidence satisfying the jury of the probability of his
defence.207 "It is necessary to occasionally remind ourselves of this interpretation
clause in the Evidence Act lest we act on artiﬁcial standard of proof not warranted by
the provisions of the Act".208 The law requires for a conviction proof beyond
reasonable doubt and not conclusive proof.209 The falsity of a plea taken by the
accused person cannot prove his guilt, though it may be an additional circumstance
against him.210 "The criminal jurisprudence no doubt requires a high standard of proof

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
for imposing punishment on an accused, but it is equally important that on hypothetical
grounds and surmises prosecution evidence of a sterling character should not be
brushed aside and disbelieved to give undue beneﬁt of doubt to the accused."211 Where
neither the dead body of the victim of murder was recovered nor post-mortem
performed, it was held that factum of murder in such a case must be proved by
strongest possible evidence.212
The proof of a fact depends upon the degree of probability of its existence. The
standard required for reaching the supposition is that of a prudent man acting in any
important manner concerning him.213
The Supreme Court observed in the matter of a custodial death that an exaggerated
adherence to and insistence upon proof beyond every reasonable doubt may result in
miscarriage of justice. Courts should therefore deal with such cases in realistic manner
and with sensitivity.214

[s 3.33] Allegation of murder in Civil Action.—
Where there is an allegation of murder in a civil action, the standard of proof for the
plaintiff would to be establish a prima facie case if the defendant offers no evidence in
defence. In the appreciation of evidence of witnesses in civil cases, hyper-technical
approach should be avoided. The litigant should not be allowed to suffer for the
lawyer's default.215
Where a plaintiff established a prima facie case against the defendant, who then chose
not to give evidence in his defence, the case had to be regarded as proved on a balance
of probabilities. In the instant case, given that the plaintiff had shown that the
defendant was obsessed with the victim, that he had been violent towards her in the
past, that he had no explanation for where he was on the day she died and that he had
lied to the police when questioned, it was unbelievable that the defendant had failed to
adduce any evidence that he was innocent. That converted a prima facie case into an
extremely strong case, which permitted the court to conclude that assault and battery,
effectively murder, had been proved.216

[s 3.33.1] Suspicion.—
The rules of evidence cannot be departed from, because there may be a strong moral
conviction of guilt; for a Judge cannot set himself above the law which he has to
administer or make it or mould it to suit the exigencies of a particular occasion.217
Punishment of an accused person on the basis of suspicion alone has been held to be
not permissible. Burden is always on the prosecution to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt. The graver the offence, the stricter should be the degree of proof.218
Suspicion cannot give probative force to testimony which in itself is insuﬃcient to
establish or to justify an inference of a particular fact.219 Suspicion, though a ground
for scrutiny, cannot be made the foundation of a decision.220 The gravest suspicion
against an accused will not suﬃce to convict him of a crime unless evidence
establishes it beyond doubt.221 "The sea of suspicion has no shore and the Court that
embarks upon it is without rudder and compass".222
In cases based on circumstantial evidence that evidence should be so strong as to
point unmistakably to the guilt of the accused. The fundamental rule by which the
effect of the circumstantial evidence is to be estimated is that in order to justify the
inference of guilt the inculpatory facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
accused and incapable of explanation upon any other reasonable hypothesis than that
of his guilt.223
In cases depending largely upon circumstantial evidence, there is always a danger that
the conjecture or suspicion may take the place of legal proof. Such suspicion, however
strong, cannot be allowed to take the place of proof. The court has to be watchful and
ensure that conjectures and suspicions do not take the place of legal proof.224
Suspicion, however strong, cannot be a substitute for legal proof. Graver the charge,
the greater has to be the standard of proof. The court must keep in mind that there lies
a long mental distance between "may be true" and "must be true".225

[s 3.33.2] "Matters before it".—
The expression "matters before it" includes matters which do not fall within the
deﬁnition of "evidence" in section 3. Therefore, in determining what is evidence other
than evidence within the phraseology of the Act, the deﬁnition of "evidence" must be
read with that of "proved". It would appear, therefore, that the Legislature intentionally
refrained from using the word "evidence" in this deﬁnition, but used instead the words,
"matters before it". For instance, a fact may be orally admitted in court. The admission
would not come within the deﬁnition of the word "evidence" as given in this Act, but still
it is a matter which the court before whom the admission was made would have to
take into consideration in order to determine whether the particular fact was proved or
not.226 Therefore, the word "matters" in section 3 of the Act is of a wide connotation. It
not only includes evidence but also the surrounding circumstances.227
Similarly, the result of a local investigation under the Code of Civil Procedure must be
taken into consideration by the court though not "evidence" within the deﬁnition given
by the Act. The result of a local enquiry by a presiding judicial oﬃcer, although it does
not come under clauses (1) and (2) of the deﬁnition of the word "evidence", falls within
the meaning of the word "proved" which comes immediately after.228
Where certain letters were not produced before the court by any known procedure of
law, nor any aﬃdavit ﬁled for using some of them in evidence, use of any one of those
letters was held to be not proper.229 The use of the word "proved" does not enable the
court to take into consideration matters including statements whose use is absolutely
barred.230

[s 3.33.3] Difference between evidence in civil and criminal proceedings.—
The rules of evidence are in general the same in civil and criminal proceedings, and
bind alike State and citizen, prosecutor and accused, plaintiff and defendant, counsel
and client. There are, however, some exceptions, e.g. the doctrine of estoppel applies to
civil proceedings only;231 the provisions relating to confessions (Sections 24-30),
character of persons appearing before courts (Sections 53, 54), and incompetence of
parties as witnesses (Section 120), are peculiar to criminal proceedings.
In a civil case, a Judge of fact must ﬁnd for the party in whose favour there is a
preponderance of proof, though the evidence is not entirely free from doubt. In a
criminal case no weight of preponderant evidence is suﬃcient, short of that which
excludes all reasonable doubt. Unbiased moral conviction is no suﬃcient foundation
for a verdict of guilty unless it is based on substantial facts leading to no other
reasonable conclusion than that of guilt. In cases dependent on circumstantial

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
evidence, the incriminating facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the
accused and incapable of explanation on any other reasonable hypothesis than that of
his guilt. Circumstantial evidence not furnishing conclusive evidence against an
accused, though forming a ground for grave suspicion against him, cannot sustain a
conviction. To justify the inference of guilt from circumstances, the inculpating facts
must be shown to be incompatible with the innocence of the accused and incapable of
explanation on any other reasonable hypothesis than that of guilt.232 No man can be
convicted of an offence where the theory of his guilt is no more likely than the theory of
his innocence.233
In a criminal trial the degree of probability of guilt has got to be very much higher—
almost amounting to a certainty—than in a civil proceeding, and, if there is the slightest
reasonable or probable chance of innocence of an accused, the beneﬁt of it must be
given to him. But that is quite a different thing from contending that even where the
burden of proof, say of proving an exception, is on the accused, the term "proved"
should be differently and more liberally construed than when the burden of proof is on
the prosecution. The Evidence Act does not contemplate and does not lay down that
the satisfaction which is required to be caused in the mind of a prudent man before
acting on or accepting the prosecution story is to be of a different kind or degree from
the satisfaction which is required when the accused has to discharge the burden which
is cast upon him by law.234 The standard of proof required in election matters in
proving corrupt practices is the same as that for a criminal offence.235
The onus of proof in criminal cases never shifts to the accused, and they are under no
obligation to prove their innocence or adduce evidence in their defence or make any
statement.236
In a civil case, it is the duty of the parties to place their case before the court as they
think best, whereas in a criminal case it is the duty of the court to bring all relevant
evidence on the record and to see that justice is done.237
In a criminal trial, it is for the court to determine the question of the guilt of the accused
and it must do this upon the evidence before it, independently of decisions in a civil
litigation between the same parties. A judgment or decree is not admissible in evidence
in all cases as a matter of course, and, generally speaking, a judgment is only
admissible to show its date and legal consequence.238
The rules regulating the admissibility of evidence are, in general, the same in civil as in
criminal proceedings. When dealing with the serious question of the guilt or innocence
of persons charged with crime, the following general rules have been suggested for the
guidance of Tribunals:—
1. The onus of proving everything essential to the establishment of the charge

against the accused lies on the prosecutor.
2. The evidence must be such as to exclude, to a moral certainty, every reasonable

doubt of the guilt of the accused.
3. In matters of doubt it is safer to acquit than to condemn, since it is better that

several guilty persons should escape than that one innocent person should
suffer.
4. There must be clear and unequivocal proof of the corpus delicti (substance of the

offence).
5. The hypothesis of delinquency should be consistent with all the facts proved.239

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.33.3.1] Corpus delicti.—
In cases of homicide, death as a fact must be proved. Where the dead body of the
deceased was not recovered, and no piece of mortal remains of the deceased was
found, and no evidence was brought on record to show that there was no possibility of
recovery of dead body, it having been washed away in the river, the Supreme Court held
that corpus delicti has not been proved.240 In Sevaka Perumal v State of Tamil Nadu, the
Supreme Court held that there may be cases where corpus delicti is not possible to be
traced or recovered, such as the dead body was thrown into the river stream or washed
away or burnt. But where no such circumstance exists or has been brought on record,
corpus delicti must be established like any other fact.241

[s 3.33.3.2] Balance of Probability.—
Civil cases are decided on the basis of preponderance of evidence, while in criminal
case, the entire burden lies on the prosecution, and proof beyond reasonable doubt has
to be given. Findings recorded in one proceeding have no binding effect on another
proceedings. The evidence in one case and arguments presented in it might have been
different from those in the other.242

[s 3.34] Appreciation of Evidence.—
The court has to decide on the basis of the evidence adduced before it by the parties
whether the guilt of the accused is made out beyond a reasonable doubt243 and
whether, in a civil case, on a balance of probabilities the plaintiff has made out a case
for relief.244 The prosecution case has to rest on its own strength, and not on absence
of any explanation by the accused person or his inability to raise any plausible defence.
The governing principle is known as that of "standard of proof". But here under the
Evidence Act all such cases are reported under the caption "appreciation of
evidence".245 Absolute standard of proof does not exist. For a proof to be beyond
reasonable doubt, the standard of reasonable man must be adopted.246 This is a very
delicate task. The higher courts have often to reject or remand cases because the
evidence was not properly appreciated. A testimony without a fringe or embroidery of
untruth is rare. The court can reject it only when it is tainted to the core, that is, where
falsehood and truth are inextricably intertwined.247 If this is not so the court must
separate the grain from the chaff.248 Where the story told by the witnesses in the court
was consistent and also ﬁtted into medical evidence and contents of FIR, it warranted
implicit reliance notwithstanding different statements obtained by the police under
section 162, CrPC.249 In Kanwar Pal Singh v State of Haryana,250 the Supreme Court
held that, though the statement of the witnesses recorded under section 164 CrPC is to
be viewed with some initial distrust, it is not a rule of law and such evidence cannot be
discarded in all cases. The court cannot proceed on the hypothesis that eye-witnesses
are implicitly reliable. Every piece of evidence has to be subjected to the test of
objectivity.251 Fabric of truth should be the guiding factor, and not the village or rustic
background of the witness.252
The question of weight to be attached to a particular piece of evidence is a matter on
which decided cases cannot be of much help.253 The weight of the testimony of a
witness does not depend upon his social strata. The Supreme Court did not approve
the rejection of the evidence of a poor teacher or a peon.254 A previous convict can
testify.255 It was shown of a witness that he was convicted 43 years ago. His testimony

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was not allowed to be rejected on that ground alone.256 Where all the witnesses gave a
consistent account of the happening which was suﬃcient in itself to convict, it was
immaterial that there were slight discrepancies in examination-in-chief and crossexamination or that there was one more witness who was not produced,257 or that the
articles connected with the crime were not seized.258 Witness showed slight
discrepancies as to the number of blows and whether the victim was at the time in a
standing or lying posture. The Supreme Court observed:259
Such discrepancies in matters of detail may occur even in the evidence of truthful
witnesses. Such variations creep in because there are always natural differences in the
faculties of different individuals in the matter of observation, perception and memorisation
of details.
That is hardly a ground for rejecting their evidence when there is consensus as to the
substratum of the case.260

Deﬁciencies, drawbacks and inﬁrmities in evidence need not be evaluated to ﬁnd out
whether they go against the general tenor of evidence, rendering it unworthy of belief.
Discrepancies normally exist in oral evidence. They are due to errors of observation,
mental disposition, shock and horror at the time of incident. Unless they go to the root
of the matter, such discrepancies do not make the evidence unreliable. A rustic witness
was subjected to gruelling cross-examination for many days. Inconsistencies are
bound to occur in his narration of the event. They should not be blown out of
proportion. The court deprecated the practice of confusing witnesses by lengthy crossexaminations.261 A person who witnessed a murder was so upset and shocked that he
could not speak anything on reaching home until he recovered his breath. This did not
destroy the value of his testimony.262 Improvements made by a witness in his
testimony and variations in earlier and later statements do not by itself make his
testimony inﬁrm.263
Where a witness is not successfully contradicted with reference to his earlier
statement recorded by the IO under section 161(3) of CrPC, he cannot be said to be an
unreliable witness.264
The fact that a witness improves his testimony at the trial or that he was not reliable at
one point does not ruin the value of his testimony in its entirety.265

[s 3.35] Credibility of direct testimony of witness (Eye-witness).—
Direct testimony of witnesses which is in general agreement as to material
circumstances cannot be discarded for not being in strict conformity with medical
evidence. Minor discrepancies are not material since they occur due to individual
differences.266 Where minor discrepancies, not going to the root of the matter, are
found in the evidence of natural and probable witnesses, the discrepancies should not
be over-emphasised.267 Where the presence of eye-witness could not be secured at all,
that would not prevent the prosecution from relying on the evidence, though
circumstantial in nature, and, if such evidence is suﬃcient to bring home the guilt, the
conviction should follow.268
The Supreme Court held in PS Rao v State of AP, that the evidence of the employees of
the concerned branch of the bank could not be rejected merely on the ground that they
were working under the accused.269 Credibility of a witness should not be accepted
merely because it is corroborated by the evidence of other witnesses but credibility
should be tested in the touchstone of the broad probabilities of the case. If doubt
arises with regard to any material fact, the accused is always entitled to beneﬁt of such

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
doubt.270 The fact of failure of a witness's married life with her husband and her
subsequent living with another man cannot be a ground to discard her evidence.271
The credibility of the prosecution case is not affected by the fact that the FIR was
lodged at the police station of the place to which the injured was being brought for
treatment and he died on the way and not at the place of occurrence. The court also
held that non-production of the weapon of offence had no effect on the prosecution
case.272

[s 3.35.1] Eye-witness's account vis-à-vis medical opinion.—
Where the eye-witnesses' account is found credible and trustworthy, a medical opinion
pointing to the alternative possibilities cannot be accepted as conclusive.273

[s 3.35.2] Demeanour of witness.—
The court cannot disbelieve evidence of one witness and believes that of the other
merely on the basis of demeanour without giving reasons or grounds for the same. The
demeanour can only be an additional factor to be taken into account.274

[s 3.35.3] Multiple eye-witnesses.—
Where a case involved a large number of eye-witnesses, the Supreme Court said that
there must be a string running through the evidence of all of them satisfying the test of
consistency.275

[s 3.35.4] Status of witness.—
It has been held that respectability and veracity of a witness does not necessarily
depend upon his status in life. Merely because the respondent is a school teacher, it
could not be presumed that whatever he has deposed was a gospel truth and to
dismiss the plaintiff's case on that basis.276

[s 3.36] Sole witness.—
The court may and can act on the testimony of a sole witness though uncorroborated.
But corroboration should be insisted upon where nature of the testimony itself requires.
Hence, no general rule can be laid down.277

[s 3.36.1] Mass killing by mob.—
A deep-seated enmity between two communities resulted in the annihilation of 9
human lives and serious injury to 4 persons. Proof of motive was available. The trial
judge adopted this guiding principle that out of 51 accused persons whom he was
trying he would convict only those against whom some overt act was proved and there
were at least three eye-witnesses to establish participation or overt act of each one of
the accused persons, was held to be proper.278

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.36.2] Motive not established.—
Failure to prove motive in a case resting entirely on circumstantial evidence is not fatal
in itself to the prosecution case. However, courts are to be more careful and
circumspect in scrutinising the evidence to ensure that suspicion does not take the
place of proof while ﬁnding the accused guilty.279

[s 3.37] Conclusive Proof.—
Mere matching of blood group of the deceased in the wearing apparel of the accused
cannot be said to be a conclusive proof to fasten the accused with culpability.280 In a
case of murder, weapon of the crime was seized at the instance of the accused from a
room of his house occupied by all members of his family, it was not a conclusive proof
that the accused himself kept the weapon in the room under his exclusive possession
and the seizure of the weapon was not a piece of incriminating evidence.281 Where out
of six accused persons, two were given beneﬁt of doubt on certain grounds which were
available to two more accused also whose participation in crime was not established
beyond reasonable doubt, it was held that they also were entitled to beneﬁt of
doubt.282

[s 3.38] Non-examination of Investigating Oﬃcer.—
Where there is no contradiction in the statements of the prosecution witnesses given in
the court and their earlier statements, the non-examination of the investigating oﬃcer
like other witnesses cannot be said to be fatal for the prosecution.283

[s 3.38.1] Failure of Investigating Oﬃcer to point out spot on site plan.—
A failure on the part of the investigating oﬃcer to point out on the site plan the spot at
which the eye-witnesses had seen the occurrence taking place was held to be not
material. The court said that it could not be said that the evidence was hit by section
162, CrPC.284

[s 3.39] Non-examination by ballistic expert.—
The testimony of eye-witnesses was that the accused was armed with a double barrel
gun. He ﬁred two gun shots which hit the victim who died. The statement of the
investigating oﬃcer was that the gun seized was not in working condition and that no
purpose would be served in sending it for examination by ballistic expert. It was held
that non-examination by ballistic expert could not be said to have affected the creditworthiness of the version put forth by eye-witnesses.285

[s 3.40] Non-examination of one doctor.—
Where the postmortem report was prepared jointly by two doctors, examination of one
of them who had done major work was held to be suﬃcient.286

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.41] Appreciation of question of law.—
A wrong appreciation of facts, even if it results in a concurrent ﬁnding of facts, is liable
to be set aside.287 As against this, the Supreme Court did not interfere in the order of
conviction for bride burning on the basis of proper appreciation of circumstantial
evidence and extra judicial confession.288

[s 3.41.1] Appreciation of the testimony of victim of sexual assault.—
In a prosecution under section 377 for unnatural offence on a minor girl, the court
explained the matter of appreciation of her testimony in these words.289
The evidence of the victim girl as described by her is satisfactory even in its minutest
details, and nothing has been shown to me that she had falsely implicated the accused
at the cost of her own dignity. Where the eye-witness' account is credible and
trustworthy, medical opinion pointing to alternative possibilities is not accepted as
conclusive. Witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice, said Bentham. Eye-witnesses'
account should not be adversely evaluated and other evidence including medical
evidence should not outweigh the former in the scales of credibility. Similar
observations were made by the Apex Court in State of UP v Krishna Gopal.290

[s 3.42] Right to maintenance.—Evidence.—
Where the mother of an illegitimate child claimed maintenance from the alleged father
of the child, it was held that the evidence of the mother could not be accepted as a
proof of paternity of the said child without proper corroboration.291 In another case for
maintenance, it was held that factum of marriage could not be based on the few
statements given in support of the same.292 In a case the mother of an illegitimate
child claimed maintenance from the alleged father of the said child. There were no
allegations regarding moral lapses on the part of the mother and the panchayatdars
corroborated the evidence of mother, it was held that the child would be entitled to
maintenance from the alleged father.293

[s 3.42.1] Medical opinion about husband's conduct towards wife dying of
burns.—
Where a man was prosecuted for killing his wife by setting her on ﬁre and he tried to
defend himself by saying that he rather tried to save her and sustained burn injuries, the
court preferred the medical opinion which was to the effect that the nature of injuries
on the person of the accused showed that he tried to hold her by his hands and
prevented her from going out of the room.294

[s 3.42.2] Duty to come with clean hands.—
Where neither the prosecution nor the accused person came with clean hands and,
therefore, the court was not able to put reliance on either side, it was under no duty to
make out a third situation. The accused would be entitled to acquittal.295 The court
said296 that if the versions of both the sides were found to be incorrect, it had no
option but to acquit the accused persons. The inﬁrmities of the prosecution case may
lead the case to acquittal but the inﬁrmities of the defence put up by the accused
cannot lead to his conviction.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.42.3] Appreciation of evidence.—
Normally the Supreme Court would not subject the evidence to a reappreciation
particularly against a concurrent ﬁnding of fact by the courts below.297

[s 3.43] Disciplinary Proceedings.—
A case before the Supreme Court involved the removal of a bus conductor for not
collecting fare from certain passengers. The court held that strict rules of the Evidence
Act were not applicable to a domestic inquiry. Unrecorded statements of passengers
reproduced by the inspector of the ﬂying squad were held to be suﬃcient.298 The
Supreme Court has also held that rules of evidence are not applicable to inquiries
under Article 311 of the Constitution.299
The Supreme Court upheld the removal from service of a police inspector who had
attempted to force a woman in her hut to submit to him. Only direct evidence was the
statement of the woman though that was supported by the evidence of the
circumstances generated by the inspector's unsuccessful attempt to convert the
incident into resistance being offered to a prohibition raid. The Supreme Court regarded
the woman's evidence to be acceptable though she was described in the judgment as
an "unchaste woman" for the fact that she was keeping a friend in addition to her
husband.300
In a case of bribery, corroboration of the evidence of the complainant need not be
direct. It can be by circumstantial evidence also.301

[s 3.43.1] Disciplinary proceedings, illegally obtained evidence.—
The Professional Conduct Committee of the General Medical Council (GMC) found a
doctor to be guilty of serious professional misconduct and suspended her registration
for 12 months following her failure to return to her duties as a Senior House Oﬃcer, her
failure to give any or any adequate notice of her intention to leave her post or any
subsequent explanation. Her defence to the complaints made against her was based
upon medical grounds. She appealed against the decision contending that, whilst she
had given her consent to the partial disclosure of her medical records, the committee
had overstepped that consent and as such the information relied upon by the
committee in reaching the decision had been obtained illegally and was, therefore,
inadmissible. Her appeal was dismissed.
The court said302 that the admissibility of evidence in disciplinary proceedings was not
dependent upon it having been obtained legally.303 The principle in Khan was not
restricted to criminal proceedings and in any event the Rules of the GMC permitted
wider admissibility than is generally allowed in English criminal proceedings.

[s 3.44] Mode of obtaining evidence, irrelevant.—
The Supreme Court in its decision in Pushpadevi M Jatia v ML Wadhawan,304 endorsed
the already established principle that relevant evidence can be taken into account
irrespective of the method by which it was obtained. The court cited the observation of
Sir Lawrence Jenkins in Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor305 to the effect that evidence
which would otherwise be relevant does not become irrelevant because it was
discovered in the course of a search or seizure in violation of the statutory

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
enactments.306 The court also cited the observation of Lord Diplock in R v Sang307 to
the effect that however much the judge may dislike the way in which a particular piece
of evidence was obtained, if it is admissible evidence probative of the accused's guilt, it
is no part of his judicial function to exclude it on the ground that it was obtained by
improper or unfair means. The court is not concerned with how it was obtained. The
court may, however, exclude such evidence where its prejudicial effect would be out of
proportion to its evidential value.308
Wrongs committed by the investigating oﬃcer were not allowed to affect that part of
the evidence which was trustworthy.309 There is of course always a word of caution. It
is that the judge has the discretion to disallow evidence in a criminal case if nonobservance of the strict rules of admissibility would operate unfairly against the
accused. That caution is the golden rule in criminal jurisprudence.310
Objections as to incompetency of the inquiring oﬃcer must be raised at the earliest
opportunity. The court said that such incompetence does not vitiate the entire
proceedings. The right to object becomes waived if not exercised in time. It cannot be
raised for the ﬁrst time before superior courts.311
Where in an appeal against certiﬁcation as a terrorist under the Anti Terrorisms, Crime
and Security Act, 2001, the question was whether the evidence obtained by torture was
admissible, the House of Lords were of the opinion that if the accused has created a
suspicion about torture, the fact of it should be probed ﬁrst and the evidence so
obtained, even if it remains admissible, it may lose its weight. The provisions relating to
certiﬁcation were repealed by the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2005.312

[s 3.45] DNA test.—
A woman was under the charge of adultery. She had undergone termination of
pregnancy. Slides relating to the operation were preserved in the hospital. The husband
applied for testing his DNA for examining whether he was father of the foetus. The
court ordered it in accordance with the law. It was held that such evidence could not be
taken to be collected at the behest of the court.313
In a dispute about the paternity of a child, the husband sought divorce on the ground
that the child was the result of the adulterous life of his wife. It was held that the High
Court had the inherent power to compel parties to undergo DNA test to ﬁnd out the
truth and clear misunderstanding between the parties.314 The property in dispute was
the self-acquired property of the mother. The suit for partition was ﬁled by the plaintiff
(daughter). The son was defendant. He stated that the plaintiff and her brother were
destitutes and not born to his mother. As such they had no right of inheritance. The
court said that the maternity of the parties was thus disputed. The court directed both
the parties to undergo DNA test.315

[s 3.45.1] Order of DNA test by Women's Commission.—
A woman sought declaration that she was the legitimate wife of her husband and the
female child is his legitimate daughter. The court said that if the DNA test came out to
be positive, it would redeem the woman and her child of their trauma which they had
been undergoing for several years. The order of DNA test by Women's Commission was
proper.316

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 3.46] Domestic Inquiry.—
The standards of proof in domestic inquiries other than those involved in disciplinary
proceedings are also the same, namely, proof by preponderance of probability. Strict
rules of evidence are not applicable to departmental proceedings or proceedings
before domestic tribunals. But there must be relevant evidence whether direct or
circumstantial to support necessary inference as to the existence of the alleged facts.
Applying these principles to the facts of a case before it, the Supreme Court came to
the conclusion that where the marks awarded by a moderator were tampered with in
favour of the candidate, the probability would suggest, and it would have to be taken as
a proof, that the tampering must have been in league with either the candidate or his
parent/guardian etc.317
The court proceeded to explain the position as follows: "Strict rules of the Evidence Act,
and the standard of proof envisaged therein do not apply to departmental proceedings
or domestic tribunal. It is open to the authorities to receive and place on record all the
necessary, relevant, cogent and acceptable material facts though not proved strictly in
conformity with the Evidence Act. The material must be germane and relevant to the
facts in issue. In grave cases like forgery, fraud, conspiracy, mis-appropriation, etc.
seldom direct evidence would be available. Only the circumstantial evidence would
furnish the proof. Inference from the evidence and circumstances must be carefully
distinguished from conjectures or speculation. The mind is prone to take pleasure to
adapt circumstances to one another and even in straining them a little to force them to
form parts of one connected whole. There must be evidence, direct or circumstantial,
to deduce necessary inferences in proof of the facts in issue. There can be no
inferences unless there are objectively proved facts, direct or circumstantial from which
to infer the other fact which it is sought to establish. The standard of proof is not proof
beyond reasonable doubt but the preponderance of probabilities tending to draw an
inference that the fact must be more probable. Standard of proof, however, cannot be
put in a strait-jacket formula. The probative value could be gauged from facts and
circumstances in a given case. The standard of proof is the same both in civil cases
and domestic enquiries".
"Unless either the examinee or parent or guardian approached the fabricator; gave the
number and instructed him/them to fabricate the marks, it would not be possible to
know their number to fabricate. The act of fabrication is an offence. Merely that is done
in one subject or more than one, makes little difference. Its gravity is not mitigated if it
is committed in one subject alone. This is not an innocent at or a casual mistake during
the course of performance of the oﬃcial duty. It was obviously done as a concerted
action. In view of the admitted facts and above circumstances the necessary
conclusion that could unerringly be drawn would be that either the examinee or the
parent or guardian obviously was a privy to the fabrication and that the forgery was
committed at his or her or parent's or guardian's instance. It is, therefore, clear that the
conclusion reached by the standing committee that the fabrication was done at the
instance of either the examinees or their parents or guardians is amply borne out from
the record."318

[s 3.46.1] Interference in concurrent ﬁndings.—
The Supreme Court laid down in Balak Ram v State of UP,319 "that the powers of the
Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution are wide enough but in criminal
appeals, this court does not interfere with the concurrent ﬁndings of fact save in
exceptional circumstances. The [question] of the scope of interference arose in
Arunachalam v PSR Setharathnam320 wherein the Supreme Court held that ... the very
nature of the power has led the court to set limits. It is now the well established
practice of this court to permit the invocation of the power under Article 136 only in
very exceptional circumstances, as when a question of law of general public

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
importance arises or a decision shocks the conscience of the court. But within the
restrictions imposed by itself, this court has the undoubted power to interfere even in
ﬁndings of facts making no distinction between judgments of acquittal and conviction,
if the High Court in arriving at those ﬁndings has acted perversely or otherwise
improperly."321

[s 3.46.2] Prior enmity.—
Where prior enmity of the accused with the deceased and the witnesses was duly
established and the presence of the accused at the place of occurrence was highly
doubtful, it was held that it was not safe to place reliance on the evidence of such
witnesses.322
The courts have said time and again that the post-event conduct of a person varies
from person to person. There cannot be a cast-iron reaction to be followed as a model
by everyone witnessing such event. Different persons would react differently on seeing
any violence and their behaviour and conduct would, therefore, be different.323

[s 3.46.3] Omission to state material facts.—
When a solitary witness omits to state the material facts of the actual incident in his
ﬁrst disclosure before the investigating oﬃcer, then his evidence becomes doubtful and
is to be pushed out of the arena of trustworthiness.324

[s 3.46.4] Non- explanation of injuries on person of accused.—
The signiﬁcance of non-explanation of injuries on the person of the accused was
explained by the Supreme Court in Dhananjay Shanker Shetty v State of Maharashtra.325
In this case four incised injuries on non-vital parts of the person of the accused were
found which were caused by sharp edged weapon and the prosecution completely
failed to explain the same. The court said: "It cannot be laid down as a matter of law or
invariably a rule that whenever accused sustained an injury in the same occurrence, the
prosecution is obliged to explain it and on its failure to do so the prosecution case
should be disbelieved." But non-explanation of injuries assumes signiﬁcance when
there are material circumstances which make the prosecution case doubtful.
Reference in this connection may be made to decisions of this court in the cases of
Takhaji Hiraji v Thakore Kubersing Chamansingh,326 and Kashiram v State of MP.327 In
the present case, non-explanation of injuries on the appellant by the prosecution
assumes signiﬁcance as there are circumstances which make the prosecution case,
showing complicity of appellant with the crime, highly doubtful.

[s 3.47] Hostile witness.—
The testimony of such a witness is acceptable to the extent to which it is corroborated
by the evidence of a reliable witness.328 The evidence of a hostile witness is not to be
totally discarded. The admissible parts of his statement can be used by the
prosecution or defence.329 Where the prosecution witness supported the defence side

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
but even so the prosecution did not get him declared as a hostile witness, it was held
that the accused could rely on such evidence.330

[s 3.48] FIR as evidence.—
An FIR does not constitute substantive evidence. It can only be used as a previous
statement for purposes of either corroborating its maker or for contradicting him. In
such a situation, previous statement cannot be used unless attention of the witness
has ﬁrst been drawn to those parts by which it is proposed to contradict him.331

[s 3.48.1] Newspaper report.—
The court has to react, with extreme caution on a newspaper report, which has not
been substantiated in adversarial litigation. It would be a perilous piece of evidence to
ﬁnd the State Government to be guilty of fraud and perjury.332

[s 3.48.2] Variance between statements in FIR and in deposition.—
An FIR need not contain an exhaustive account of the incident. In this case the court
found that all the essential and relevant details of the incident were given in the FIR.
The witness who had dictated the FIR gave a few more details in her evidence. The
court said that her evidence could not discarded by saying that there was an
improvements in her testimony.333

[s 3.48.3] Variance between medical evidence and ocular evidence.—
In case of variance between medical evidence and ocular evidence, unimpeachable
evidence of eye-witnesses should be accepted in preference to hypothetical answers
given by medical oﬃcer.334
Doctors are usually confronted with questions on different possibilities and
probabilities about the consequences of injuries. Their response depends upon the
manner of questioning. But their answers are not the last word on such possibilities.
The court said that the evidence of eye-witnesses cannot be discarded on the basis of
possibilities so suggested.335

[s 3.48.4] Variance between ballistic evidence and eye-witness account.—
The eye-witness deposed that the accused ﬁred the fatal shot from mouser riﬂe and
that the other accused who ﬁred at the son of the deceased with a 12-bore gun missed
him and hit the wall. The report of a ballistic expert was that the discharged empties of
the cartridge which was found near the dead body was not ﬁred from mouser riﬂe. The
bullets recovered from the wall were mouser bullets. The eye-witnesses were relatives
of the deceased. Their statements also suffered from inter se contradictions. This
raised doubts about their presence at the spot.336

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

197 Hawkins v Powells Tillery Steam Coal Co Ltd, (1911) 1 KB 988 , 995; Emperor v Shaﬁ Ahmed,

(1925) 31 Bom LR 515 ; Bhano v Babu Singh, 1998 Cr LJ 4768 (Raj), facts must be proved by the
best evidence available.
198 Inder Singh v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1978 SC 1091 : 1978 Cr LJ 766 ; Doubt must be real,

not fanciful. Gurbachan Singh v Satpal Singh, AIR 1990 SC 209 ; 1990 Cr LJ 562 : (1990) 1 SCC
445 : 1990 SCC (Cri) 151 . The court pointed out that the same standards of proof are
applicable in reference to crimes against women and the provisions of S. 498A of IPC and S.
113A of the Evidence Act. Vijayee Singh v State of UP, AIR 1990 SC 1459 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 .
199 Walters v R, (1969) 2 AC 26 (PC). Ram Bihari Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC 1850 :

(1998) 4 SCC 517 : 1998 Cr LJ 2515 , the Supreme Court explains concepts like probative value
of evidence which means the weight to be given to it and the legal implications of relevancy and
admissibility.
200 State of Goa v Pandurang, AIR 2009 SC 1066 : (2008) 16 SCC 714 ; State of Punjab v

Sukhchain Singh, AIR 2009 SC 1542 : (2008) 16 SCC 629 .
201 State of MP v Dharkole, AIR 2005 SC 44 : (2004) 13 SCC 308 : 2005 Cr LJ 108 .
202 Abdul Karim v The Crown, (1879) PR No. 32 of 1878 (Cr).
203 Emperor v Shaﬁ Ahmed, (1925) 31 Bom LR 515 , 516.
204 Tej Bahadur Singh v State of UP, AIR 1990 SC 431 ; 1990 Cr LJ 611 : 1990 Supp SCC 125 :

1990 SCC (Cri) 627 . Sevaka Perumal v State of TN, 1991 Cr LJ 1845 : AIR 1991 SC 1863 : (1991)
3 SCC 471 , a murder can be proved by direct or circumstantial evidence though there may be no
trace of the body of the deceased.
205 Devendra Bhai Shankar Mehta v Ramesh Chandra Vithaldas Sheth, AIR 1992 SC 1398 :

(1992) 3 SCC 473 .
206 M Narsinga Rao v State of AP, 2001 Cr LJ 515 : AIR 2001 SC 318 .
207 Government of Bombay v Samuel, (1946) 48 Bom LR 746 (SB); Yogendra Morarji v State of

Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 661 : 1980 Cr LJ 459 ; Naval Kishore Somani v Poonam Somani, AIR 1999
AP 1 , a fact not proved does not necessarily mean that it is a false fact.
208 Murarilal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 at 535: 1980 Cr LJ 393 . Further vividly explained

by the Supreme Court in Yogendra Morarji v State of Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 660 : 1980 Cr LJ 459
and again in State of UP v Krishna Gopal, AIR 1988 SC 2154 : (1988) 4 SCC 302 : 1988 SCC (Cri)
928 . There can always be two views. But the alternative view should be totally ignored unless it
carries some degree of plausibility. State of UP v Chet Ram, AIR 1989 SC 1543 : 1989 Cr LJ 1785
: (1989) 2 SCC 425 : 1989 SCC (Cr) 388.
209 State of Kerala v Bahueyan, AIR 1987 SC 482 : 1988 Cr LJ 1579 : 1986 4 SCC 124 .
210 Shankarlal Gyarasill Lal Dixit v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1981 SC 765 : 1981 Cr LJ 325 :

(1981) 2 SCC 35 .
211 State of UP v Ram Sewak, AIR 2003 SC 2141 at p 2147.
212 Ramua v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 3972 (All).
213 M Narsinga Rao v State of AP, AIR 2001 SC 318 , the case was under the prevention of

Corruption Act, 1988.
214 Dalbir Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 2009 SC 1674 : (2009) 11 SCC 376 .
215 Central Bank of India v Ashran Degraj Rathi, AIR 2007 NOC 277 (Gau).
216 Francisco v Diedrick, The Times, April 3, 1998 (QBD).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
217 Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 , 508; Lakhwinder Singh v State, 1998 Cr

LJ 468 (P&H), proving of guilt of the accused is the burden of the prosecution. Mere conjectures
or surmises or picking up some sentences from here and there would not be enough to
establish the guilt of the accused.
218 Mousam Singha Roy v State of WB, (2003) 12 SCC 377 : 2003 (3) Crimes 321 (SC).
219 Ibid. Also Padala Veera Reddy v State of AP, 1989 BBCJ 121 : 1990 Cr LJ 605 : AIR 1990 SC

79 : 1989 Supp (2) SCC 706 ; Abdulla Mohammed Pagarkar v State, AIR 1980 SC 499 : (1980) 1
SCR 604 : 1980 Cr LJ 220 ; Vindo Samuel v Delhi Admn, AIR 1992 SC 465 : 1991 Cr LJ 3359 , the
fact that a person getting down from a bus walked away fastly might create suspicion that he
was the chain snatcher of lady passenger, but not proof. Jagga Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1995
SC 135 : 1994 Supp (3) SCC 463 , suspicion.
220 Mohammad Mehdi Hasan Khan v Mandir Das, (1912) 39 IA 184 : 190 34 All 511 : 14 Bom LR

1073, quoted in Hari Krishna v King-Emperor, (1935) 11 Luck 327 , 335.
221 Hawaldar Singh v King-Emperor, (1932) 7 Luck 623 .
222 Ibid. See also observations to the same effect in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v State of

Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 ; 1984 Cr LJ 1738 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 487 ;
Bhugdomal Gangaram v State of Gujarat (1984) 1 SCC 319 : AIR 1983 SC 906 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 67
: 1983 Cr LJ 1276 . Suspicion is not a substitute for proof. Varkey Joseph v State of Kerala, AIR
1993 SC 1892 : 1993 Cr LJ 2010 : 1993 Supp (3) SCC 754 . See also State of Maharashtra v
Prabhu Barku Gade, 1995 Cr LJ 1432 (Bom). On mere suspicion, however strong, conviction
cannot be based, Babuda v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1992 SC 2091 : 1992 Cr LJ 3451 . See also
State of Maharashtra v Sukhdev Singh, AIR 1992 SC 2100 : 1992 Cr LJ 3554 : (1992) 3 SCC 700 .
Mere suggestion or suspicion of defence cannot discredit the eye-witness, Kirtan Bhuyan v State
of Orissa, AIR 1992 SC 1579 : 1992 Cr LJ 2325 . Where the testimony of the eye-witness was
clouded with grave suspicion and serious doubts, it was quite unsafe to act upon his evidence.
Jagdish Prasad v State of MP, AIR 1994 SC 1251 : 1994 Cr LJ 1106 ; Pabitra Pradhan v State of
Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 3798 (Ori), conﬂicting version with regard to time and place of occurrence,
recovery of weapon and its identiﬁcation was doubtful, doctor also had difference of opinion,
prosecution case rejected.
223 Ibid, Appreciation of circumstantial evidence cannot create presumption of guilt. Naresh

Kumar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1980 SC 1168 : 1980 Cr LJ 920 ; State (Delhi Admn) v VC.
Shukla, AIR 1980 SC 1382 : 1980(2) SCC 665 . Standard of proof in incidental matters is the
same as in others. State (Delhi Admn.) v Sanjay Gandhi, AIR 1978 SC 961 : 1978 Cr LJ 952 .
Requirements of "proved" are the same whether the evidence is direct or circumstantial. State of
Maharashtra v Mohd. Yakub, AIR 1980 SC 1111 ; 1980 Cr LJ 793 .
224 Jaherlala Das v State of Orissa, (1991) 3 SCC 27 : AIR 1991 SC 1388 : (1991) 2 Crimes 268 :

Swinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 669 : 1992 Cr LJ 606 , suspicion, however strong,
cannot take the place of proof. State v Bhanudas Sommanna Sangolkar, 1997 Cr LJ 3205 (Bom),
motive may create a very strong suspicion but cannot take the place of proof.
225 The Supreme Court following this line of reasoning in State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu,

(2005) 11 SCC 600 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 : (2005) 122 DLT 194 , and observed that there was a
serious suspicion as to complicity of the accused, SAR Gilani, in the conspiracy to attack
Parliament House, the court could not condemn him in the absence of suﬃcient evidence
pointing unmistakably to his guilt.
226 Joy Coomar v Bundhoo Lall, (1882) 9 Cal 363 , 366.
227 Govindan v P Mahendran, AS No. 569 of 2006, decided on 27 April 2017 (Madras High

Court).
228 Joy Coomar v Bundhoo Lall, (1882) 9 Cal 363 , 366.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
229 Charidrakant Anna Patil v State, 1998 Cr LJ 369 (SC).
230 Hazarilal v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1980 SC 873 : 1980 Cr LJ 564 .
231 Best, 12th Edn, section 94, p 81.
232 Emperor v Kangal Mali, (1905) 41 Cal 601 ; Emperor v Parbhoo, (1941) All 843 FB; Pritam

Singh v Tilok Singh, (1953) 2 Patiala 187. Circumstances which throw suspicion about the
genuineness of a will for civil purposes may not be enough to sustain a criminal charge. Arjun
Singh v Hazara Singh, 1979 Cr LJ 1029 : AIR 1979 SC 1236 .
233 Emperor v Shivdas Omkar, (1912) 15 Bom LR 315 .
234 State v Harprasad Ghashiram Gupta, (1951) 53 Bom LR 938 .
235 C Subba Rao v K B Reddy, AIR 1967 AP 155 . Jahed v State of WB, 1995 Cr LJ 3451 (Cal), in

a criminal trial degree of proof is stricter than what is required in a civil proceeding.
236 Binayendra Chandra Pande v Emperor, (1936) 63 Cal 929 .
237 Emperor v Janki Prasad, (1920) 43 All 283 ; Hema Reddy v Rakesh Reddy, AIR 2002 AP 228 ,

wife pleaded and produced evidence that her husband contemplated marrying a girl from
among his close relationship but she could not prove it. A false allegation may amount to
evidence of cruelty.
238 Trailokyanath Das v Emperor, (1931) 59 Cal 136 .
239 Best, 12th Edn, sections 439, 440, 441-451, pp 372-382.
240 KT Palanisamy v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2008 SC 1095 : (2008) 3 SCC 100 : (2008) 1 SCC

(Cri) 627 .
241 AIR 1991 SC 1463 , (1991) 3 SCC 471 .
242 Iqbal Singh Marwah v Meenakshi Marwah, AIR 2005 2119 : (2005) 4 SCC 370 : (2005) 3 Mah

LJ 530 : 2005 Cr LJ 2161 .
243 Chhotanney v State of UP, AIR 2009 SC 2013 : (2009) 11 SCC 71 , doubts would be called

reasonable if they are free from zest for abstract speculation.
244 Toran Singh v State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 2807 : (2002) 6 SCC 494 .
245 Balbir Singh v State of Haryana, 1987 Cr LJ 853 : AIR 1987 SC 1053 : (1987) SCC 533 : 1987

SSC (Cri) 193, a prosecution under Terrorist and Disruptive Activities Act, 1985 (now repealed)
suffering from incredibility and inﬁrm evidence, no proof of alleged facts. See also Mohd. Iqbal
M Shaikh v State of Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 2537 : AIR 1998 SC 2864 : (1998) 4 SCC 494 .
246 State of WB v Orilal Jaiswal, AIR 1994 SC 1418 : (1994) 1 SCC 73 , 89, 90 : 1994 Cr LJ 2104 .
247 The Supreme Court observed on the facts of a case before it that the conduct of a

responsible oﬃcer should not have been doubted on the basis of a mere suspicion. Lila Krishan
v Maniram Godara, AIR 1985 SC 1073 : 1985 Supp SCC 179 . In Forest Range Oﬃcer v
Aboobacker, 1989 Cr LJ 2038 Ker, the testimony of a forest range oﬃcer was accepted without
corroboration. State of Kerala v Kuttan, 1988 Cr LJ 453 (Ker), the testimony of the owner of
articles stolen from him not rejected only because he had not reported the crime.
248 State of UP v Shanker, AIR 1981 SC 897 : 1981 Cr LJ 23 : 1980 Supp SCC 489 ; Biswambar

Meher v State of Orissa, 1989 Cr LJ 271 Orissa, evidence of a sole tribal eye-witness to a ghastly
murder, relied.
249 Gurnam Kaur v Bakshish Singh, AIR 1981 SC 631 : 1981 Cr LJ 34 . Minor discrepancies in

the statements of witnesses and those in the FIR are generally ignored because no one can
expect an FIR to be perfect in its minute details. See Ram Udgar Jha v State of Bihar, 1987 Cr LJ
113 (Pat); Gajanand v State of Gujarat, 1987 Cr LJ 374 (Guj). A person who was injured by gun
ﬁre, his failure to note that the accused was taking out the empty cartridge manually, did not
cast any reﬂection upon his testimony, he being concerned with his injury, Ved Prakash v State of
Haryana, AIR 1996 SC 2795 : 1996 Cr LJ 4156 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
250 Kanwar Pal Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1994 SC 1045 : 1994 Cr LJ 1392 .
251 Hallu v State of MP, AIR 1974 SC 1936 : 1974 Cr LJ 1385 .
252

Shivaji v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 2622 : 1973 Cr LJ 1783 ; Kondamuri

Anasuyamma v Dist Judge, AIR 1991 AP 47 , no adverse presumption about a rustic witness who
appeared to testify about a document particularly when the document itself was not produced.
253 Charan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 246 : 1974 Cr LJ 1253 .
254 Sat Paul v Delhi Admn. AIR 1976 SC 294 : 1976 Cr LJ 295 , though it was a trap case and the

court said that evidence of trap witnesses should be scrutinised with extra care. See also
Gurdial Singh v Biru, AIR 1976 SC 449 : 1976 Cr LJ 346 ; R.P Arora v State of Punjab, AIR 1973 SC
498 : 1972 Cr LJ 1214 . It is not proper to disbelieve a witness merely because the police had
not examined him as a witness. Fizabai v Nemichand, AIR 1993 MP 79 , relying on Varadamma v
H Mallapa Gowda, 1972 ACJ 375 (Mys).
255 Varghese Thomas v State of Kerala, AIR 1977 SC 701 : 1977 Cr LJ 343 .
256 Arumuga Nadar v State of TN, AIR 1976 SC 2588 : 1976 Cr LJ 1998 .
257 State of Maharashtra v Krishnamurti, AIR 1981 SC 617 : 1981 Cr LJ 9 . Followed in State of

Orissa v Dilip Kumar Chand, 1987 Cr LJ 1242 (Ori), presumption against prosecution only when
there is deliberate suppression of evidence; effect of discrepancies also considered. Baskar Re,
1991 Cr LJ 535 (Mad), one witness turning hostile, testimony of others not affected.
Thunincharam Re, 1991 Cr LJ 1319 (Mad), minor variations in the statements of a relative eyewitness ignored: Babarali Ahmedali Sayed v State of Gujarat, 1991 Cr LJ 1269 (Guj), prosecution
for accepting bribe, minor discrepancies in the statements of the witness creeping in because
of lapse of time, ignored. Rakka Dineshan v State of Kerala, 1990 Cr LJ 1361 (Ker), evidence of a
witness not to be discarded only because his name was not listed in the FIR. Rachpal Singh v
State of Punjab, 2002 Cr LJ 3540 (SC), death by gunshot injuries, discrepancy regarding nature
of injury as to whether the wound edges were averted or inverted, not material, the presence of
the accused persons at that place with those weapons was established, ballistic examination,
proof good.
258 Santosh Kumar Sarkar v State of WB, 1988 Cr LJ 1828 (Cal). This is so because such

articles are only of corroborative value and in this case corroboration was not needed.
259 ST Shinde v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 791 : 1974 Cr LJ 674 .
260 See also Boya Gaganna v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1976 SC 1541 : 1976 Cr LJ 1158 , Minor

contradictions in the testimony of illiterate and ignorant women who were eye-witnesses were
held to be not material; Narpal Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1977 SC 1066 : 1977 Cr LJ 642 ,
accused bent upon murder, killed 5, accuracy could not be expected from witnesses as to the
number of injuries, shots, etc. But unexplained discrepancies in the statement of witnesses
would give beneﬁt of doubt. See Ajmer Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 1078 ; Bava Hajee v
State of Kerala, AIR 1974 SC 902 : 1974 Cr LJ 755 . Minor contradictions in the evidence of the
victim of an assault can be ignored. Appabhai v State of Gujarat, 1988 Cr LJ 848 : AIR 1988 SC
696 ; Martin v State of Kerala, 1991 Cr LJ 2391 (Ker). Non-compliance with the formality of the
presence of a gazetted oﬃcer or magistrate at search or seizure, the accused being told of his
right but did not insist upon it, evidence not vitiated. Om Prakash v State, 1991 Cr LJ 2980 Delhi,
under the Narcotic Drugs etc. Act, 1985. State of UP v Krishna Master, AIR 2010 SC 3071 : (2010)
12 SCC 324 , minor discrepancies not touching the core of the case, not a ground for rejection
of evidence in entirety. Minor omissions in police statements, never considered to be fatal.
261 State of UP v Krishna Master, AIR 2010 SC 3071 : (2010) 12 SCC 324 .
262 Narayan Singh v State of MP, AIR 1985 SC 1678 : (1985) 4 SCC 26 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 460 ;

Ram Avtar v Delhi Admn., AIR 1985 SC 1692 : 1985 Cr LJ 1865 . Where a witness contradicted
himself, his statement ﬁrst in time should be preferred. See Mohan Lal v State of Maharashtra,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
AIR 1982 SC 839 : (1982) 1 SCC 700 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 334 : 1982 Cr LJ 630 (2). Adivasi woman
showed some discrepancies in her evidence but even so accepted. Boti Pedia v State of Orissa,
AIR 1981 SC 1163 : 1981 Cr LJ 626 . Minor discrepancies, Jagdish v State of MP, AIR 1981 SC
1167 : 1981 Cr LJ 630 .
263 Maqsoodan v State of UP, AIR 1983 SC 126 : (1983) 1 SCC 218 : 1983 Cr LJ 218 : 1982 All

LJ 1524 : 1983 SCC Cr LJ 176; Rangi Lal v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 916 (All), improvements in
testimony; Kapil Singh v State of Bihar, 1990 Cr LJ 1249 (Pat), a chance witness improving his
testimony, even then found reliable.
264 Mani v State, Represented by Inspector of Police, 2010 Cr LJ 4151 (Mad)(DB).
265 Bhimrao v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1980 SC 1322 : 1980 Cr LJ 958 . See also Kuleshwar v

State UP, AIR 1980 SC 1534 where the court said that acquittal of all the accused because
prosecution case is unreliable but convicting one on the ground that there injuries on his person
was wrong. Bhagwan v MP, AIR 1980 SC 1873 on appreciation of evidence. Where the witness
improved his testimony to make it conform with the medical opinion, his testimony was
rejected. See Mahendra Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1989 Cr LJ 886 : AIR 1989 SC 982 .
266 State of Rajasthan v Ganesh Das, 1995 Cr LJ 25 (Raj), the court referred to Shivaji Sahebrao

Bobade v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 2622 at 2634 : 1973 Cr LJ 1783 at pp 1794-95 and
Kishan Narain v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 2751 : ( 1973 Cr LJ 1839 ). Ram Bhukan v
State of UP, AIR 1994 SC 561 : 1994 Cr LJ 596 , one witness turning hostile, testimony of others
not to be rejected. State of UP v Man Singh, 2003 Cr LJ 82 (SC), evidence of eye-witnesses to
murder rejected by the High Court on the subsequently introduced theory of fog. The Supreme
Court considered this to be improper.
267 Qaiyum Mian v State of Bihar, 1993 Cr LJ 1756 (Pat). Balbir Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1994

SC 969 : 1994 Cr LJ 1206 , minor inconsistencies as to the time of occurrence in the
corroborated testimony of the eye-witnesses ignored.
268 Jagjit Singh v State of Himachal Pradesh, 1994 SCC (Cr) 176 : 1994 Cr LJ 233 ; State of

Karnataka v Md Nazeer, AIR 2003 SC 999 , statement of the witness that a blow was given by the
accused on a particular part of the body. It is enough for sake of evidence. The witness is not
bound to explain whether the blow was intended or directed to a particular part.
269 AIR 1994 SC 1407 : 1994 Cr LJ 2102 . See also Nonappa Poojari v State of Karnataka, AIR

1994 SC 1581 : 1994 Cr LJ 2185 . Govind v State of MP, AIR 1994 SC 826 : 1994 Cr LJ 938 ,
reliable eye-witness but not giving many details, evidence not to be rejected. Gurdev Singh v
State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 1924 : 1992 Cr LJ 3447 , testimony of eye-witness belonging to
one faction, not discarded. Testimony of the witness truthful, could not be discarded on the
ground of long delay in recording his statement, Ganeshlal v State of Maharashtra, (1992) 3 SCC
106 : 1992 Cr LJ 1545 (SC). A remote possibility of innocence in favour of the accused, to let
him escape punishment would not be legally justiﬁable, Hans Raj v State of Rajasthan, 1995 Cr
LJ 1004 (Raj), Arjun Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1995 SC 2507 : 1995 Cr LJ 410 , beneﬁt of
doubt to some accused does not entitle others to automatic acquittal. To the same effect, Ram
Narain v State of Haryana, 1993 Cr LJ 1343 (P&H).
270 Mangulu Kanhar v State of Orissa, 1995 Cr LJ 2036 (Ori); Bijaya Ananda v State of Orissa,

1992 Cr LJ 3293 (Ori), the claim of a witness that he heard the conversation from a distance
355 feet was held to be doubtful. Harpal Singh v Devinder Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2914 : 1997 Cr LJ
3561 , the eye-witness made the injured to reach hospital. His clothes became soaked with
blood. The failure of the investigating agency to seize his clothes was not a ground for holding
that the eye-witness must not have seen the incident. Sarjerao Sahadeo Gaikwad v State, 1997 Cr
LJ 3839 (Bom), there was a lacerated wound on the head of the deceased which was bleeding
when he was medically examined. This was not explained by the witnesses. Such witnesses not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
creditable. Pandit Ram Prakash Sharma v Khairatilal, 1998 Cr LJ 1410 : AIR 1998 SC 2820 , eyewitnesses did not disclose names of two accused in their initial version to the police or to the
doctor though all the accused were known to them. They also did not explain 8 injuries on the
body of the deceased. Jayasena Pradhan v State, 2000 Cri PC 1953 (Ori), testimony bristled with
inﬁrmities and improbabilities, it could not be relied upon. Cherlopalli Cheliminabi Saheb v State
of AP, 2003 Cr LJ 1246 (SC), four assailants killed one man, only one weapon recovered,
improbable that they used a single weapon, the injured accused and the deceased reached the
hospital at the same time and the prosecution failed to explain injuries on the person of the
accused, other witnesses turned hostile, acquittal.
271 Vishnu Naraya Moger v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr LJ 1121 (Kant). Ram Sunder Yadav v

State of Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ 4558 : AIR 1998 SC 3117 , failure by the prosecution injuries on the
person of the accused was held to be not fatal to their case. Inder Singh v State of HP, 2003 Cr
LJ 1482 (HP), conviction on the basis of proper evidence of identiﬁcation and other evidence.
272 Shashidhar Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2676 (MP). State of Punjab v Jugraj Singh, 2002 Cr LJ

1503 (SC) eye-witnesses could not speak of the total number of injuries because they ran away
after witnessing two gun-shot injuries, eye-witness account prevailed. Bhim Singh v State of
Haryana, 2003 Cr LJ 857 (SC), there was variation in evidence as to time of death, evidence of
prosecution witnesses was sought to be corroborated by stomach contents of the deceased as
found in the post-mortem report. The court said that this could not be relied on as conclusive
evidence, there should be some other evidence, for example, as to when the deceased had
taken his last meal.
273 Vijay Pal v State (GNCT) of Delhi, 2015 Cr LJ 2041 (para 13) : AIR 2015 SC 1495 .
274 Navaneetham v S.S. Jayarama Pillai, 1996 AIHC 1849 .
275 C Magesh v State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 2768 : (2010) 5 SCC 645 .
276 Soev Bhimabai Eknath Shejwal v Suresh Dayanand Kasab, AIR 1999 Bom 379 .
277 Vithal Pundalik Zendge v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 1110 : (2008) 17 SCC 239 .
278 State of UP v Ram Bharat, 2002 Cr LJ 1529 (All).
279 Sunil Rai @ Pauna v Union Territory of Chandigarh, AIR 2011 SC 2545 : (2011) 12 SCC 258 .
280 Binder Munda v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 3508 (Ori), blood found on the apparel of the

accused matching with that of the deceased, not a conclusive proof.
281 Binder Munda v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 3508 (Ori); Chandar Singh v State of MP, 1992 Cr

LJ 3947 (MP), pre-existing enmity, whole family charge-sheeted, beneﬁt of doubt. Mohar v State
of UP, 2002 Cr LJ 4310 (SC), misspelling the name of the witness in the FIR and in the court
proceedings could not be used as a ground for doubting his presence at the stop.
282 Pulla Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1993 SC 1899 : 1993 Cr LJ 2246 . Chinnasamy v State of TN,

1994 Cr LJ 882 (Mad), all but one accused acquitted, the sole one could not be convicted by
making a new case. Leelason Breweries Ltd v Beemireddy, AIR 2002 AP 253 , appointment of
guardian of the inﬁrm plaintiff, contents of medical certiﬁcate showed his inﬁrmity, such
certiﬁcate can be taken into consideration in deciding the question of inﬁrmity.
283 Hakru v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 2141 (Raj). In another case of non-examination of

the IO which caused no prejudice to the accused, other reliable and trustworthy evidence was
not allowed to be discarded, Shyam Narayan Singh v State of Bihar, 1993 Cr LJ 772 (Pat).
Bahadur Naik v State of Bihar, AIR 2000 SC 1582 : (2000) 9 SCC 153 : 2000 Cr LJ 2466 , nonexamination of the investigating oﬃcer was held to be of no consequence when the defence
failed to shake the credibility of the eye-witnesses or to point out any material contradiction in
the prosecution case.
284 Pyara v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1065 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
285 State of Punjab v Jugraj Singh, AIR 2002 SC 1083 . The court also said that the doctor was

not bound to explain the origin or cause of injuries in the post-mortem report.
286 State of Gujarat v Anirudh Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2780 : 1997 CrLJ 3397 .
287 Mahabir Prashad v State of MP, 1991 CrLJ 3325 : AIR 1991 SC 2296 .
288 Baldev Raj v State of Haryana, 1990 CrLJ 2643 : AIR 1991 SC 37 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 14 .
289 Mihir v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 488 (Ori).
290 State of UP v Krishna Gopal, AIR 1988 SC 2154 : 1989 Cr LJ 288 : (1988) 4 SCC 302 : 1988

SCC (Cri) 928 .
291 Chaya v KG Channappa Gowda, 1993 Cr LJ 767 (Kant).
292 Shibsankar Samanta v Sobhana Samanta, 1992 Cr LJ 2196 (Cal).
293 Chaya v KG Channappa Gowda, 1993 Cr LJ 767 (Kant).
294 Rajendra Kumar v State of UP, 1998 Cr LJ 3293 : AIR 1998 SC 2379 : (1998) 5 SCC 690 .
295 State of UP v Bhagat Singh, 1999 Cr LJ 2333 (All).
296 At p 2337.
297 C Chenga Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1996 SC 3390 : 1996 Cr LJ 3461 : 1996 AIR SCW 3461.

See also Dharam Pal v State of Haryana, AIR 2017 SC 3720 .
298 State of Haryana v Rattan Singh, AIR 1977 SC 1512 : (1977) 2 SCC 491 .
299 KL Shinde v State of Mysore, AIR 1976 SC 1080 : (1976) 3 SCC 76 .
300 State of Maharashtra v Madhukar N Mardikar, (1991) 1 SCC 57 : AIR 1991 SC 207 , AHMADI

J.
301 Ramesh Kumar Gupta v State of MP, AIR 1995 SC 2121 : 1995 Cr LJ 3656 .
302 Idenburg v General Medical Council, (2000) 55 BMLR 101 , Cly, PC.
303 The court followed R. v Khan, (Sultan), 1997 SC 558 : (1997) 2 SCC 664 .
304 Pushpadevi M Jatia v ML Wadhawan AIR 1987 SC 1748 : 1987 Cr LJ 1888 : (1987) 3 SCC

367 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 526 : (1987) 12 ECC 356.
305 Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, ILR (1910) 37 Cal 467
306 Citing also the observation to the same effect of Goddard LJ in Kuruma v Reginam, (1955)

1 All ER 236 , 239, saying that the principle is applicable to civil as well as criminal proceedings.
307 R v Sang, (1979) 2 All ER 1222 , 1230-31.
308 The following authorities were relied upon: Megraj Patodia v RK Borla, AIR 1971 SC 1295 :

(1971) 2 SCR 118 ; R M Malkani v State of Maharashtra, (1973) 2 SCR 417 : 1973 Cr LJ 228 and
Pooran Mal v Director Inspection (IT), (1974) 2 SCR 764 : (1974) 93 ITR 505 : (1974) 1 SCC 345 :
1994 SCC (Tax) 114.
309 Jai Narain v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 3806 (All) State of Punjab v Baldev Singh, AIR 1999 SC

2378 : (1999) 6 SCC 172 : 1999 Cr LJ 3672 , a search and seizure was made under the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, which was in violation of the provisions of the
Act. The court said that the contraband seized could not by itself be used as evidence of proof
of unlawful possession. Presumption under section 50 of that Act could not be applied. Pon
Adithan v Deputy Director, Narcotic Control Bureau, AIR 1999 SC 2355 : (1999) 6 SCC 1 : 1999 Cr
LJ 3663 statement of the Intelligence Oﬃcer that the accused was informed of his rights, the
fact that 10 years earlier he was involved in a corruption case could not be said to damage
testimony here.
310 State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 : (2005) 122 DLT

194 .
311 HV Nirmala v Karnataka State Financial Corpn., AIR 2008 SC 2440 : (2008) 7 SCC 639 .
312 A v Secretary of State for the Home Deptt. (No. 2), (2006) 1 All ER 575 HL : 2005 UKHL 71 .
313 "X" Mrs v Z, AIR 2002 Del 217 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
314 Buridi Vanajakshmi v Buridi Venkata Satya Varha Pd Gangadhar Rao, AIR 2010 AP 172 .
315 Mavada Venkateswara Rao v Oleti Vana Lakshmi, AIR 2008 AP 195 : 2008 (4) RCR (Civil) 155

.
316 Joseph v State of Kerala, AIR 2006 Ker 191 .
317 Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Education v KS Gandhi, (1991) 2 SCC 716

: (1991) 1 SCR 772 .
318 Ibid.
319 Balak Ram v State of UP, AIR 1974 SC 2165 , at 2170 : (1975) 3 SCC 219 at 227.
320 Arunachalam v PSR Setharathnam, AIR 1979 SC 1284 : (1979) 2 SCC 297 .
321 Citing State of Madras v A Vaidyanatha Iyer, 1958 SCR 580 : AIR 1958 SC 61 and Himachal

Pradesh Admn v Om Prakash, AIR 1972 SC 975 : (1972) 1 SCC 249 .
322 Dharam Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 319 : 1993 Cr LJ 150 : 1993 Supp (3) SCC 532

.
323 Rammi v State of MP, AIR 1999 SC 3544 : (1999) 8 SCC 649 : 1999 Cr LJ 4561 . Leela Ram v

State of Haryana, AIR 1999 SC 3717 : (1999) 9 SCC 525 , discrepancy in the evidence of eyewitnesses cannot affect credibility of their evidence and corroboration of evidence with
mathematical niceties cannot be expected in criminal cases.
324 Bilaluddin v State of Assam, 1992 Cr LJ 161 (Gau). Prem v State of Maharashtra, 1993 CrLJ

1608 (Bom), failure to disclose the names of all the assailants, does not destroy the case
against the accused. Absence of particulars in complaint regarding weapons used, not a
material omission to make the testimony incredible, Manoj Wasudeo Ingley v State of
Maharashtra, 1992 Cr LJ 1970 (Bom). Eye-witnesses not speaking truth but suppressing
material facts, other evidence contradictory and improbable, acquittal, no interference, Biri Singh
v State of UP, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 264 : 1992 Cr LJ 1510 (SC).
325 Dhananjay Shanker Shetty v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2787 at p 2789.
326 Takhaji Hiraji v Thakore Kubersing Chamansingh, AIR 2001 SC 2328 : (2001) 6 SCC 145 : AIR

2001 SCW 2077 .
327 Kashiram v State of MP, AIR 2001 SC 2902 : AIR 2001 SCW 4350 : (2002) 1 SCC 71 .
328 State v Harishchandra Tukaram Awatade, 1997 Cr LJ 612 (Bom). For a full account of

hostile witnesses see section 154.
329 C Muniappan v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2010 SC 3718 : (2010) 9 SCC 567 , citing Gagan

Kanojia v State of Punjab, (2006) 13 SCC 516 : 2007 (2) Crimes 81 (SC); Radha Mohan Singh v
State of UP, AIR 2006 SC 951 : 2006 AIR SCW 421 : (2006) 2 SCC 450 ; Subbu Singh v State
(2009) 6 SCC 462 : 2009 AIR SCW 3937 : 2009 Cr J 3433.
330 Javed Masood v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2010 SC 979 . Sarvesh Narain Shukla v Daroga

Singh, AIR 2008 SC 320 : (2007) 13 SCC 360 , both parties are entitled to rely on such part of his
evidence as assists their case. Paramjeet Singh v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2011 SC 200 : (2010)
10 SCC 439 , evidence not to be rejected, to be considered with caution, court should look for
corroboration.
331 Utpal Das v State of WB, AIR 2010 SC 1894 : (2010) 6 SCC 493 .
332 Kunal Saha v State of WB, AIR 2016 (NOC) 308 (Cal).
333 Om Prakash v State of Uttaranchal, 2003 Cr LJ 483 (SC), the domestic servant killed three

members of the family, the fourth (the witness) managed to save herself by locking herself in
the bathroom. She heard voices which clinchingly showed the involvement of the domestic
servant. Her evidence, though not direct, was that of circumstances surrounding the
transaction. It was relevant and suﬃcient to support conviction.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
334 Kedar Behera v State, 1993 Cr LJ 378 (Ori). State of Maharashtra v Vithal, 1993 Cr LJ 2285

(Bom), direct evidence cogent, reliable and unimpeachable, medical evidence not to override it.
Bhim Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2003 SC 693 , variation in medical evidence and that of other
witnesses as to time of death, medical evidence not relied upon as conclusive in the absence of
some other evidence as to when the deceased had last meal and attended call of nature.
335 Ram Swaroop v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2008 SC 1747 : (2008) 13 SCC 515 .
336 Brijpal Singh v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 2533 : AIR 2003 SC 2460 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Disproved".—
A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a
prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the
supposition that it does not exist.

COMMENT
This is merely the converse of the deﬁnition of "proved".337

337 Emperor v Shaﬁ Ahmed, (1925) 31 Bom LR 515 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
"Not proved".—
A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.

COMMENT
[s 3.49] Not Proved.—
The deﬁnition of "proved" is the embodiment of a sound rule of common sense. It
describes what degree of certainty must be arrived at before a fact can be said to be
proved. Proof means anything which serves, either immediately or mediately, to
convince the mind of the truth or falsehood of a fact or proposition. It is apparent from
the deﬁnitions of the words "proved" "disproved" and "not proved" in this section that
the Act applies the same standard of proof in all civil cases.338 The term "not proved"
indicates a state of mind between two states of mind ("proved" and "disproved") when
one is unable to say precisely how the matter stands.339

338 Gulabchand v Kudilal, AIR 1966 SC 1734 : (1966) 3 SCR 623 .
339 Emperor v Shaﬁ Ahmed, (1925) 31 Bom LR 515 : AIR 1925 PC 305 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
340["India".—

"India" means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.]
341 [the expression "certifying Authority", 342 ["electronic signature"], 342 ["Electronic

Signature Certiﬁcate"], "electronic form", "electronic records", "information", "secure
electronic record", "secured digital signature" and "subscriber" shall have the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21
of 2000)]

COMMENT
[s 3.50] India.—
This deﬁnition was inserted by section 92 of the IT Act, 2000 to give credence to
documents and evidences which were in electronic and digital form. However, initially
the reference was to "digital signature" and "digital signature certiﬁcate", till before the
same was changed in 2008 to the present form.
Vide Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008,343 section 3 was amended so as
to substitute the following words—
"digital signature" was substituted by "electronic signature"
"Digital Signature Certiﬁcate" was substituted by "Electronic Signature Certiﬁcate".
A digital signature (standard electronic signature) is technology speciﬁc and an
electronic "ﬁngerprint" of the signatory. It is supposed to be irreversibly unique to both
the document and the signer and binds both of them together. It ensures the
authenticity of the signer and any change made into the document after it has been
digitally signed invalidates the sanctity of the document, thereby protecting the
document against signature forgery and information tampering.
An electronic signature is technology neutral and generic in nature. It has a proprietary
format (there is no standard for electronic signatures) such as even a typed name or a
digitized image of a handwritten signature. Consequently, the integrity, sanctity and
security of electronic signatures are a big issue since nothing prevents one individual
from typing another individual's name. Due to this practical problem, an electronic
signature that does not incorporate additional measures of security (the way digital
signatures do) is considered an insecure way of signing documentation.
Since an electronic signature is vulnerable to copying and tampering, and invites
forgery, there was a debate in the United States on the legally binding nature of the
generic electronic signatures and whether only a technology speciﬁc digital signature
should form the basis of electronic commerce. This debate ﬁnally resulted in the
enactment of the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce (E-SIGN) Act,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
2000. This Act aimed at creating sanctity for the electronic signatures by providing that
a signature may not be denied legal effect solely because it is in electronic form or
because it did not ﬁt or follow a prescribed technological process.
This substitution is a part of the entire scheme under which digital signature regime is
being switched over to electronic signature regime in the ﬁeld of e-commerce and egovernance. This switching over of regime is meant to broaden the spectrum and
follow the global trend.

340 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for the deﬁnitions of "State" and "States".

Earlier the deﬁnitions of "State" and "States" were inserted by the A.O. 1950.
341 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–1(b) (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
342

Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(a), for "digital signature" and "Digital Signature

Certiﬁcate" respectively (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
343 Amended by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 2009), section 51

(w.e.f. 27-10-2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O. 2689(E), dated 27-10-2009).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY
[s 4] "May presume".—
Whenever it is provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it may either
regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof of it.
"Shall presume".—
Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall presume a fact, it shall
regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.
"Conclusive proof".—
When one fact is declared by this Act to be conclusive proof of another, the Court
shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow
evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving it.

COMMENT
[s 4.1] Conclusive proof.—
The term "presumption", in its largest and most comprehensive signiﬁcation, may be
deﬁned to be an inference, aﬃrmative or disaﬃrmative of the truth or falsehood of a
doubtful fact or proposition, drawn by a process of probable reasoning from something
proved or taken for granted.344
A presumption means a rule of law that courts and Judges shall draw a particular
inference from a particular fact, or from particular evidence, unless and until the truth
of such inference is disproved. A presumption is a legal or factual assumption drawn
from the existence of certain facts. They are raised in terms of the Evidence Act. A
presumption raised under the provisions of a statute carries only evidentiary value.
Presumption drawn on the basis of a fact may constitute an evidence for presumption
in respect of another fact.345
A court, where it "may presume" a fact, has a discretion to presume it as proved, or to
call for conﬁrmatory evidence of it, as the circumstances require. In such a case the
presumption is not a hard and fast presumption, incapable of rebuttal, a presumptio
juris et de jure.346 In cases in which a court shall presume a fact, the presumption is not
conclusive but rebuttable.
Presumptions of fact or natural presumptions are inferences which are naturally and
logically drawn from experience and observation of the course of nature, the
constitution of human mind, the springs of human action, the usages and habits of
society. These presumptions are generally rebuttable.347 Clause (1) of the section
appears to point at presumptions of facts.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the statute prescribes for a rebuttable presumption, it has been held by Supreme
Court that it is not just any evidence, howsoever shaky and nebulous, that would satisfy
the test of preponderance of probability to rebut the statutory presumption but
evidence that can by proper and judicial application of mind be said to be fairly and
reasonably showing that the real fact is not as presumed. In other words the evidence
required to rebut a statutory presumption ought to be clear and convincing, no matter
that the degree of proof may not be as high as proving the fact to the contrary beyond a
reasonable doubt. Thus, the evidence intended to rebut the statutory presumption
ought to be clear and convincing evidence showing that what is presumed under the
provision is not the real fact.348
Presumptions of law are based, like presumptions of fact, on the uniformity of
deduction which experience proves to be justiﬁable; they differ in being vested by the
law with the quality of a rule, which directs that they must be drawn; they are not
permissive like natural presumptions, which may or may not be drawn; and
presumptions of law again differ in their force, according as they are rebuttable or
irrebuttable. As to the former, the presumption shall stand good only until it is
disproved. The latter class, or irrebuttable presumptions, the law holds conclusive.349
See sections 79 to 90 and section 105, infra, as to presumptions of fact and rebuttable
presumptions of law.
Clause 3 of the section points at irrebuttable presumptions of law and the number of
such presumptions is very few (see sections 41, 112, 113, infra and section 82 of the
Indian Penal Code). The certiﬁcate issued by the Director of Central Food Laboratory is
conclusive proof of facts stated therein. Examination of the Director as witness is not
permissible.350
Where husband and wife were in love and led an amorous life for about eight years
before their marriage, both were sound in health and mind and after marriage lived
together in a room for months together and had privacy, the presumption was
conclusive that consummation of marriage was an accomplished fact.351
Where the plaintiff claimed to be a partner in a ﬁrm and it was shown that the
application for registration of the ﬁrm showed his signature as a partner, the court said
that he could thus be regarded as a partner in the ﬁrm and the plea that he was only
nominally shown to be a partner was not tenable.352
Dealing with the use of phrases "until the contrary is proved" in section 118 and "unless
the contrary is proved" in section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 read with
deﬁnitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in section 4 of Evidence Act,
it has been explained by Supreme Court that presumptions to be raised under both the
provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is rebuttable, it only points out that
when the party against whom the presumption is drawn produces evidence fairly and
reasonably tending to show that real fact is not as presumed, the purpose of the
presumption is over.353
Where it was alleged against an eighteen year old student that he had passed a fake
note of Rs 100 to a shop keeper and 13 more such notes were recovered from him, it
was held by the Supreme Court that the presumption thus created was not suﬃcient to
prove the mens rea requirement under section 489-B, IPC, that he knew or had reason
to believe that the notes in question were forged or counterfeit.354

[s 4.2] Marriage Certiﬁcate.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A marriage certiﬁcate issued under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is a conclusive
evidence of the solemnisation of marriage under the Act and also of compliance of
formalities and signatures of parties and witnesses. The genuineness of the
compliance procedure is a different question. It remains questionable.355
In a matrimonial dispute, the marriage was said to have been performed according to
Hindu customs. Thereafter they married as per Japanese Custom and the registration
certiﬁcate showing their marriage under section 17 of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969
was issued. It was held by Bombay High Court that upon the factum of registration of
marriage, the solemnisation of the marriage becomes a conclusive fact under section
14(2) of the Foreign Marriage Act, 1969. Thus, under section 4 of the Evidence Act, no
evidence with regard to the fact that marriage was also solemnised under the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 can be allowed.356

344 Best, 12th Edn, section 299, p 267. Babukhan v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2960 : 1997

Cr LJ 3567 ; Mayank Rajput v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2797 (All).
345 MS Narayana Menon v State of Kerala, (2006) 6 SCC 39 : (2006) 3 Ker LT 404 : (2006) 5 Mah

LJ 676 : (2006) 4 MPLJ 97 : AIR 2006 SC 3366 .
346 Emperor v Shrinivas, (1905) 7 Bom LR 969 . For the clariﬁcation of expressions "may

presume" and "shall presume" see Haradhan Mahatha v Dukhu Mahatha, AIR 1993 Pat 129 .
347 Amal Chandra Datt v Second Addl. DJ, 1988 ALR 794 : AIR 1989 SC 255 : (1989) 1 SCC 1 .

Reiterated in Gitika Bagechi v Subhabrota Bagechi, AIR 1996 Cal 246 , a comparison has been
drawn between this section and section 114.
348 Heinz India Pvt Ltd v State of UP, (2012) 5 SCC 443 .
349 Norton on Evidence, sections 97-98. See also Syad Akbar v State of Kant, AIR 1979 SC 1848

; 1979 Cr LJ 1374 where the difference between the operation of a presumption of law and that
of fact is explained; Yogendra Morarji v State of Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 660 : 1980 Cr LJ 459 the
court presumes the absence of circumstances which justify the right of private defence.
350 KV Baby v Food Inspector, Wadakkanchery, 1994 Cr LJ 3421 (Ker) :1994 (2) ILR (Ker) 502.
351 Gitika Bagechi v Subhabrota Bagechi, AIR 1966 Cal 246 . See the decision of the Supreme

Court in Sodhi Transport Co v State of UP, AIR 1986 SC 1099 : (1986) 2 SCC 486 : 1986 Tax LR
2347 , where the effect on burden of proof of all the kinds of presumption has been explained.
The court further said that these presumptions are not peculiar to the Evidence Act. They are
generally used wherever facts are to be ascertained by a judicial process. For details see under
section 114.
352 Shivraj Reddy & Bros v S Raghu Raj Reddy, AIR 2002 NOC 120 (AP).
353 Kumar Exports v Sharma Carpets, (2009) 2 SCC 513 .
354 Umashanker v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2001 SC 3074 : 2001 Cr LJ 4696 .
355 Nirmal Das Bose v Mamta Gulati, AIR 1997 All 401 .
356 Minoti Anand v Subhash Anand, AIR 2011 Bom 61 : 2011 (2) Mah LJ 812 : 2011 (5) Bom CR

624 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 5] Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.—
Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of
every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, [s
5.5] and of no others. [s 5.6]

Explanation. —This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact
which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force
relating to Civil Procedure. 1
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of

causing his death.
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:—
A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him and have in readiness for production at the ﬁrst

hearing of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him
to produce the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the
proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions prescribed by
the Code of Civil Procedure.

COMMENT
[s 5.1] Evidence of facts in issue and relevant facts only.—
Section 3 says that one fact is relevant to another when the one is connected with the
other in any of the ways referred to in this chapter. Relevancy is thus fully explained in
sections 6 to 11. "These sections enumerate speciﬁcally the different instances of the
connection between cause and effect which occur most frequently in judicial
proceedings. They are designedly worded very widely, and in such a way as to overlap
each other. Thus a motive for a fact in issue (section 8) is part of its cause (section 7);
subsequent conduct inﬂuenced by it (section 8) is part of its effect (section 7). Facts
relevant under section 11 would, in most cases, be relevant under the other sections."2
The object of this Chapter is to point out in what cases collateral facts are relevant.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 5.2] Object.—
The object of this section is to restrict the investigation made by courts within the
bounds prescribed by general convenience.

[s 5.3] Principle.—
Of no fact can evidence be given unless it be either a fact in issue or one declared
relevant under the following sections. Thus evidence of all collateral facts, which are
incapable of affording any reasonable presumption as to the principal matters in
dispute, is excluded to save public time.
Where the entire evidence of eyewitnesses was not accepted by the High Court, it was
held by Supreme Court that the accused cannot be convicted for an offence under
section 302 IPC merely on the basis of the post-mortem report. The post-mortem
report should be in corroboration with the evidence of eyewitnesses and cannot be an
evidence suﬃcient to reach the conclusion for convicting the accused.3

[s 5.4] Scope.—
This section excludes everything not covered by the purview of some other succeeding
section. The last four words of the section "and of no others" preclude a party from
proving any facts not in issue or not declared relevant by any of the remaining sections
of this Chapter. To establish the relevancy of any fact, it must be shown that it is a fact
in issue or fact such as is declared to be relevant. Evidence is to be conﬁned strictly to
the issue.

[s 5.5] "Facts … declared to be relevant".—
The relevant facts are all those facts which are in the eye of the law so connected with
or related to the facts in issue that they render the latter probable or improbable.

[s 5.6] "And of no others".—
The section excludes everything which is not covered by the purview of some other
section which follows in the Statute.4 There must be a speciﬁc provision before facts
can be treated as relevant and facts must also be proved as laid down in the Act.5
Anyone who wants to give evidence on a particular fact must show that it is admissible
under someone or other of the following sections. The words "and of no others"
impliedly impose a duty on the court to exclude evidence of irrelevant facts,
irrespective of objections by the parties. In criminal proceedings this duty is expressly
imposed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, section 298 (omitted by the Code of
1973). In civil proceedings, see the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, O XIII, rule 3.6

[s 5.7] Admissibility of evidence.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The court is to decide the question of admissibility of evidence (section 136, infra). It
should be decided as it arises and should not be reserved until judgment in the case is
given. The moment a witness commences giving evidence which is inadmissible, he
should be stopped by the court. A party objecting to a question must do so as soon as
it is stated and before the answer is given. When an irrelevant document is tendered an
objection should be made at that time. If it is not taken in time, it is considered to be
waived.
A party ﬁling a document cannot urge its inadmissibility when the opposite party seeks
to use it against him.7
Where no objection is taken in the court of ﬁrst instance to the reception of a document
in evidence, it is not within the province of the appellate court to raise or recognise it in
appeal.8 The appellate court, however, has a perfect right to attach such weight to the
document as it thinks proper, or to say whether it ought to be treated as evidence as
against particular parties to the suit.9 The Gujarat High Court has held that an objection
that a piece of evidence which was considered by the trial judge was irrelevant can be
taken for the ﬁrst time in appeal. If the evidence is irrelevant the consent of parties
cannot make it relevant.10
The fact that a document was procured by improper or even illegal means will not be a
bar to its admissibility if it is relevant and its genuineness proved. But while examining
the proof given as to its genuineness the circumstances under which it came to be
produced into court have to be taken into consideration.11

[s 5.8] Inadmissibility of evidence.—
While the services of a sniffer dog may be taken for the purpose of investigation, its
faculties cannot be taken as evidence for the purpose of establishing the guilt of an
accused.12

[s 5.9] Explanation.—
The Explanation appended to the section prohibits a party from claiming any relief
upon facts or documents not stated or referred to by him in his pleadings. Illustration
(b) elucidates the meaning of the Explanation.

[s 5.10] Admissibility of new evidence after trial.—
When what is pleaded is not proved, or what is stated in the evidence is contrary to the
pleadings, the dictum that no amount of evidence, howsoever cogent, can be relied
upon if it is contrary to the pleadings, would apply.13
An issue which has been ﬁnally settled and therefore attracts the bar of res judicata, an
evidence led on such issue in a later part of the proceedings has been held to be not
admissible.14

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

1 See the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act No. 5 of 1908). 59
2 Stephen's Introduction, p 72.
3 Balaji Gunthu Dhule v State of Maharashtra, (2012) 11 SCC 685 .
4 The Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, (1889) 12 All 1 , 43, FB; Mt Khedia v Mt Turea,

AIR 1962 Pat 420 .
5 Hasan Abdulla v State of Gujarat, AIR 1962 Guj 214 .
6 Stokes' Anglo Indian Codes, Vol II, p 854, fn 1.
7 Raman v Secretary of State for India in Council, (1901) 24 Mad 427.
8 Chimnaji Govind Godbole v Dinkar Dhondev Godbole, (1886) 11 Bom 320.
9 Akbur Ali v Bhyea Lal Jha, (1880) 6 Cal 666 , 670.
10 Nathubhai v Chhotubhai, AIR 1962 Guj 68 .
11 Magraj Patodia v RK Birla, AIR 1971 SC 1295 : (1970) 2 SCC 888 . For a study of this subject

see Shah Ashok Damodar, Relevancy and Admissibility, AIR 2001 Journal 232 .
12 Dinesh Borthakur v State of Assam, (2008) 5 SCC 697 .
13 Janak Dulari Devi v Kapildeo Rai, (2011) 6 SCC 555 .
14 Amarendra Komalam v Usha Sinha, AIR 2005 SC 2758 : (2005) 11 SCC 251 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 6] Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.—
Facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form part
of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and
place or at different times and places.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A

or B or the by-standers at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form
part of the transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the 15[Government of India] by taking part in

an armed insurrection in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked, and
gaols are broken open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming
part of the general transaction, though A may not have been present at all of
them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence.

Letters between the parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose,
and forming part of the correspondence in which it is contained, are relevant
facts, though they do not contain the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The

goods were delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each
delivery is a relevant fact.

COMMENT
[s 6.1] Principle.— res gestae.—
This section admits those facts the admissibility of which comes under the technical
expression res gestae [i.e. the things done (including words spoken) in the course of a
transaction], but such facts must "form part of the same transaction". If facts form part
of the transaction which is the subject of enquiry, manifestly evidence of them ought
not to be excluded. The question is whether they do form part or are too remote to be
considered really part of the transaction before the court. A transaction is a group of
facts so connected together as to be referred to by a single legal name, as a crime, a
contract, a wrong or any other subject of inquiry which may be in issue.16 Roughly, a
transaction may be described as any physical act, or a series of connected physical
acts, together with the words accompanying such act or acts.17 Every fact which is
part of the same transaction as the fact in issue is deemed to be relevant to the fact in
issue although it may not be actually in issue, and although if it were not part of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
same transaction it might be excluded as hearsay.18 Illustration (b) indicates that acts
done at different places and times may form part of the same transaction. Thus, a
transaction consists both of the physical acts and the words accompanying such
physical acts, whether spoken by the person doing such acts, the person to whom they
were done or any other person or persons. Such words are admissible in evidence as
parts of a transaction [vide Illustration (a)]. The expression "bystanders" used in
illustration (a) means the persons who are present at the time of the occurrence and
not those who gather on the spot after the occurrence. The remarks made by persons
other than the eye-witnesses could only be hearsay because they must have picked up
the news from others.19
The statement as that in Illustration (a) is relevant only if it is that of a person who has
seen the actual occurrence and who uttered it simultaneously with the incident or so
soon thereafter as to make it reasonably certain that the speaker is still under the
stress of the excitement caused by his having seen the incident.20 "[T]he statement
uttered or act done must be a spontaneous reaction of the person witnessing the crime
and forming part of the transaction. The bystanders' declaration must relate only to
that which came under their observation. The declaration must be substantially
contemporaneous with the fact and not merely the narration of a prior event."21
Applying this to the facts of a case before it in which the witnesses rushed to the scene
of the crime on hearing the sound of an explosion and heard from the mouth of the
bystanders as to what had happened, the Kerala High Court has held that the
statement was not a part of the transaction.22 What is admissible under this section is
a fact which is connected with the fact in issue as "part of the same transaction". A
transaction may consist of a single incident occupying a few minutes or it may be
spread over a variety of facts, etc., occupying a much longer time and occurring on
different occasions or at different places. Where the transaction consists of different
acts, in order that the chain of such acts may constitute the same transaction, they
must be connected together by proximity of time, proximity or unity of place, continuity
of action and community of purpose or design.23 Where the witness deposed that
immediately after the occurrence, his niece told him that his wife was shot by the
accused, it was held that his statement was admissible under section 6, Illustration (a)
and so also his statement that the accused was threatening persons on the spot that
he would kill them too.24
Explaining this aspect of the doctrine of res gestae in Rattan v Reginam,25 and trying to
lay down a more rational formula, Lord Wilberforce said: "The test should not be the
uncertain one whether the making of the statement was in some sense part of the
event or transaction. This may often be diﬃcult to establish; such external matters as
the time which elapses between the events and the speaking of the words (or vice
versa) and differences in location being relevant factors but not, taken by themselves,
decisive criteria. As regards statements made after the event it must be for the judge to
satisfy himself that the statement was so clearly made in circumstances of
spontaneity or involvement in the event that the possibility of concoction can be
disregarded. Conversely, if he considers that the statement was made by way of
narrative of a detached prior event so that the speaker was disengaged from it as to be
able to construct or adapt his account, he should exclude it". In this case a man was
prosecuted for the murder of his wife. His defence was that the shot went off
accidentally. There was evidence to the effect that the deceased telephoned to say:
"Get me the police please". Before the operator could connect the police, the caller, who
spoke in distress, gave her address and the call suddenly ended. Thereafter the police
came to the house and found the body of a dead woman. Her call and the words she
spoke were held to be relevant as a part of the transaction which brought about her
death. Her call in distress showed that the shooting in question was intentional and not
accidental for no victim of an accident could have thought of getting the police before
the happening.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Lord Wilberforce said:
There was ample evidence of the close and intimate connection between the statement
ascribed to the deceased and the shooting which occurred very shortly afterwards. They
were closely associated in place and in time. The way in which the statement came to be
made (in a call for the police) and the tone of voice used, showed intrinsically that the
statement was being forced from the deceased by an overwhelming pressure of
contemporary event. It carried its own stamp of spontaneity.

This aspect of the doctrine was applied by the Supreme Court in Rattan Singh v State of
HP,26 The accused intruded into the courtyard of the victim's house at night and
inﬂicted gun-shot injury on her. She was able to identify him. She stated before her
death that the accused was standing with a gun before her. She explained the time and
space proximity between her and the assailant. The statement was held to be a part of
the transaction and relevant as such under section 6.
The eye-witness spontaneously told the persons reaching the place immediately after
the occurrence that the accused killed the deceased. Such persons derived knowledge
about the incident spontaneously with the happening from the eye-witness. Their
evidence was held to be relevant under section 6 as forming part of the same
transaction.27
A transaction in its ordinary sense is some business or dealing which is carried on or
transacted between two or more persons.28
This and the following sections deal with circumstantial evidence. Sections 7, 8 and 9
explain and illustrate this section.

[s 6.2] CASES
[s 6.2.1] Facts forming part of same transaction.—
Statements of bystanders witnessing a transaction are relevant if they are made while
the transaction is in progress or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the same
transaction.29 Where A was tried for the murder of B by shooting him, the facts that the
person, then in the room, with B, saw a man with a gun in his hand pass a window
opening into the room where B was shot, and thereupon exclaimed "there's Butcher" (a
name by which A was known), were held to be relevant.30 The only evidence against an
accused charged with having voluntarily caused grievous hurt was a statement made
in the presence of the accused by the person injured to a third person, immediately
after the commission of the offence. The accused did not, when the statement was
made, deny that she had done the act complained of. It was held that the evidence was
admissible under this section and section 8, Illustration (g).31 A husband, his father and
mother were prosecuted for the murder of his wife. She cried out for help as soon as
she was pushed into the room. Her children who were playing outside in the verandah
exclaimed at the same time that their mother was being killed. The exclamations of
children were received through the evidence of persons who heard them.32

[s 6.2.2] Facts not so connected as to form part of same transaction.—
The statements of persons who were injured by burns by the act of the accused in
setting ﬁre to the bus in which they were travelling, though recorded by a Magistrate
under expectation of death, were held to be not relevant there being a gap of time
between the incident and the recording of the statements.33

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In a case involving murder by a man of his wife and daughter, evidence was offered to
show that the wife's father received a phone call from the father of the accused that his
son had caused the deaths in question. This was held to be not relevant under section
6 because there was nothing to show that the communication had taken place so soon
after the crime as the form a part of the same transaction.34
The prosecution of the husband was for torture of his wife for non-fulﬁllment of his
demand. The witnesses testiﬁed to what the deceased told them about torture and
harassment. The court said such deposition had no connection with any of the
circumstances of the transaction which resulted in her death. Their evidence was also
not admissible under section 32.35

[s 6.2.2.1] Newspaper report.—
A newspaper report can be relied on by the Election Commission while deciding a
petition in connection with repolling. In similar circumstances the High Court can also
rely on newspaper reports.36

15 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen".
16 Stephen's Digest of Evidence, Article 3.
17 Phipson on Evidence, 51-79.
18 Chain Mahto v Emperor, (1906) 11 Cal WN 266, 270. See also Thakur Das v State of HP, 1992

Cr LJ 2415 (HP).
19 Nasir Din v Crown, (1944) 25 Lah 461.
20 Thus an FIR lodged soon after the incident by persons who witnessed it becomes a part of

the happening. Shayam Nandan Singh v State of Bihar, 1991 Cr LJ 3359 . Description of the
assault by the victim at a police station on the same day, the victim dying subsequently of
injuries developing infection, held, a part of the transaction. Kulamani Sandha v State of Orissa,
1991 Cr LJ 599 (Ori). See also Jadumani Khanda v State, 1993 Cr LJ 2701 (Ori).
21 Bhaskaran v State of Kerala, (1985) Ker LT 122 ; (1985) Cr LJ 1711 (DB).
22 Rajan v State of Kerala, 1992 Cr LJ 575 Ker.
23 Hadu v State, (1950) Cut 509.
24 Mohd. Islam v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 1736 (All). Mahender Singh Dhaiya v State (CBI), 2003

Cr LJ 1908 (Del), letters of deceased wife to her husband (wife alleged to be murdered by him),
the court said that the contents of such letters were not relevant under section 6 or section 11
as they did not fall within the domain 32, i.e. did not amount to a lying declaration.
25 Rattan v Reginam (1971) 1 WLR 801 .
26 Rattan Singh v State of HP, AIR 1997 SC 768 : 1997 Cr LJ 833 .
27 Om Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 2419 (Raj).
28 Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 (FB).
29 Chain Mahto v Emperor, (1906) 11 Cal WN 266, 271.
30 Fowkes, (1856) Stephen's Digest, 12th Edn, (1946).
31 Re Surat Dhobni, (1884) 10 Cal 302 .
32 Sawaldas v State of Bihar, AIR 1974 SC 778 : 1974 Cr LJ 664 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
33 Gentela V Rao v State of AP, AIR 1996 SC 2791 : 1996 Cr LJ 4151 ; State of Gujarat v

Anirudhsing, AIR 1997 SC 2780 : 1997 Cr LJ 3397 , evidence of police oﬃcer that the accused
made confession to someone, not covered by section 6. It was wholly a hearsay and in no way a
part of the transaction.
34 Vasa Chandra Sekhar v Ponna Satyanarayana, 2000 Cr LJ 3175 : AIR 2000 SC 2138 : (2000) 6

SCC 286 .
35 Bhairon Singh v State of MP, AIR 2009 SC 2603 : (2009) 13 SCC 80 .
36 All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v State Election Commission, AIR 2007 NOC 1801

(Mad—FB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 7] Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue.—
Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant
facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under which they
happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are
relevant.
ILLUSTRIATIONS
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B.

The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to a fair with money in his
possession, and that he showed it or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third
persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B.

Marks on the ground, produced by a struggle at or near the place where the
murder was committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B.

The state of B's health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and habits of B,
known to A, which afforded an opportunity for the administration of poison, are
relevant facts.

COMMENT
This section admits a very large class of facts connected with facts in issue or relevant
facts, though not forming part of the transaction. Facts forming part of the same
transaction are admissible under the preceding section. Evidence relating to collateral
facts is admissible when such facts will, if established, establish reasonable
presumption as to the matter in dispute and when such evidence is reasonably
conclusive. The section provides for the admission of several classes of facts which
are connected with the transaction under inquiry in particular modes, viz. (1) as being
the occasion or cause of a fact; (2) as being its effect; (3) as giving opportunity for its
occurrence; and (4) as constituting the state of things under which it happened.
A fact in issue cannot be proved by showing that facts similar to it, but not part of the
same transaction, have occurred at other times. Thus, when the question is, whether a
person has committed a crime, the fact that he had committed a similar crime before,
is irrelevant.
Illustration (a) is an instance of facts relevant as giving occasion or opportunity, (b) of
facts constituting an effect, (c) of facts constituting the state of things under which an

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
alleged fact happened.

[s 7.1] Tape-recording.—
A contemporaneous tape record of a relevant conversation is a relevant fact and is
admissible under this section but such evidence must be received with caution.37
Where the tape recorded conversation carried music before and after the recorded
conversation and the same could not be explained, the court said that the only
plausible explanation was that the tape was tampered.38 A contemporaneous taperecord of a relevant conversation is a relevant fact and is admissible under section 7.
The manner and mode of its proof and its use in a trial is a matter of detail. It can be
used for the purpose of confronting a witness with his earlier tape-recorded
statements. It may also be legitimately used for the purpose of shaking the credit of a
witness.39
For the use of an earlier tape-recorded statement, the identiﬁcation of the taped voices
is a crucial matter and indeed such proper identiﬁcation is a sine qua non for the use of
the earlier tape recording. Where the voice is denied by the alleged maker thereof, a
comparison of the same becomes inevitable and proper identiﬁcation of the voices
must be proved by a competent witness. The recording of the voice of a witness for the
purposes of a comparison with and identiﬁcation of his earlier recorded voice can,
therefore, be allowed by the court and such comparison is neither expressly nor
impliedly prohibited under any statute.40

37 Yusufalli v State, (1967) 70 Bom LR 76 (SC). See also Mahabir Pd Verma v SurinderKaur, AIR

1982 SC 1043 : (1982) 2 SCC 258 , where a tape-recorded matter was rejected because there
was no proof of the conversation which it could have been used to corroborate. The court said
that a tape-recorded conversation could only be relied upon as corroborative evidence of
conversation deposed by any of the parties to the conversation. In the absence of evidence of
any such conversation, the tape is no proper evidence and could not be relied upon. In this case
there was no evidence of any such conversation between the tenant and the husband of the
landlady. In such case, tape-recorded conversation could be no proper evidence. See also Sunil
Panchal v State of Rajasthan, 2016 Cr LJ 4238 , para 40 (Raj-DB).
38 State of Maharashtra v Ramdas Shankar Kurtekar, 1999 Cr LJ 196 (Bom).
39 Dial Singh Narain Singh v Rajapal Jagan Nath, AIR 1969 P&H. 350 : 1969 Cr LJ 1422 .
40 Nirmala v Ashu Ram, 2000 Cr LJ 2001 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 8] Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.—
Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in
issue or relevant fact.
The conduct of any party, [s 8.4] or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding,
in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or
relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence against whom is the
subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct inﬂuences or is inﬂuenced by
any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1. [s 8.5] —The word "conduct" in this section does not include statements,
unless those statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this
explanation is not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other section of
this Act.
Explanation 2. [s 8.6] —When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement
made to him or in his presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A is tried for the murder of B.

The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had
tried to extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge public, are
relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the

bond.
The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required
money for a particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison.

The fact that, before the death of B, A procured poison similar to that which was
administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A.

The facts that, not long before the date of the alleged will, A made inquiry into
matters to which the provisions of the alleged will relate, that he consulted
vakils in reference to making the will, and that he caused drafts of other wills to
be prepared of which he did not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The facts that, either before or at the time of, or after the alleged crime, A
provided evidence which would tend to give to the facts of the case an
appearance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or concealed evidence,
or prevented the presence or procured the absence of persons who might have
been witnesses, or suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are
relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B.

The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in A's presence—"the police are coming
to look for the man who robbed B," and that immediately afterwards A ran away,
are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B rupees 10,000.

The facts that A asked C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A's presence
and hearing—"I advise you not to trust A, for he owes B 10,000 rupees," and that
A went away without making any answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime.

The fact that A absconded after receiving a letter warning him that inquiry was
being made for the criminal, and the contents of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime.

The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime, he absconded, or was
in possession of property or the proceeds of property acquired by the crime, or
attempted to conceal things which were or might have been used in committing
it, are relevant.
(j) The question is, whether A was ravished.

The facts that, shortly after the alleged rape, she made a complaint relating to
the crime, the circumstances under which, and the terms in which the complaint
was made, are relevant.
The fact that, without making a complaint, she said that she had been ravished is
not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying
declaration under section 32, clause (1), or as corroborative evidence under
section 157.
(k) The question is, whether A was robbed.

The fact that, soon after the alleged robbery, he made a complaint relating to the
offence, the circumstances under which, and the terms in which, the complaint
was made, are relevant.
The fact that he said he had been robbed without making any complaint, is not
relevant, as conduct under this section, though it may be relevant as a dying
declaration under section 32, clause (1), or as corroborative evidence under
section 157.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
[s 8.1] Principle.—
Under this section the motive which induces a party to do an act, or the preparation
which he makes in its commission, will be taken into account. Evidence of motive or
preparation becomes important when a case depends upon circumstantial evidence
only.
This section embodies the rule that the testimony of res gestae is allowable when it
goes to the root of the matter concerning the commission of a crime. Consequently, a
verbal statement to a police oﬃcer during the time of recovery of articles upon the
information of an accused in custody is admissible in evidence.41

[s 8.2] Motive.—
Motive is that which moves a man to do a particular act. There can be no action
without a motive, which must exist for every voluntary act. Generally speaking the
voluntary acts of sane persons have an impelling emotion or motive. Motive in the
correct sense is the emotion supposed to have led to the act. It is often proved by the
conduct of a person. "The ordinary feelings, passions and propensities under which
parties act, are facts known by observation and experience; and they are so uniform in
their operation that a conclusion may be safely drawn that, if a party acts in a particular
manner, he does so under the inﬂuence of a particular motive".42 Previous threats,
previous altercations, or previous litigations between parties are admitted to show
motive.43 The mere existence of motive is by itself not an incriminating
circumstance.44 Motive, however strong, cannot take place of proof.45 The motive for
commission of an offence is of particular importance only in cases of purely
circumstantial evidence for, in such cases, motive itself would be a circumstance which
the court would have to consider.46 However, absence of motive is not suﬃcient to
disregard circumstantial evidence.47

[s 8.3] Preparation.—
Preparation consists in devising or arranging the means or measures necessary for the
commission of a crime. Preparations on the part of the accused to accomplish the
crime charged, or to prevent its discovery, or to aid his escape, or to avert suspicion
from himself are relevant on the question of his guilt. Where the question is whether A
has committed an offence, the fact of his having procured the instruments, which are
used in its commission, is relevant. Illustrations (c) and (d) refer to preparation.
But no inference of guilt will arise where the preparations may have been innocent, or
for the execution of something different, though illegal; or where the crime for the
execution of which the preparations were made may have been subsequently
frustrated or voluntarily abandoned. A is indicted for murdering B by poisoning him. It
appears that shortly before A purchased a quantity of poison. This raises an inference
of guilt. But it appears that A had purchased the poison to kill vermin. This overthrows
the inference of guilt. A prepares poison with which he intends to kill B. Before he uses
it he repents of his crime and abandons the idea of killing B. This overthrows the
inference arising from the purchase of poison.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 8.4] "Conduct of any party".—
The conduct of any party or his agent in reference to a suit or proceeding will be
scanned under this section. A fact can be proved by conduct of a party and by
surrounding circumstances. The production of articles by an accused person is
relevant as evidence of conduct. Statements accompanying or explaining conduct are
also relevant as part of the conduct itself. Conversation over telephone for settling
details for passing bribe-money was recorded by secret instruments. This was held to
be evidence of conduct.48 The court cited from R v Leatham:49 "It matters not how you
get it, if you steal it even, it would be admissible in evidence." If such statements do not
appear on record, the evidence remains incomplete or imperfect.50
In the case of documents the courts very often interpret them by evidence of the mode
in which property dealt with by them has been held and enjoyed. SUGDEN LC, in a case
said:
Tell me what you have done under such a deed, and I will tell you what that deed
means.51
The word "party" includes the plaintiff and defendant in a civil suit as well as the
accused in a criminal prosecution.
The conduct of an accused in absconding when the police gets suspicious of his
complicity in the offence of murder is relevant under this section and might well be
indicative to some extent of guilty mind. But this is not the only conclusion to which it
must lead the court. Such is the instinct of self-preservation in an average human being
that even innocent persons may, when suspected of grave crimes, be tempted to evade
arrest.52 Explaining the meaning of the term "absconder", the Supreme Court53 said:
To be an absconder, in the eye of law, it is not necessary that a person should have run away
from his home, it is suﬃcient if he hides himself to evade the process of law even if the
hiding place be in his own home.

"To abscond" means, go away secretly or illegally and hurriedly to escape from custody
or avoid arrest. In the instant case, the accused had told others that they were going
from their place of work to their home in another district, from where they were
admittedly taken into custody (from their respective houses only) on the third day of
the incident. The Supreme Court observed that it was diﬃcult to hold that they had
been absconding. Even assuming for the argument's sake that they were not seen at
their workplace after the alleged incident, it cannot be held that by itself an adverse
inference is to be drawn against them.54 The suspect was secretly squatting in a
chappar. The conduct of an oﬃcial on being questioned immediately after taking bribe
was allowed to be cited.55 Refusal to appear in identiﬁcation parade and to give
specimen foot-prints is indicative of guilt.56
The presence of the accused before and after the incident in the vicinity of the village in
which dacoity look place was held to be evidence of conduct admissible under the
section.57

[s 8.5] Conduct accompanying or explaining statements—
[Explanation 1].—The conduct of a party interested in any proceeding at the time when
the facts occurred out of which the proceeding arises is extremely relevant. According
to this Explanation the word "conduct" does not include statements, unless those
statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; and it is on such a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
statement that the signiﬁcance of the act, which it accompanies, in many cases, wholly
depends. Mere statements, as distinguished from acts, do not constitute conduct. A
statement by a retiring partner, made immediately after his retirement, as the reason
for his refusing to continue to guarantee the ﬁrm's account with a bank, may be
admissible to explain his conduct.58
The conduct of the wife of the deceased in putting off relatives and others on a wrong
track by telling them that the deceased had left the village and had not returned was
held to be relevant under this section.59
Acts of parties cannot be allowed to affect the construction of written instruments if
that construction be in itself ambiguous;60 otherwise, the conduct of the party is very
important in the construction of documents. In criminal cases all the circumstances of
the case in every part of the conduct of the accused may be taken into consideration
for the purpose of showing the presence of crime by negativing the operation of every
natural agency.
Illustration (d) refers to previous conduct; illustration (e), to previous and subsequent
conduct of the accused. Illustrations (j) and (k) make statements of a person against
whom an offence has been committed, relevant. Illustration (j) is an example of the
admissibility of a complaint in a case of rape as evidence of conduct.

[s 8.6] Statements Affecting Conduct—
[Explanation 2].
The conduct must be such as has a close nexus with a fact in issue or a relevant fact.
The conduct of the accused in this case pointing out to the police the place of hiding
the weapon of offence or articles connected with it was held to be a relevant conduct,
whether it was contemporaneous with the event or otherwise.61 The exhumation of the
dead body from the place of burial as pointed out by the accused was held to be a
relevant conduct even if it was not covered by section 27 because no statement was
recorded.62 The name and address of the shop had become known to the police from
the packets of seized articles; this fact was pointed out by the accused; it was not
relevant under section 27. But the conduct of pointing out the shop and its proprietor
was relevant under section 8.63

[s 8.7] Section 8 and Domestic Violence Act.—
Conduct of the parties even prior to the commencement of the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 can be taken into consideration while passing an
order under sections 18, 19 and 20 of the said Act.64

41 Kali Jeeban Bhattacharjya v Emperor, (1936) 63 Cal 1053 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
42 Com. v Webster, 5 Cuch 295, 316. State of UP v Babu Ram, 2000 Cr LJ 2457 : AIR 2000 SC

1735 : 2000(4) SCC 515 , an explanation of the role of motive, the accused asked for partition of
landed property which the deceased was resisting. False explanations by accused persons are
relevant.
43 Chhotka v State of West Bengal, AIR 1958 Cal 482 .
44 Hadu v State, (1950) Cut 309. Tara Devi v State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 342 : 1991 Cr LJ 434 ,

motive of a woman to get rid of husband not enough to convict particularly when her paramour
acquitted.
45 State of Punjab v Sucha Singh, AIR 2003 SC 1471 .
46 State v Dinkar Bandu, (1969) 72 Bom LR 405 . Motive provides a strong link. Losing job

because of the conduct of the deceased was held to be a strong provocating cause for the
accused to act as he did. Re Baskar, 1991 Cr LJ 535 (Mad). Brahm Swaroop v State of UP, AIR
2011 SC 280 : 2011 Cr LJ 306 , the eye-witness account was trustworthy and believable, no
proof of motive was irrelevant. Varun Chaudhary v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2011 SC 72 , evidence
of motive becomes one of the circumstances where there is no direct evidence.
47 Sher Singh Nawab Singh v State of Rajasthan, 2017 Cr LJ (NOC) 1 (Raj).
48 M Malkani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 157 : 1973 Cr LJ 228 .
49 R v Leatham, (1861) 8 Cox CC 198.
50 Emperor v Raﬁque-ud-din Ahmad, (1934) 62 Cal 572 ; Neharu v Emperor, (1937) Nag 268.
51 The Attorney-General v Drummond, (1842) I Dru & War 353, 368 on appeal, (1849) 2 HLC 837.
52 Thimma v State of Mysore, AIR 1971 SC 1871 : 1971 Cr LJ 1314 ; Rahman v State of UP, AIR

1972 SC 110 : 1972 Cr LJ 23 ; Ramnathan v Tamil Nadu, AIR 1978 SC 1204 : 1978 Cr LJ 1137 .
53 Kartarey v UP, AIR 1976 SC 76 : 1976 Cr LJ 13 .
54 Durga Burman Roy v State of Sikkim, (2014) 13 SCC 35 (para 41). See also Sunil Kundu v

State of Jharkhand, (2013) 4 SCC 422 (para 28) and Sk. Yusuf v State of West Bengal, (2011) 11
SCC 754 .
55 Prakash Chand v State (Delhi Admn.), (1979) 2 SCR 330 : (1979) 1 SCJ 512 : (1979) Mad LJ

(Cr) 419 : 1979 Cr LJ 329 : AIR 1979 SC 400 . See also Malkhan Singh v State of UP, AIR 1975 SC
12 : 1975 Cr LJ 32 , where the suspect was seen holding pistol immediately after shooting and
also running away, the ﬁnding of fact was not disturbed by the Supreme Court. See also Mohan
Lal v UP, AIR 1974 SC 1144 : 1974 Cr LJ 800 , hiding with blood stained clothes.
56 Mulkh Raj v Delhi Admn., AIR 1976 SC 1721 : 1 (977) 1 SCC 46.
57 Sunil v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 3063 (Raj), the prosecution had strengthened its case

through TI parade of four accused and through voice of one accused, delay in holding TI parade
was also explained.
58 Pramathachandra Kar v Bhagwandas Madanlal, (1931) 59 Cal 40 .
59 Basanti v State of HP, 1987 Cr LJ 1869 : AIR 1987 SC 1572 : (1987) 3 SCC 227 : 1987 SCC

(Cri) 473 .
60 Re Purmanandas Jeewandas, (1882) 7 Bom 109.
61 State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu (2005) 11 SCC 600 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 : (2005) 122 DLT

194 .
62 AN Venkatesh v State of Karnataka, (2005) 7 SCC 714 : 2005 Cr LJ 3732 . Peerappa v State of

Karnataka, (2005) 12 SCC 461 , unrecorded statement, not made in the presence of any
witnesses, not relevant either under section 8 or 27.
63 State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 .
64 Saraswathy v Babu, (2014) 3 SCC 712 (para 23), following VD Bhanot v Savita Bhanot, (2012)

3 SCC 183 and aﬃrming Savita Bhanot v Lt Col VD Bhanot, (2010) 168 DLT 68 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 9] Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts.—
Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
establish the identity of any thing [s 9.2] or person [s 9.3] whose identity is relevant, or
ﬁx the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which
show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so
far as they are necessary for that purpose.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A.

The state of A's property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be
relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B aﬃrms that the matter

alleged to be libellous is true.
The position and relations of the parties at the time when the libel was
published may be relevant facts as introductory to the facts in issue.
The particulars of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with
the alleged libel are irrelevant, though the fact that there was a dispute may be
relevant if it affected the relations between A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime.

The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A absconded from his
house, is relevant under section 8, as conduct subsequent to and affected by
facts in issue.
The fact that, at the time when he left home he had sudden and urgent business
at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that he
left home suddenly.
The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except in so far as
they are necessary to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on

leaving A's service, says to A—"I am leaving you because B has made me a
better offer." This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of C's conduct,
which is relevant as a fact in issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it

to A's wife. B says as he delivers it—"A says you are to hide this." B's statement is
relevant as explanatory of a fact which is part of the transaction.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries

of the mob are relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.

COMMENT
Section 7 deals with the admissibility of facts which are the occasion, cause, or effect
of facts in issue. Section 8 similarly makes admissible facts showing motive or
preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact. This section makes admissible facts
which are necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts, such as place, name, date,
identity of parties, circumstances and relations of the parties. Thus, evidence of other
offences committed by the accused is admitted in order to establish his identity or to
corroborate the testimony of a witness in a material particular. Identity can also be
established by technical evidence like medical report.65 Section 11 is like the present
section.
Illustrations (a) and (b) are examples of introductory fact.66
Illustrations (d) and (e) indicate that explanatory statements are admitted under this
section irrespective of the fact whether the person against whom it is made heard it or
was present when it was made. Under this section it is not necessary that the person
against whom the statement is made should be present when it is made.

[s 9.1] Importance of identity evidence.—
The principles governing Test Identiﬁcation Parade (TI parade) have been succinctly
summed up by P Sathasivam J (as His Lordship then was) in following words:67
"The identiﬁcation parades are not primarily meant for the court. They are meant for
investigation purposes. The object of conducting a test identiﬁcation parade is twofold.
First is to enable the witnesses to satisfy themselves that the accused whom they
suspect is really the one who was seen by them in connection with the commission of
the crime. Second is to satisfy the investigating authorities that the suspect is the real
person whom the witnesses had seen in connection with the said occurrence.
Therefore, the following principles regarding identiﬁcation parade emerge:
(1) an identiﬁcation parade ideally must be conducted as soon as possible to avoid

any mistake on the part of witnesses;
(2) this condition can be revoked if proper explanation justifying the delay is

provided; and
(3) the authorities must make sure that the delay does not result in exposure of the

accused which may lead to mistakes on the part of the witnesses".

[s 9.2] "Identity of any thing".—
A superimposed photograph of the deceased over the skeleton of a human body was
held admissible by the Supreme Court to prove the fact that the skeleton was that of
the deceased.68

[s 9.2.1] Identity of Motor Vehicle.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In order to prove that the recovered motor cycle was used in the offence, the
prosecution has to show that the tyre marks found at the place of offence were that of
the recovered motor cycle. For that purpose the tyre marks have to be lifted from the
place and compared with the marks of the recovered motor cycle. The fact that the
home-guard and police constable had seen one digit of the registration number of the
motor cycle was held to be not suﬃcient to establish the identity even if the same digit
was there in the recovered vehicle also.69

[s 9.3] Identity of Accused: Test Identiﬁcation (TI) Parade.—
One of the methods of establishing the identity of the accused is "test identiﬁcation
parade". Its evidence is received under this section. The idea of the parade is to test the
veracity of the witness on the question of his capability to identify, from among several
persons made to stand in a queue, an unknown person whom the witness had seen at
the time of the occurrence.70 It is only an aid to investigation. The practice is not borne
out of procedure but out of prudence.71 The purpose is to test and strengthen the
substantive evidence of the witness in court. Such evidence is used for
corroboration.72 The TI Parade, even if it is held may not be considered in all cases as
trustworthy evidence on which the conviction of the accused can be sustained.73
The main object of holding TI parade during investigation is to test the memory of the
witness based upon the ﬁrst impression and also to enable the prosecution to decide
whether all the witnesses or any of them could be called as an eye-witness to the
crime.74
The relevant factors to be taken into consideration in connection with identiﬁcation are
whether there was opportunity for the witnesses to see the accused at the time of the
incident, whether they could remember by face the accused persons and whether they
could identify them by such memory in the court.75 Where a parade of this kind was
held within two days of arrest under the supervision of a Judicial Magistrate and with
all the necessary precautions, the evidence so obtained, the Supreme Court held,
should not have been rejected on the accused telling the court that he was shown to
the witnesses beforehand. All this is for the accused to prove.76 The Magistrate has to
satisfy himself that the accused was not shown to the witnesses and that the parade
was otherwise fair77 and not a farce.78 Evidence of identity so obtained can in
circumstances be the sole basis of conviction.79 But generally such evidence is only of
supporting nature. It can be used as corroborative evidence.80 The identiﬁcation
parade must be held by the investigating agency with reasonable despatch.81 The
identifying witness has to appear personally to depose.82 It is not necessary for him to
tell what role was played by the person whom he identiﬁed.83 Where TI is not held,
identiﬁcation in the court for the ﬁrst time does not serve much purpose.84 The trial
court as well as the High Court has found various legal inﬁrmities in the holding of test
identiﬁcation parade as such no reliance has been placed thereon. Moreover, as the
appellant was a named accused person, his so-called identiﬁcation in the test
identiﬁcation parade could not be of any avail to the prosecution as it was
meaningless."85

[s 9.3.1] Joint test identiﬁcation parade.—
There is no invariable rule that two accused persons cannot be made part of the same
test identiﬁcation parade. The joint test identiﬁcation parade, in no manner, affects the
validity of the test identiﬁcation parade.86

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 9.3.2] Delay in holding TI parade.—
The test identiﬁcation parade should be held at the earliest-possible opportunity, but
there is no hard-and-fast rule that can be laid down in this regard. If the delay is
inordinate and there is evidence probabilising the possibility of the accused having
been shown to the witnesses, the court may not act on the basis of such evidence.
Moreover, cases where the conviction is based not solely on the basis of identiﬁcation
in court, but on the basis of other corroborative evidence, such as recovery of looted
articles, stand on a different footing and the court has to consider the evidence in its
entirety.87 Where the identiﬁcation parade was held four months after the incident, the
Supreme Court held that it was not a reliable evidence. Its weakness further appeared
from the fact that the accused and the witness belonged to adjoining villages and had
also been students in one and the same school and, therefore, must have known each
other even before the parade.88 The dacoity in this case had been committed at night.
The court was of the view that the evidence of identiﬁcation in such cases should be
examined more carefully. Venkatachaliah J relied upon authorities as to the value of
and disservice by, identiﬁcation evidence. He said: The one area of criminal evidence
susceptible of miscarriage of criminal justice is the error in the identiﬁcation of the
criminal.
The utility of the evidence created by an identiﬁcation parade was explained by the
Supreme Court in Ramanathan v State of Tamil Nadu,89 Shinghal J said: Identiﬁcation
parades have been in common use for a very long time for the object of placing
suspect in a line-up with other persons for identiﬁcation. The purpose is to ﬁnd out
whether he is the perpetrator of the crime. This is all the more necessary where the
name of the offender is not mentioned by those who claim to be eye-witnesses of the
incident, but they claim that although they did not know him earlier, they could recall his
features in suﬃcient details and would also be able to identify him if and when they
happen to see him again. Such identiﬁcation is in the interest of both, the accused and
the investigating agency. It enables the investigating oﬃcer to ascertain whether the
witnesses had really seen the perpetrator of the crime and test their capacity to identify
him and thereby to ﬁll the gap in the investigation regarding the identity of the culprit.
The line-up of the accused in a test identiﬁcation parade is therefore a workable way of
testing the memory and veracity of the witnesses and has worked well in actual
practice. In the present case where there was satisfactory evidence to prove that at
least two of the witnesses emphatically claimed that they had noticed the culprit and
had in fact described him and claimed that they could identify him, the holding of a test
identiﬁcation parade was absolutely necessary. The fact that such parade was held
within two days of the arrest and was supervised by a Judicial Magistrate with all the
necessary precautions and arrangements, leaves no room for doubt that the evidence
was of considerable importance.
The accused persons were hired criminals and not residents of the locality. There was
street light. But they were ﬂeeing on scooter. Except for a ﬂeeting glance, the witness
must have had a very limited chance of observing properly. The court had to take this
fact into the account. The accused were kept in open police custody for four days prior
to identiﬁcation. The parade was held three months after the incident and one month
after arrest. No explanation was offered for the delay. The court said that no reliance
could be placed on such identiﬁcation.90

[s 9.4] Corroborative, not substantive evidence.—
The evidence generated through TI parade has been described by the Supreme Court to
be corroborative only. It is used only to corroborate the evidence recorded in the court.
It is not substantive evidence. The actual evidence is what is given by the witness in the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
court. The TI parade provides an assurance that the investigation is proceeding in the
right direction. It enables the witnesses to satisfy themselves that the accused whom
they suspect is really one who was seen by them at the time of commission of the
offence. The accused should not be shown to any of the witnesses after arrest. Up to
the time of parade, he must be kept "baparda", (with face covered). It was alleged in this
case that the parade was conducted in undue haste, but the magistrate was not
examined on this point. Hence, the plea was of no signiﬁcance.91

[s 9.5] Identiﬁcation inside the Court.—
In the decision in Suresh Candra Bahri v State of Bihar,92 it is well settled that statement
of the witness in the court is his evidence but when the accused person is not
previously known to the witness concerned then identiﬁcation of the accused by the
witness soon after his arrest is of great importance because it furnishes an assurance
that the investigation is proceeding on right lines in addition to furnishing corroboration
of the evidence to be given by the witness later in the court at the trial. From this point
of view it is a matter of great importance both for the investigating agency and for the
accused and a fortiori for the proper administration of justice that such identiﬁcation is
held without avoidable and unreasonable delay after the arrest of the accused and that
all the necessary precautions and safeguards were effectively taken so that the
investigation proceeds on correct lines for punishing the real culprit. It would, in
addition, be fair to the witness concerned also who was a stranger to the accused
because in that event the chances of his memory fading away are reduced and he is
required to identify the alleged culprit at the earliest possible opportunity after the
occurrence. It is in adopting this course alone that justice and fair play can be assured
both to the accused as well as to the prosecution. But the position may be different
when the accused or a culprit who stands trial had been seen not once but for quite a
number of times at different points of time and places which fact may do away with the
necessity of a TI parade.
Where the accused was not named in the FIR, nor was any identiﬁcation parade
conducted to identify him by the witnesses, it was held by Supreme Court that it is
rather impossible to identify the accused person when he is produced for the ﬁrst time
in the court, i.e., after 10 years since he was unknown to the witnesses.93 Identiﬁcation
in court is an evidence of weak character. It could have derived strength if identiﬁcation
had taken place in a parade. Holding of TI parade being not obligatory, its absence
does make the evidence of identiﬁcation in court as inadmissible.94
It has consistently been held by the Supreme Court that what is substantive evidence is
the identiﬁcation of the accused in the court by a witness and that the prior
identiﬁcation in a test identiﬁcation parade is used only to corroborate the identiﬁcation
in court. Holding the test identiﬁcation parade is not the rule of law but rule of
prudence. Normally, the identiﬁcation of the accused in a test identiﬁcation parade
lends assurance, so that the subsequent identiﬁcation in court during trial could be
safely relied upon. However, even in the absence of such a test identiﬁcation parade,
the identiﬁcation in court can in a given circumstance be relied upon, if the witness is
otherwise trustworthy and reliable as in the instant case, wherein the victim of a broad
daylight rape identiﬁed her assailant in court and was relied on.95
In the absence of identiﬁcation in court at the time of tendering evidence, the result of
TI parade would be of little value.96
In the case of Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi),97 one witness
who was said to be present at the scene of crime at the time of murder, had left for
Kolkata. One police oﬃcer went to Kolkata to get the identiﬁcation of the accused done

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
by showing photographs to the witness. The witness identiﬁed the accused by his
photograph in the presence of Police Oﬃcer, though he refused to sign the same.
Holding the factum of photo identiﬁcation as admissible in evidence, it was held by
Supreme Court that the factum of photo-identiﬁcation as witnessed by the concerned
Oﬃcer is a relevant and admissible piece of evidence.
In the case relating to the murder of a Christian Missionary Graham Staines, the
question of identiﬁcation from photographs arose, and it was held by Supreme Court
that showing photographs of the miscreants and identiﬁcation for the ﬁrst time in the
trial court without being corroborated by TI parade held before a Magistrate or without
any other material may not be helpful to the prosecution case. It was further held that
the evidence of witness given in the court as to the identiﬁcation may be accepted only
if he identiﬁed the same person in a previously held TI parade in jail. The identiﬁcation
of the accused during trial for the ﬁrst time was considered to be of an inherently weak
character, and therefore, it was held to be desirable to look for corroboration of the
sworn testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who are
strangers to them, in the form of earlier TI parade.98
The court may appreciate the dock identiﬁcation even if there is no previous TI parade.
In the case at hand, the informant, apart from identifying the accused who had made
themselves available in the TI parade, has also identiﬁed all of them in court. The dock
identiﬁcation by the informant deserved acceptance and could be accepted as reliable
identiﬁcation.99

[s 9.6] Refusal to submit for parade.—
The effect of such refusal was explained by the Supreme Court in the following
words:100 In the present case, the prosecution was anxiously taking steps to hold the
test identiﬁcation parade but the appellants declined to submit themselves for that
purpose. It is true that they could not have been compelled to line up for test parade
and so if they refused to submit for it they did so at their own risk. The prosecution
could not be blamed for not holding the test parade. The reason given out by the
appellants for declining to stand the test of identiﬁcation was that they were shown by
the police to the witnesses. This allegation was found to be baseless and unfounded by
both the courts below. There was absolutely no basis to say that the appellants or any
of them were shown to the witnesses. If the appellants had, in exercise of their own
volition, chosen not to stand the test of identiﬁcation without any reasonable cause,
they did so at their own risk for which they could not be heard to say that in the
absence of test parade, dock identiﬁcation was not proper and should not be accepted,
if it was otherwise found to be reliable.
There was nothing on record to show that newspapers in question had shown the
photograph of the accused. The photograph which was taken when surrendered before
the police was with muﬄed face. It was held that the refusal of the accused to appear
in TI parade on the ground that his photograph had appeared in newspapers was
unjustiﬁed. An adverse inference could be drawn against him.101
Where the plea that the accused had refused to participate in the test identiﬁcation
parade because their faces were shown to the prosecution witness at the police station
after their arrest, was raised for the ﬁrst time before the Supreme Court, the same was
not entertained.102

[s 9.7] Identiﬁcation by voice, gait etc.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Known persons can be recognised by the timbre of their voice and gait.103 Where the
accused persons were close relatives of the witnesses, it was held that they could be
recognised even in the absence of light by gait, timbre of voice etc.104 There can be
identiﬁcation by the shape of the body, gait, manner of walking, or even by voice.105
Where the witnesses were not closely acquainted with the accused, yet they claimed to
have identiﬁed the accused from short replies given by him, the evidence of
identiﬁcation was held to be unreliable.106 The evidence of an expert witness or of a
non-expert witness who is capable, is admissible to identify the voice of a
defendant.107 The facts involved the kidnapping of a wealthy businessman. Ransom
demands and other telephone calls were tape recorded. The court held that the expert
was well qualiﬁed through training and experience to express the opinion that the voice
on the recordings and that of the defendant was the same and that the police oﬃcers
were entitled to give evidence, not of opinion, but of recognition as a matter of fact.

[s 9.8] Identiﬁcation of public ﬁgure.—
In a case of fraud and misappropriation, the person accused was a public ﬁgure in the
locality. The witnesses identiﬁed him in the court. Their testimony was found to be
reliable. The court said that no identiﬁcation parade was necessary.108

[s 9.9] Identiﬁcation by footprints.—
Where the incident of murder took place in a ploughed ﬁeld and many people visited
the site before the arrival of the investigating oﬃcer and moulds were prepared from
the alleged footprints of the accused and from that of the seized foot wears, not shown
to have been asked to wear when specimen was taken, it was held that no reliance
could be placed on the result of identiﬁcation.109

[s 9.10] Crime by several persons.—
The Supreme Court laid down in Chandra Shekhar v State of Bihar,110 that where a large
number of persons participated in a crime, two witness theory could be adopted for
identiﬁcation of the accused persons. Beneﬁt of doubt was given to the accused who
could not be identiﬁed by more than one witness. Other accused persons who were
identiﬁed by at least two witnesses, their conviction was maintained.111

[s 9.11] Identiﬁcation by ﬁnger prints.—
In a murder case before the Supreme Court, two accused persons were involved. Finger
prints of one of them were found in the scene of occurrence. The other accused was
not allowed to raise the plea that the prosecution had failed to prove that the ﬁnger
prints used for comparison were those of the proper accused. The evidence was not
challenged by the accused whose ﬁnger-prints were found there.112

[s 9.12] Photoﬁts.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The Supreme Court in Ram Lochan v State of West Bengal,113 held that the
superimposed photograph of the deceased over the skeleton of a human body
recovered from a tank was admissible to prove the fact that the skeleton was that of
the deceased. Ayyanger J, explained the basic principles:
The question at issue in the case is identity of the skeleton. The identity could be
established by its physical or visual examination with reference to any peculiar features
in it which would mark it out as belonging to the person whose bones or skeleton it is
stated to be. Similarly, the size of the bones, their angularity or curvature, the
prominences or the recessions would be features which any examination and
comparison might serve to establish "the identity of a thing" within the meaning of
section 9. What we have in the present case is a photograph of that skull. That the skull
would be admissible in evidence for establishing the identity of the deceased was not
disputed and similarly a photograph of that skull. That a photograph of the deceased
was admissible in evidence to prove his facial features, where these are facts in issue
or relevant facts, is also beyond controversy. (What the witnesses have done) is to
combine these two. The outlines of the skull which is seen in the superimposed
photograph show the nasion prominences, the width of the jaw bones, and their shape,
the general contours of the cheek bones, the position of the eye cavity and the
comparison of these with the contours, etc., of the face of the deceased as seen in the
photograph serve to prove that the features found in the skull and the features in the
bones of the fact of the deceased are identical or at least not dissimilar. It appears to
us that such evidence would clearly be within section 9 of the Evidence Act.

[s 9.13] Weight of identity evidence.—
The Supreme Court in its decision in Kanta Prasad v Delhi Admn.114 observed that "the
weight to be attached to such identiﬁcation would be a matter for the court of fact and
it is not for this court to reassess the evidence unless exceptional grounds were
established necessitating such a course." Following this in Ramdeo Rai Yadav v State of
Bihar,115 the Supreme Court laid down that "in the present case, both the trial court and
the appellate court have assessed the evidence in the proper perspective and attached
much importance to the evidence in regard to the identiﬁcation of the appellant in
ﬁnding him guilty. Before this court no exception ground has been established
necessitating reassessment of that evidence."116
The identiﬁcation of the accused made in the court is substantive evidence, whereas
identiﬁcation at the test identiﬁcation parade, though a primary evidence, is not
substantive. It can be used only to corroborate the identiﬁcation of the accused by the
witness in the court.117 Evidence of identiﬁcation cannot be rejected on mere
suspicion that the accused might have been shown to the witnesses. The fact that the
witnesses identiﬁed the accused during the identiﬁcation parade itself is a strong
corroborative circumstance to the identiﬁcation of the accused made by them in the
court.118

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
65 Hardayal v State of UP, AIR 1976 SC 2027 : 1976 Cr LJ 1563 , the report showed that the body

was not decomposed beyond recognition.
66 State of Tamil Nadu v T Thulasingam, 1994 SCC (Cri) 1504 , evidence relating to the period

prior to the commencement of a conspiracy could not be looked into in regard to the criminal
conspiracy itself, it can be relevant as a fact introductory to the facts in issue, i.e., criminal
conspiracy.
67 Mulla v State of UP, (2010) 3 SCC 508 .
68 Ram Lochan v State of West Bengal, AIR 1963 SC 1074 : (1963) 2 Cr LJ 170 .
69 Varun Chaudhary v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2011 SC 72 .
70 Kanan v State of Kerala, 1979 Cr LJ 919 ; Chonampra v State of Kerala, AIR 1979 SC 1761 :

1979 Cr LJ 1335 . The statement of the witness that he identiﬁed the accused in the light of
torch ﬂashed by him and in the court that it was in the light of a lantern, held not reliable.
Basudev Yadaw v State of Bihar, 1988 Cr LJ 1408 (Pat). The evidence of identity given by the
inmates of the house cannot be rejected for the fact that they are interested witnesses. Ram
Deo Yadaw v State of Bihar, 1988 Cr LJ 1431 (Pat). Identiﬁcation by voice not accepted.
Pramahans Traders v Collector, 1988 Cr LJ 506 (Ori); Kalipadu Gope v State of Bihar, 1987 Cr LJ
1320 , proper identiﬁcation of dacoits on test identiﬁcation parade, conviction on such evidence,
good. Raj Kumar Singh v State of Bihar, 1988 Cr LJ 1273 (Pat), unreliable evidence of identity of
dacoits. Tain Singh v State, 1987 Cr LJ 53 (Del), refusal of the accused to stand in the line-up
saying that he had been exposed to the witnesses, held strict proof of the allegation not needed.
Sher Singh v State, 1991 Cr LJ 2612 (Del), where there was no evidence to show that the
accused in a robbery case was shown to the witnesses, his refusal to appear in the line-up
created presumption against him; Govinda Pradhan v State of Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 269 (Ori),
accused made to walk on several occasions to and from between court and jail, possibility of
witnesses having seen them not ruled out. Mahendra Singh v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 1381 (All),
no evidence that the accused was not shown to the witness before TI parade. Pramod Kumar v
State, 1991 Cr LJ 68 (Del), accused taken out for recovery of the weapon of offence, possibility
of being seen by the accused, subsequent identiﬁcation ruled out. Chaman v State of UP, AIR
1992 SC 601 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 403 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 212 , face of the accused and those of
others in the line covered with too many paper patches, held, identiﬁcation parade a wasted
effort, State of Orissa v Pravarkar Babera, 1991 Cr LJ 745 (Ori); Ahmad Sayeed v State of UP, 1991
Cr LJ 991 (All), delay not fatal by itself; if the dacoits came with covered faces in TI parade, they
should be similarly covered. Satrughana v State of Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 846 (Ori), separate for each
accused not necessary; effect of delay. Suraj Pal v State of Haryana, (1995) 2 SCC 64 : 1995 SCC
(Cri) 313 , the Supreme Court explained the reasons for and the utility of the practice of the test
identiﬁcation parade. Har Pal Singh v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 4552 (All), test of veracity of
witness as to identiﬁcation without which not safe to believe the witness. Kapporchand
Chaudhary v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 1424 (Pat), looting of passengers in a bus, the miscreants
were strangers to the victims, they had not covered their faces, the victims had the opportunity
to see them in the light of the vehicle which was on, evidence of identiﬁcation by the victims in
the court and in TI parade was held to be reliable. Lakhwinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2003
SC 2577 , eye-witness not knowing assailants who committed murder. Not holding a test
identiﬁcation parade to enable the witnesses to identify them was a serious lapse and was fatal
to the prosecution case. Bachan v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 2060 (All), the accused was seen by
the witnesses during transit, identiﬁcation evidence of such witness was not relied upon. Heera
v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2007 SC 2425 : (2007) 10 SCC 175 , purpose explained and also
emphasising that the parade should be paid at the earliest after arrest.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
71 Sidharth Vashisth @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC 1

.
72 Latesh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2018 SC 659 : (2018) 3 SCC 66 : LNIND 2018 SC 36 ; Ram

Babu v State of UP, AIR 2010 SC 2143 : (2010) 5 SCC 63 . Ankush Maruti Shinde v State of
Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 2609 : (2009) 6 SCC 667 , object of TI parade stated. Md Kalam v
State of Rajasthan, AIR 2008 SC 1813 : (2008) 11 SCC 352 , purpose of TI parade stated.
73 Latesh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2018 SC 659 : (2018) 3 SCC 66 : LNIND 2018 SC 36 .
74 Mahabir v State of Delhi, AIR 2008 SC 2343 : 2008 Cr LJ 3036 , the purpose is to test and

strengthen trustworthiness of the evidence. It is accordingly considered as a safe rule of
prudence to generally look for corroboration of sworn testimony of the witness in the court.
Mahabir v State of Delhi, AIR 2008 SC 2343 : 2008 Cr LJ 3036 , TI parade belongs to the stage of
investigation. There is nothing in CrPC obliging the investigating agency to hold it or conferring
right on the accused to demand it.
75

State of Karnataka v Rajan, 1994 Cr LJ 1042 (Kant). Vilas Vasatrao Patil v State of

Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 1854 (Bom), non-compliance of the provisions of the Criminal Manual
issued by the High Court in respect to identiﬁcation parade, makes it unacceptable. Ahmed Bin
Salam v State of AP, 1999 Cr LJ 2281 : AIR 1999 SC 1617 , where the accused persons were
shown to the witness and he identiﬁed them, this was held to be no identiﬁcation parade.
76 Sone Lal v State of UP, AIR 1978 SC 1142 : 1978 Cr LJ 1122 ; Ramanathan v State of TN, AIR

1978 SC 1204 : 1978 Cr LJ 1137 . See also Ashok Narhari Nath v State of Maharashtra, 1980 Cr
LJ 205 : (1980) 2 SCR 628 : AIR 1980 SC 727 , the witness identifying two out of several
accused, namely, one who assaulted him and one who inﬂicted fatal injuries on his complainant,
held, TI good evidence; delay of 44 hours was not so material as to convince the court that the
memory of the witness must have become blurred. Digambar Singh v State of UP, 1990 Cr LJ 489
: 1989 All LJ 180, dacoit identiﬁed in moonlight and lantern light and also in TI parade, good
evidence.
77 Somappa V Madar v State of Mysore, AIR 1979 SC 1831 : 1979 Cr LJ 1358 . Prosecution has

to show that the accused was carried for remand ba parda.
78 Yeshwant v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 337 : 1972 Cr LJ 1254 ; State of MP v

Samaylal, 1994 Cr LJ 3407 (MP), the accused shown to the witness. Such chances should be
eliminated, RB Gupta v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 4048 (Bom). Anoop Singh v State, 1994
Cr LJ 3442 (Delhi), conducting TI parade one day after the accused was shown to the
complainant, farce. Juglal Mehto v State (Delhi Admn.), 1995 Cr LJ 1618 (Del), the witness had
earlier occasion to see the assailants, not reliable. Accused as well as police oﬃcials present at
police station for photographs, possibility of being seen, TI parade held after more than one
month of the arrest, conviction could not be based on such identiﬁcation, Kabul v State of
Rajasthan, 1992 Cr LJ 1491 (Raj). Rejection of evidence obtained by identiﬁcation parade was
upheld by the Supreme Court because the make up of the persons standing in the line-up was
overdone making the parade a farcical exercise. Moles, and scars on the face of the accused
covered to a large extent with pieces of paper and similar covering done on faces of others in
the line up. Held not safe to convict on such evidence. Chaman v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 524 SC
: AIR 1992 SC 601 .
79 Jugal Gopal v State of Bihar, (1979) 3 SCC 272 : 1981 Cr LJ 4 : AIR 1981 SC 612 . But where

the parade was held after inordinate delay, such conviction was not sustained. Avtar Singh v
State of MP, AIR 1979 SC 1188 : 1979 Cr LJ 715 .
80 ST Shinde v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 791 : 1974 Cr LJ 674 . The value of such

evidence depends upon many things particularly the fact whether at the time of occurrence the
circumstances were such as to enable a witness to have a clear perception of the assailant. See

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Wakil Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 1392 : 1981 Supp SCC 28 : 1981 Cr LJ 1014 ; State of
UP v Boota, AIR 1978 SC 1770 : (1979) 1 SCR 298 : 1978 All LJ 1156 : 1979 Mad LJ (Cr) 290;
Ram Deo Rao Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1990 SC 1180 : 1990 Cr LJ 1183 . Danu v State of Orissa,
1996 Cr LJ 2107 (Ori), the accused were detained for a long period of 7 to 10 days with a view to
be shown to the witnesses, identiﬁcation parade conducted thereafter was held to be unreliable.
Dana Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3325 , the accused denied the fact that he was known
to the prosecution witness from before. He challenged the identiﬁcation by ﬁling a petition and
praying for holding test identiﬁcation parade. The court explained the procedure to be followed
in such a case. The court said that identiﬁcation of accused for the ﬁrst time in the court should
not ordinarily be the basis of conviction unless corroborated by identiﬁcation previously in
identiﬁcation parade, though it may in exceptional circumstances form the basis of conviction,
for example, where the solitary witness named the accused in the FIR and also in the court and
correctly identiﬁed him in the deck the accused persons were known to him. Their identiﬁcation
by such a witness could form the basis of conviction. The evidence was also consistent and
found to be credible. Where the accused was not named in the FIR his identiﬁcation in the court
could not be relied upon.
81 Dana Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3325 .
82 CP Fernandes v UT Goa, AIR 1977 SC 135 : 1977 Cr LJ 167 , otherwise the accused misses

the opportunity to cross-examine him.
83 State of AP v KV Reddy, AIR 1976 SC 2207 : 1976 Cr LJ 1723 .
84 State v UC Shukla, AIR 1980 SC 1382 : 1980 Supp SCC 249 ; Mohd Abdul Hafeez v AD, AIR

1983 SC 367 : 1983 Cr LJ 689 ; names and descriptions of the 4 accused were not given in the
FIR and no TI parade was held, identiﬁcation of accused after 4 months was held to be of no
use for connecting the accused persons with the crime. Pravakar Bahera v State, 1997 Cr LJ
3291 (Ori), dacoity, TI parade after 3½ months, no material to show that the accused persons
were shown to the witnesses before the parade. Evidence of identiﬁcation was relied upon. See
also Siri Ram Sharma v State, 1995 Cr LJ 1116 (Del), no identiﬁcation parade held, witness
identiﬁed the accused for the ﬁrst time in court, not to serve as basis for conviction. Rampal
Pithwa Rahidass v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 73 : 1994 Cr LJ 2320 (SC), dacoity,
no identiﬁcation parade held, accused unknown to witnesses, identiﬁcation in court not
suﬃcient to base conviction. Ramnath Naik v State of Orissa, 1995 Cr LJ 2255 (Ori),
identiﬁcation for the ﬁrst time during trial, weak evidence. State of Maharashtra v Sukhdev Singh,
AIR 1992 SC 2100 : 1992 Cr LJ 3454 : (1992) 3 SCC 700 , TI parade not held, no satisfactory
explanation, accused identiﬁed in the court, no corroboration, not reliable. Earabhadrappa v State
of Karnataka, AIR 1983 SC 446 : (1983) 3 SCC 330 : 1983 Cr LJ 846 , conviction cannot be based
on the identiﬁcation by a single witness. Wakil Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 1392 : 1981
Supp SC 628 : 1981 Cr LJ 1014 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 634 . In Hari Nath v State of UP, (1988) 1 SCC 14
: AIR 1988 SC 345 : 1988 Cr LJ 422 : 1988 CCC (Cri) 149, the Supreme Court cited the following
passage from HALSBURY'S LAWS OF ENGLAND: "It is undesirable that witnesses should be
asked to identify a defendant for the ﬁrst time in the dock at his trial; and as a general practice it
is preferable that he should have been placed previously on a parade with other persons, so that
potential witnesses can be asked to pick him out [para 363, Vol II, 4th Edn]. See also, Sheikh
Habib v State of Bihar, AIR 1972 SC 283 : (1972) Cr LJ 233 : (1972) 2 SCC 773 ; Rameshwar Singh
v State of J&K, AIR 1972 SC 102 : (1971) SCC (Cr) 638: (1971) 2 SCC 715 . Parasnath Singh v
State of Bihar, (1988) 2 SCC 96 : AIR 1988 SC 863 : 1988 Cr LJ 925 , identiﬁcation of the accused
by two witnesses in the witness-box, held to be useless when one of them had failed to identify
in TI parade. Failure to identify in the court after identiﬁcation in TI parade is likely to be equally
fatal. See Ramadhar Thakur v State of Bihar, 1988 Cr LJ 264 Pat; Khan Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
2305 (All), dacoity, looting of arms, evidence not adduced to show that the accused persons
were not shown to the witnesses. Conviction based on identiﬁcation by witnesses without TI
parade was held to be not proper. No recovery from one of the accused. Recovery from the
other was not connected with the present dacoity. Kishore Amarsingh Maheshkar v State of
Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 4059 : AIR 1998 SC 3031 : (1998) 6 SCC 609 , photographs of accused
persons shown to witnesses, parade held in the lock-up of the investigating agency, evidence
rejected Asifkhan Haiderkhan Pathan v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4458 (Guj), the witness and the
accused were present at the police station before the parade, failure of the prosecution to rule
out the accused being seen. Evidence of TI parade not reliable.
85 Dhananjay Shankar Shetty v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2787 , at p 2789.
86 Sheikh Sintha Madhar v State, AIR 2016 SC 1844 , para 16.
87 Md. Sajjad v State of West Bengal, AIR 2017 SC 642 : (2017) 11 SCC 150 : LNIND 2017 SC 21

.
88 Hari Nath v State of UP, (1988) 1 SCC 14 : AIR 1988 SC 345 : 1989 Cr LJ 842 . Other cases

involving four months delay: Subash v State of UP, 1987 Cr LJ 991 : AIR 1987 SC 1282 ; Habal
Shaikh v State of WB, 1991 Cr LJ 1258 (Cal); Khalak Singh v State of MP, 1992 Cr LJ 1151 MP, 57
days' of unexplained delay in conducting identiﬁcation parade, hence no evidentiary value.
Mohd. Isa Khan v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 3987 (All), ocular witness saw the accused for the ﬁrst
time at the time of incident, identiﬁed after seven years, not reliable. Adithela Immanuel Raju v
State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 243 (Ori), encashment of drafts by accused lasting only for few
minutes, identiﬁcation after nearly ﬁve months, not plausible. Identiﬁcation parade after three
and a half months, identiﬁcation not proper, Banifas Samad v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 2271
(Ori), the court relied on Satrughana v State of Orissa, 1990 (2) Ori LR 324 . Brij Mohan v State of
Rajasthan, AIR 1994 SC 739 : 1994 Cr LJ 922 : (1994) 1 SCC 413 , TI parade within twenty four
hours of the arrest but after three months from the occurrence, can't be rejected on the grounds
of delay. Ganpat Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 1565 (Raj), 14 days delay, not fatal. For
another case of prior knowledge, see Bali Ahir v State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 289 : (1984) Supp
SCR 625: 1983 SCC (Cr) 312; Soni v State of UP, (1982) 3 SCC 368 : (1983) SCC (Cr) 49, another
case of weak evidence of identiﬁcation and consequential beneﬁt of doubt. Bollavaram Pedda
Narsi Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1991 SC 1468 : (1991) 3 SCC 434 : (1991) Cr LJ 1833 ,
misconducted identiﬁcation parade; Manne Subbaro v State of AP, AIR 1980 SC 2113 : 1980 Cr
LJ 1476 , and Rahimal v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 3819 (All), question of suﬃciency of light.Munna
v State, 1993 Cr LJ 3719 , broad day light dacoity, T.I. after six months, not fatal and Kasu Bhai v
State of HP, 1992 Cr LJ 3251 (HP), house, breaking, a long struggle of the accused with the
victim lady in well lighted house, identiﬁcation parade after the release of the victim from the
hospital, legal. Sukumar Jena v State of Orissa, 1993 Cr LJ 1354 dacoity, suﬃcient light,
identiﬁcation corroborated by seizures of articles, reliable. Abdul Waheed Khan v State of AP, AIR
2002 SC 2961 , where the witnesses were not available on the date on which TI parade was
organised and, therefore, it had to be rescheduled and some delay which took place was
suﬃciently explained, the evidence thus generated was held to be relevant. Surendra Singh
Rautela v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 260 : 2002 Cr LJ 555 , accused ﬁred at inmates of a car, the
witness stated in the FIR that he could not identify the assailant, his identiﬁcation at TI parade
was held to be a farce Prakash Dhawal v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 540 , plea that the
confessional statement should not be admissible because he was acquitted of the main
offence, held not tenable because there was also the confessional statement of the co-accused
who was jointly tried. Kanwar Lal v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 3632 (MP) in a dacoity cum murder
case, there was an unexplained delay of 2½ months in holding the test identiﬁcation parade.
There was no proof also that no opportunity was given to the witnesses to see the accused

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
persons. The court did not put corroborative value upon such a parade. State v Ramesh, 2000 Cr
LJ 2855 (All), the identiﬁcation of the accused took place 2½ years after the incident. The court
said that the testimony of the identifying witnesses could not be relied upon. Ganpat Singh v
State of Rajasthan, (1997) 11 SCC 565 : 1998 SCC (Cr) 201, accused shown to the witness, TI
parade wasted.
89 Ramanathan v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1978 SC 1201 , at pp 1211-12 : (1978) 1 SCC 632 ;

Shiv Charan v State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1 : (1978) 1 SCC 27 : 1978 Cr LJ 1 . See Somappa
Vamanappa Madar v State of Mysore, (1980) 1 SCC 479 , 485 : AIR 1975 SC 1831 : 1979 Cr LJ
1358 , where the SC points out that the witnesses ought to be questioned as to whether the
accused had not been shown to them and in the absence of such questioning by the Magistrate
or the accused, the evidence is not reliable; Ashok Narhari v State of Maharashtra, (1980) 3 SCC
91 : 1980 SCC (Cr) 538, accused not shown to witnesses. Ramesh Kumar v State of Punjab,
(1993) Cr LJ 1800 (SC) there is no need for identiﬁcation parade where the witnesses already
knew who the assailants were. Ahmed Bin Salam v State of AP, 1999 Cri 2281 : AIR 1999 SC
1617 : (1999) 4 SCC 111 , police inquired from the witness as to whether he could identify the
persons who were on scooter and who threw bombs towards the deceased. The accused
persons were then shown to him and he identiﬁed them. The Supreme Court said that such an
exercise could not be described as a test identiﬁcation parade; Matru v State of UP, (1971) 2 SCC
75 : AIR 1971 SC 1050 ; Raj Kishore Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1058 ; Jadunath Singh v
State of UP, AIR 1971 SC 363 . Where norms as to organising a parade are not observed, it
becomes a wasted exercise. Musheer Khan v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 ,
evidence not of substantive nature. The identifying witness said that persons in the line were
covered up to neck those who organised the parade testiﬁed that there was no such cover,
because of this contradiction the court regarded identiﬁcation as doubtful.
90 Musheer Khan v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 , Mahabir v State of Delhi,

AIR 2008 SC 2343 : 2008 Cr LJ 3036 , ﬂeeting glimpse of an accused who was stranger, not
reliable identiﬁcation possible.
91 C. Muniappa v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2010 SC 3718 at pp 3729, 3730 : (2010) 9 SCC 567 ;

Mahabir v State of Delhi, AIR 2008 SC 2343 : 2008 Cr LJ 3036 , evidence of identiﬁcation can be
used only as corroborative of statement in the court.
92 AIR 1994 SC 2420 : 1994 Cr LJ 3271 . Thankayyan v State of Kerala, 1994 SCC (Cri) 1751 ,

the accused was not previously known to the witness, identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time in court, no
reliance on such evidence.
93 Oma v State of TN, (2013) 3 SCC 440 . Accused stranger, ﬁrst seen brieﬂy, no TI parade,

identiﬁcation in court after a gap of 41/2 years, did not inspire conﬁdence, Prakash v State of
Karnataka, (2014) 12 SCC 133 (paras 17 and 18).
94 Heera v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2007 SC 2425 : (2007) 10 SCC 175 .
95 S v Sunil Kumar, (2015) 8 SCC 478 , paras 11 and 12, following Ashok Debbarma v State of

Tripura, (2014) 4 SCC 747 .
96 Umesh Kumar v State of Bihar, AIR 2005 SC 726 : (2005) 9 SCC 200 : 2005 Cr LJ 908 .
97 Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 , para 107 at p

2414, (2010) 6 SCC 1 , P Sathasivam, J, speaking for the Bench.
98 Rabindra Kumar Pal @ Dara Singh v Republic of India, AIR 2011 SC 1436 , para 12 at pp 1445-

1446, (2011) 1 Scale 615 , (2011) 1 SCC (Cr) 706, P Sathasivam J.
99 Mukesh v State for NCT Delhi, AIR 2017 SC 2161 : (2017) 6 SCC 1 : LNIND 2017 SC 252 .
100 Suraj Pal v State of Haryana, (1995) 2 SCC 64 .
101 Sidharth Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC

1.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
102 Pargan Singh v State of Punjab, (2014) 14 SCC 619 (para 23) : AIR 2014 SC 3790 .
103 State v Harishchandra Tukaram Awatade, 1997 Cr LJ 612 (Bom); Shyamrao Vishnu Patil v

State, 1998 Cr LJ 3446 (Bom), incident at 8.30 p.m. Light was not there. But that was not
necessary, because known persons could be identiﬁed by their gait and voice.
104

Shankar Sridhar Kavale v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4491 (Bom); Shivaji Ganu Naik v State of

Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 471 (Bom).
105 Kedar Singh v State of Bihar, 1999 Cr LJ 601 : AIR 1999 SC 1481 .
106 Inspector of Police v Palaniswamy, AIR 2009 SC 1012 : 2009 Cr LJ 788 .
107 R v Robb, (1991) 93 Cr App R 161 (CA).
108 Arun Parshuram Sutar v State of Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 438 (Bom).
109 Niranjan Lal v State of Haryana, 1995 Cr LJ 248 (P&H).
110 Chandra Shekhar v State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 4693 (SC).
111 The court referred to its own earlier decisions in Binay Kumar Singh v State of Bihar, AIR

1997 SC 322 : 1997 Cr LJ 3621 : 1997 AIR SCW 78 : (1997) 1 SCC 283 and Masalti v State of UP,
AIR 1965 SC 202 : 1965 Cr LJ 226 in both of which the two-witness theory was adopted in cases
of crimes in which several persons are involved.
112 Gade Lakshmi Mangraju v State of AP, AIR 2001 SC 2677 : 2001 Cr LJ 3317 . Absence of the

ﬁngerprints was not suﬃcient to establish his absence from the scene of occurrence.
113 Ram Lochan v State of West Bengal, AIR 1963 SC 1074 : (1964) 1 SCJ 82 : (1963) SCD 638 :

(1963) 2 Cr LJ 170 . Har Dayal v State of UP, AIR 1976 SC 2055 : 1976(2) SCC 812 : 1976 Cr LJ
1578 , where the clothes and shoes of a deceased child were held to be good marks for his
identiﬁcation. State of Kerala v Baby Joseph, 1992 Cr LJ 2257 (Ker). The identity of a person
established through hair left behind by him in the ﬁngers of the deceased and also on the knife.
Report of an expert on analysis of the hair is an acceptable form of evidence, citing. Kanbi
Karsan Jadawa v State of Gujarat, AIR 1996 SC 821 : 1966 Cr LJ 605 , TAYLOR'S MEDICAL
JURISPRUDENCE, 122 (1965) where some cases are given showing that hairs were identiﬁed as
belonging to a particular person; Moghar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 1320 : 1975 Cr LJ
1102 , blades of hair of the deceased stuck to the Kirpan used by the accused; Ravindra Laxman
v Maharashtra, 1997 Cr LJ 3833 (Bom), crime at night, 9 : 30 p.m., not suﬃcient light for
identiﬁcation, single witness, not suﬃcient to found conviction. Umar Abdul Shakoor Sorathia v
Intelligence Oﬃcer, Narcotic Control Bureau, AIR 1999 SC 2562 , evidence of identiﬁcation by a
witness by photograph outside the court was accepted for framing a charge, but not as
substantive evidence unless he appeared before the court to testify on the matter. Mohd. Iqbal
M Shaikh v State of Maharashtra, (1998) 4 SCC 494 , accused shown to the witness before
identiﬁcation parade, evidence useless, identiﬁcation in court subsequently was also
inconsequential. Prahlad Singh v State of MP, (1997) 8 SCC 515 : AIR 1997 SC 3442 : 1997 Cr LJ
4078 : Ganpat Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1997) 11 SCC 565 : 1998 SCC (Cr) 201 were also to
the same effect.
114 Kanta Prasad v Delhi Admn, 1958 SCR 1218 : 1958 Cr LJ 698 .
115 Ramdeo Rai Yadav v State of Bihar, 1990 Cr LJ 1183 .
116 Ibid, p 1186, per S Ratnavel Pandian J See also Sheonath Bhar v State of UP, 1990 Cr LJ

2423 All, where a perfectly executed TI parade was disbelieved. Proper identiﬁcation is
substantive evidence, Ram Nath Mahto v State of Bihar, AIR 1996 SC 2511 : 1996 Cr LJ 3585 ;
Praveen Kumer Kailashchandra Shukla v State, 1997 Cr LJ 577 (Bom), Criminal Manual II,
magistrate entitled to put questions to the witness to know whether he had seen the suspect
after the incident. No serious defect in identiﬁcation parade. Identiﬁcation and conviction. Ali
Bahadur v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2871 (All), accused persons were known to witnesses as they were
residing in a village within a radius of two miles. No weight was given to their evidence of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
identiﬁcation. Identiﬁcation memo was also not proved by any of the witnesses or by the
magistrate. Ramesh Jogi v State, 1998 Cr LJ 3861 (All), the accused resided in the same locality
as the witness with a gap of only 2½ furlong. But the witness did not know him, nor he had the
opportunity to see the face of the accused at the time of the incident. Evidence of identiﬁcation,
held unacceptable. Ramesh Jogi v State, 1998 Cr LJ 3861 (All), the witness ran away from the
attacking accused to save his life, he did not tell the investigating oﬃcer that he turned back
subsequently. He had no opportunity to identify the accused. The name of the accused was
known for about two months before his arrest. Thus the witness might have known him before
he identiﬁed him at the parade. The evidence was held to be of zero value.
117 Dana Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3325 .
118 Radha Ballabh v State of UP, (1995) Supp 1 SCC 119 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 797 ; Karam Singh v

State, AIR 1992 SC 1438 : 1992 Cr LJ 2333 , no test identiﬁcation parade conducted, conviction
on the basis of identiﬁcation in court, not safe, particularly where no overt act was attributed to
him. Rajesh Govind Jagesda v State of Maharashtra, 2000 Cr LJ 350 : AIR 2000 SC 160 , the
witnesses said that one of the miscreants was sporting long hair and beard. No such person
was there in the parade, possibly he could have shorn off. But even so the witnesses identiﬁed
him. The court felt that because of the gap of 5 weeks between the arrest and identiﬁcation, the
possibility could not be ruled out that the culprit was shown to the witnesses in the meantime.
The court did believe upon the explanation for the delay that no magistrate was available. The
court said that it was not believable that in a city like Bombay there should be dearth of
magistrates particularly when no magistrate was speciﬁcally designated for identiﬁcation
purposes. Ganga Din v State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 1762 (All), robbery at night, FIR mentioned of only
one torchlight, subsequently more torchlight mentioned, identiﬁcation not reliable.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 10] Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design.—
Where there is reasonable ground to believe [s 10.3] that two or more persons have
conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done
or written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, [s 10.4]
after the time when such intention was ﬁrst entertained by any one of them, is a
relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for
the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing
that any such person was a party to it.
ILLUSTRATION
(i) (i) Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to

wage war against the 119[Government of India].
(ii) (ii) The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C

collected money in Calcutta for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the
conspiracy in Bombay, E published writings advocating the object in view at
Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to G at Cabul the money which C had
collected at Calcutta, and the contents of a letter written by H giving an account
of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the
conspiracy, and to prove A's complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant
of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were done were
strangers to him, and although they may have taken place before he joined the
conspiracy or after he left it.

COMMENT
This section refers to things said or done by conspirators in reference to the common
design. To attract the applicability of this section, the court must have reasonable
ground to believe that two or more persons had conspired together for committing an
offence and then the evidence of action or statement made by one of the accused
could be used as evidence against the other.120

[s 10.1] Principle.—
The principle on which the acts and declarations of other conspirators, and acts done
at different times, are admitted in evidence against the persons prosecuted, is, that, by
the act of conspiring together, the conspirators have jointly assumed to themselves, as
a body, the attitude of individuality, so far as regards the prosecution of the common
design; thus rendering whatever is done or said by any one in furtherance of that
design, a part of the res gestae and therefore the act of all. This section has been
deliberately enacted in order to make such acts and statements of a co-conspirator
admissible against the whole body of conspirators because of the nature of the crime.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A conspiracy is hatched in secrecy, and executed in darkness. Naturally, therefore, it is
not feasible for the prosecution to connect each isolated act or statement of one
accused with the acts or statements of the others, unless there is a common bond
linking all of them together.121

[s 10.2] Scope.—
The operation of this section is strictly conditional upon there being reasonable ground
to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence.122
There must be reason to believe that there was a conspiracy and the accused persons
were members of that conspiracy.123 The section refers to things said or done by a
conspirator in reference to the common intention. Anything said, done or written "in
reference to the common intention" is admissible, and therefore the contents of letters
written by one in reference to the conspiracy is relevant against the others even though
not written in support of it or in furtherance of it.124 The expression "in reference to
their common intention" in this section is very comprehensive with the result that
anything said, done or written by a co-conspirator, after the conspiracy was formed, will
be evidence against the other before he entered the ﬁeld of conspiracy or after he left
it. It cannot be used in favour of the other party or for the purpose of showing that such
a person was not a party to the conspiracy.125
However, where prosecution fails to substantiate the allegation of conspiracy against
an accused, that accused cannot be called a co-conspirator so as to attract the
provisions of section 10 of the Evidence Act, for the purposes of roping in the other
accused persons.126
"An overt act committed by any one of the conspirators is suﬃcient on the general
principles of agency to make it the act of all."127

[s 10.3] "Reasonable ground to believe".—
The fact that the accused and the person who shot dead the deceased were together
at a social gathering sometime before the shooting and having isolated themselves at
the house top, were seen talking and avoided questions as to what they were talking
about, was held by the Supreme Court to be suﬃcient to create a reason to believe that
they might be conspiring about something. The accused was accordingly sentenced to
death along with those who actually caused death though he was no where there at the
place of shooting.128

[s 10.4] "Common intention"—
[Effect when common intention ceases].—These words signify a common intention
existing at the time when the thing was said, done or written by one of them. Things
said, done or written while the conspiracy was on foot are relevant as evidence of the
common intention, once reasonable ground has been shown to believe in its existence.
Hence, any narrative or statement or confession made to a third party after the
common intention or conspiracy was no longer operating and had ceased to exist, is
not admissible against the other party. There is then no common intention of the
conspirators to which the statement can have reference.129 Lord Wright said:

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The words 'common intention' signify a common intention existing at the time when the
thing was said, done or written by the one of them. Things said, done or written while the
conspiracy was on foot are relevant as evidence of the common intention. But it would be
very different matter to hold that any narrative or statement or confession made to a third
party after the common intention or conspiracy was no longer operating and had ceased to
exist is admissible against the other party. There is then no common intention of the
conspirators to which the statement can have reference. In their lordships' judgment section
10 embodies this principle. That is the construction which has been rightly applied to
section 10 in India, for instance, in Emperor v Ganesh Raghunath,130 and Emperor v Abani.131
In these cases the distinction was rightly drawn from communications between
conspirators while the conspiracy was going on the statement made after arrest or after the
conspiracy had ended, by way of description of events then past.

The agreement to conspire may be inferred from circumstances which raise a
presumption of a concerted plan to carry out an unlawful design.132 A conspiracy need
not be established by proof which actually brings the parties together; but may be
shown, like any other fact, by circumstantial evidence.
In the Bombay terror attack case, the appellant was apprehended while he was on a
killing spree in execution of the objects of the conspiracy. The transcripts of the phone
conversation of the other terrorists, who were associates of the appellant and their
foreign collaborators, related to a time when the speakers were not only free but were
actively involved in trying to fulﬁl the objects of their conspiracy. Therefore, it was held
by Supreme Court that the transcripts were by no means any confessional statements
made under arrest and they were fully covered by the provisions of section 10 of the
Indian Evidence Act for the purposes of proving the factum of conspiracy amongst
them.133
Under section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, when a criminal act is done by several
persons, in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable
for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone. This section makes
admissible in evidence things said or done by a conspirator in reference to the
common design. It applies to crimes as well as torts, i.e., to joint offenders as well as
joint tort-feasors. It has no bearing on the question as to how far a conspiracy to
commit an offence or actionable wrong is an offence under the Indian Penal Code. It is
based upon the principle that, when several persons conspire to commit a crime or a
tort, each makes the rest his agent to carry the plan into execution.134

[s 10.5] Confession.—
A confession by a conspirator made to a Magistrate after arrest disclosing the
existence of a conspiracy, its objects and the names of its members, is not admissible
under this section against the co-conspirators jointly tried with him, but only under
section 30.135 When a person accused along with others voluntarily comes into the
witness-box and deposes as a witness for defence, he is in the same position as an
ordinary witness, and is, therefore, subject to cross-examination.136
Once his evidence as a witness for the defence is on record and it speaks of a
communication between one conspirator and the other during the existence of the
conspiracy and relates to its implementation, it becomes relevant.137
The confessional statement of an accused who is not alive would not be of any use. It
is not every statement of an accused person, whether amounting to confession or not,
which can fall within the scope of section 10.138
In an enquiry into removal for misbehaviour of a member of the Public Service
Commission, the evidence given by an oﬃcial of the PSC was sought to be
corroborated by a confessional statement made earlier by such oﬃcial. The court said

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that even if the confessional statement was not evidence under section 10, it could not
be totally discarded while considering the acceptability of his evidence on the point of
misbehaviour.139

[s 10.6] Agreement but not direct meeting necessary.—
"Though to establish the charge of conspiracy there must be agreement, there need not
be proof of direct meeting or combination, nor need the parties be brought into each
other's presence; the agreement may be inferred from circumstances raising a
presumption of a common concerted plan to carry out the unlawful design. So again it
is not necessary that all should have joined in the scheme from the ﬁrst; those who
come in at a later stage are equally guilty, provided the agreement be proved".140

[s 10.7] CASES.—
From the evidence of conspiracy to assassinate the Prime Minister of India, Mr Rajiv
Gandhi, the court said that it could not be inferred that the conspirators intended to
disrupt the sovereignty of India.141 Where four accused persons were alleged to have
conspired together to commit offences of abduction and murder of children, a
confession by one of them in respect of what the other accused persons did in
reference to their common intention was admissible as evidence as much against the
confessing accused as against the others.142

119 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen".
120 State of Karnataka v Selvi J Jayalalitha, 2017(2) Scale 375 : (2017) 6 SCC 263 : LNIND 2017

SC 72 .
121 Badri Rai, (1958) Pat 1504 SC: (1959) SCR 1141 : AIR 1958 SC 953 : 1958 Cr LJ 1434 .
122 Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 , 504; Natwarlal v State of Bombay,

(1963) 65 Bom LR 660 SC.
123 Chandrattan v Crown, (1945) Kar 129 .
124 Emperor v Bhola Nath, (1939) All 736 .
125 Bhagwan Swarup v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 682 : (1965) 1 Cr LJ 608 ; Abhay Tuli v

Lt Governor, 1998 Cr LJ 3217 (Del), the petitioners who were not being prosecuted but only
detained under COFEPOSA, section 10 was held not applicable to them. Ram Narayan Popli v
CBI, (2003) 3 SCC 641 : AIR 2003 SC 2748 followed in K Hashim v State of TN, AIR 2005 SC 128 :
(2005) 11 SCC 600 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 .
126 S Arul Raja v State of TN, (2010) 8 SCC 233 .
127 Roscoe's Criminal Evidence, 482 (16th Edn), cited by Jagannath J in Sardul Singh v State of

Bombay, AIR 1957 SC 747 at p 765 : 1957 Cr LJ 1325 .
128 Kehar Singh v State (Delhi Admn), AIR 1988 SC 1883 : 1989 Cr LJ 1 : (1988) 3 SCC 609 :

1988 SCC (Cri) 711 . The court doubted on this point the ratio of the decision in Sardar Sardul

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Singh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 681 : (1965) 2 Cr LJ 8 : (1965) 1 SCR 65 : (1965) Cr LJ
608 .
129 Mirza Akbar v Emperor, (1940) 43 Bom LR 20 PC : AIR 1940 PC 760 .
130 Emperor v Ganesh Raghunath, AIR 1932 Bom 56 : 55 Bom 839 : 33 Bom LR 1150.
131 Emperor v Ganesh Raghunath, (1911) 38 Cal 189 : 81 C 779 : 15 Cal WN 25. Sidharth v State

of Bihar, AIR 2005 SC 4352 : (2005) 12 SCC 545 , confession made after the common intention
was no longer there, not admissible against others.
132 Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 ; State of Kerala v P Sugathan, 2000 Cr

LJ 4584 : (2000) 8 SCC 203 , intention to cause death under conspiracy not proved.
133 Mohd. Ajmal Amir Kasab v State of Maharashtra, (2012) 9 SCC 1 .
134 State of Delhi (NCT) v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 , the principle

on the basis of which hearsay evidence is made admissible is that there is mutual agency
amongst the conspirators. Jayendra Saraswathi Swamigal v State of TN, AIR 2005 SC 716 :
(2005) 2 SCC 13 , statements made after their arrest, not admissible statements made or acts
done after completion of conspiracy are not evidence against each other.
135 Emperor v Abani Bhushan Chuckerbutty, (1910) 38 Cal 169 (SB).
136 People's Ins. Co v Sardul, AIR 1962 Panj 101 and Jibatch Shan v State of Bihar, AIR 1965 Pat

331 .
137 Tribhuvan Nath v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 450 : 1972 Cr LJ 1277 .
138 State of Gujarat v Mohd. Atik, 1998 Cr LJ 2251 : AIR 1998 SC 1686 . CBI v VC Shukla, 1998

Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 , entries in books of account were alleged to be showing
conspiracy among all the accused persons.
139 Re Sayalee Sanjeev Joshi, Member, Maharashtra Public Service Commission, AIR 2007 SC

2809 : (2007) 11 SCC 547 .
140 Per Jenkins CJ, in Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 , 507.
141 State of TN v Nalini, AIR 1999 SC 2640 : 1999 Cr LJ 3124 (SC) at p 3143-3144.
142 State of Maharashtra v Damu Gopinath Shinde, 2000 Cr LJ 2301 : AIR 2000 SC 1691 : (2000)

6 SCC 260 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 11] When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.—
Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant—
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue [s 11.2] or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or

non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or
improbable. [s 11.3]
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Calcutta on a certain

day. The fact that, on that day A was at Lahore is relevant.
The fact that, near the time when the crime was committed, A was at a
distance from the place where it was committed, which would render it
highly improbable, though not impossible, that he committed it, is
relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime.

The circumstances are such that the crime must have been committed
either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which shows that the crime could have
been committed by no one else and that it was not committed by either
B, C or D, is relevant.

COMMENT
[s 11.1] Principle.—
In order that a collateral fact may be admissible as relevant under this section there are
two requirements:
(1) that the collateral fact must itself be established by reasonably conclusive
evidence; and
(2) that it must, when established, afford a reasonable presumption or inference as to
the matter in dispute.143
Under certain circumstances, in certain cases, the judgment in a previous suit, to which
one of the parties in the subsequent suit was not a party, may be admissible in
evidence for certain purposes and with certain objects in the subsequent suit.144
Except where they are judgments in rem, or where they relate to public matters,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
judgments not inter partes have been always held to be not res judicata, but they cannot
be wholly excluded for other purposes insofar as they explain the nature of possession,
or throw light on the motives or conduct of parties or identify property.145 Evidence
recorded by one forum cannot be read in relation to proceedings emanating from
another forum.146

[s 11.2] "Inconsistent with any fact in issue".— Plea of Alibi.—
The usual theory of essential inconsistency is that a certain fact cannot co-exist with
the doing of the act in question, and, therefore, that if that fact is true of a person of
whom the act is alleged, it is impossible that he should have done the act. Thus the
fact of presence elsewhere is essentially inconsistent with the presence at the place
and time alleged, and therefore with personal participation in the act (theory of
alibi).147 The plea of "alibi" has to be weighed against the positive evidence led by the
prosecution, i.e., not only the substantive evidence of the witness and the dying
declarations, but also against the scientiﬁc evidence, viz., the DNA analysis, ﬁnger print
analysis and bite marks analysis, the accuracy of which is scientiﬁcally acclaimed.148
The Supreme Court has observed that it is well settled that the plea of alibi must be
proved with absolute certainty so as to completely exclude the possibility of the
presence of the person concerned at the place of occurrence.

[s 11.3] "Highly probable or improbable".—
These words point out that the connection between the facts in issue and the collateral
facts sought to be proved must be so mediate as to render the co-existence of the two
highly probable.149

[s 11.4] CASES
[s 11.4.1] Highly probable.—
Where the plaintiffs and some of the defendants were co-owners of certain properties,
the question at issue being whether there was a partition between them, and whether
under that partition the defendants came to be in possession of a speciﬁc property in
lieu of their shares in all the properties, a petition and a written statement ﬁled by the
defendants in certain previous suits admitting the partition and the exclusive
acquisition of the speciﬁc property were put in, but objected to as inadmissible in
evidence; it was held that the documents were admissible against those defendants as
they made the existence of the partition, which was the fact in issue, highly probable.
They were also admissible under section 21, clause (3).150
In a case where the previous suit was to recover a two-thirds share of the property in
question, and the subsequent suit was by a different plaintiff to recover the remaining
one-third share of the same property, it was held in the subsequent suit that the
judgment in the previous suit was not admissible in evidence, the subject-matter in the
two suits not being identical.151
In respect of the alleged hidden loss to a company in previous years, the ﬁnding of the
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction under Sick Industrial Companies
(Special Provisions) Act, 1985 was that there was no prior period loss, it was held that

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the ﬁnding was relevant under section 11 read with section 43, though it was not
conclusive and binding.152 A rectiﬁed trust deed pursuant to the order of the court
would certainly make the rectiﬁcation order relevant under the provisions of section
11.153
In a suit for recovery of possession of a plot and declaration of title, the defendant
denied the existence of the plot. The sale deed of the adjacent plot acknowledged the
existence of the plot and the plaintiff's possession over it. This was held to be
admissible in evidence under sections 11 and 13(a).154

143 Khaver Sultan v Rukha Sultan, (1904) 6 Bom LR 983 .
144 Tepu Khan v Rajani Mohun Das, (1898) 25 Cal 522 FB, holding that Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall,

(1880) 6 Cal 171 FB, is materially qualiﬁed by the decisions of the Privy Council in Ram Ranjan
Chuckerbutty v Ram Narain Singh, (1894) 22 IA 60 : 22 Cal 533, and Bitto Kunwar v Kesho
Pershad, (1897) 24 IA 10 , 19 All 277.
145 Per Ranade J, in Lakshman v Amrit, (1900) 24 Bom 591, 599 : 2 Bom LR 386, 393.
146 Sangeeta Balkrishna Kadam v Balkrishna Ramchandra Kadam, AIR 1994 Bom 1 .
147 Dhananjoy Chatterjee v State of West Bengal, (1994) 2 SCC 220 , the plea of alibi must be

proved by cogent and satisfactory evidence completely excluding the possibility of the presence
of the accused at the scene of occurrence at the relevant time. The court found that the belated
and vague plea of alibi was only an afterthought.
State of UP v Mukunde Singh, (1994) 2 SCC 191 , evidence regarding was adduced for the ﬁrst
time in the High Court during pendency of appeal, found to be very unsatisfactory, on the basis
of such alibi the testimony of eyewitnesses among whom there were two injured witnesses,
could not be brushed aside. Gurcharan Singh v State of Punjab, 1994 Supp (1) SCC 515 : 1994
SCC (Cri) 512 , the accused pleaded that he had been away from the scene of crime and had
gone to purchase a thresher. The thresher dealer testiﬁed to that and showed a book but that
was in an irregular shape with blank pages, no good evidence. Rajesh Kumar v Dharamvi, AIR
1997 SC 3769 : 1997 Cr LJ 2242 , the accused claimed to have gone to an Advocate for
consultation at the time when the occurrence took place. No contemporaneous document was
produced by the Advocate showing the fact and timing of his visit. The plea of alibi was not
accepted. Binay Kumar Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 322 : 1997 Cr LJ 362 , strict proof is
required for establishing plea of alibi. There was a ﬁnding of fact by the court below disbelieving
the plea of alibi. The founding was based upon strong and sturdy reasons. The Supreme Court
did not interfere. CBI v VC Shukla, 1998 Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 , entries in books of
account alleged to be showing conspiracy among all the accused persons. The evidence of the
prosecution witness was that one of the accused persons was known to the other and visited
him on formal occasions. The witness did not speak even a word about the other accused
persons. Held, section 10 could not be pushed into service for holding that a conspiracy existed.
State of Gujarat v Chavda Manaji Chelaji, 2000 Cr LJ 1091 (Guj), where the presence of the
accused at the scene of occurrence was satisfactorily established by the prosecution, the court
would be slow to believe any counter evidence. Jayanthbhai Bhenkarbhai v State of Gujarat, 2002

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Cr LJ 4734 (SC), proved that the accused was at some other place for quite some time during
the day when the deceased was assaulted.
148 Mukesh v State for NCT Delhi, AIR 2017 SC 2161 : (2017) 6 SCC 1 : LNIND 2017 SC 252 .
149 Empress v MJ Vyapoory Moodeliar, (1881) 6 Cal 655 , 662. An application by the co-accused

that the police had already arrested the accused and were then trying to implicate him falsely,
was allowed to be taken along with his similar statement to the police under section 342 CrPC
as making his allegation probable. Satbir v State of Haryana, AIR 1981 SC 2074 ; 1981 Cr LJ
1702 : (1981) 4 SCC 508 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 860 .
150 Gyannessa v Mobarakannessa, (1897) 25 Cal 210 ; Nana v Shanker, (1901) 3 Bom LR 465 ;

Naro Vinayak Patvardhan v Narharibin Raghunath, (1891) 16 Bom 125; Malkiat Singh v State of
Punjab, (1991) 4 SCC 341 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 976 .
151 Tepu Khan v Rajani Mohun Das, (1898) 25 Cal 522 FB; Mahender Singh Dhaiya v State (CBI),

2003 Cr LJ 1908 (Del) husband charged with killing his wife, her letters to him were not taken to
be relevant under this section as they did not indicate any probability.
152 AK Khosla v TS Venkatesan, 1992 Cr LJ 1448 (Cal).
153 IT Commr., Kanpur v Kamla Town Trust, AIR 1996 SC 619 : (1995) 4 SCC 151 ; Sadhurajan v

Sriramulu Naidu, AIR 1999 Mad 377 , recitals of boundaries in deeds not inter partes were held to
be inadmissible in evidence unless the executants were examined.
154 Kantilal v Shanti Devi, AIR 1997 Raj 230 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 12] In suits for damages, facts tending to enable Court to determine amount
are relevant.—
In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to
determine the amount of damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.

COMMENT
[s 12.1] Principle.—
This section enables the court to admit any facts which will help it to determine the
amount of damages which ought to be awarded to a party. When damages are claimed
in a suit, the amount of damages is a fact in issue. "Damages" are the pecuniary
satisfaction which the plaintiff may obtain by success in an action. They are limited to
the loss which the plaintiff has actually sustained.
Under this section it may be laid down generally that evidence tending to determine,
i.e., to increase or diminish the damages, is admissible though not expressly involved in
issue. Thus, in an action for breach of promise of marriage, the plaintiff may give
evidence of the defendant's fortunes; for it obviously tends to prove the loss sustained
by the plaintiff; but not in an action for adultery; nor for malicious prosecution. But the
evidence of the amount of damages, which is the necessary and obvious result of the
defendant's breach of contract, or of his tort, may be proved, though only alleged
generally in the plaint.155
Where the plaintiff failed to adduce the best available evidence and this caused
diﬃculty in assessing damages, this was held to be no ground for refusing damages or
ﬁxing nominal damages. It is for the court to determine the quantum of damages.156
Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act lays down the rule governing damages in actions
on contract.
Section 55 of the Evidence Act lays down the conditions under which evidence of
character may be given in civil cases with a view to the award of damages.
In a claim for damages for employment injury, fresh evidence as to the plaintiff's
credibility was held to be inadmissible.157

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
155 Norton, 124.
156 Shaikh Gafoor v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2008 NOC 1637 (Bom), digging cannal caused

damage to the crops on the plaintiff's adjoining land.
157 Owens v Redpath Offshore (South) Ltd, 1998 CLY p 92 (323). The court followed Mulholland

v Mitchell, (1971) AC 666 : (1971) CLY 3232 and Coghlan v Cumberland, (1898) 1 Ch 704 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 13] Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.—
Where the question is as to the existence of any right [s 13.2] or custom, [s 13.3] the
following facts are relevant.
(a) any transaction [s 13.4] by which the right or custom in question was created,

claimed, [s 13.5] modiﬁed, recognized, [s 13.7] asserted or denied, or which was
inconsistent with its existence.
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognized or

exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
ILLUSTRATION
The question is, whether A has a right to a ﬁshery. A deed conferring the ﬁshery
on A's ancestors, a mortgage of the ﬁshery by A's father, a subsequent grant of
the ﬁshery by A's father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in
which A's father exercised the right, or in which the exercise of the right was
stopped by A's neighbours, are relevant facts.

COMMENT
[s 13.1] Principle.—
The cases this section is intended to meet are those in which the right or custom in
question is regarded as capable of surviving repeated instances of its assertion and
denial, where transactions may be supposed to have gone on modifying, asserting,
denying, creating, recognizing it, or being inconsistent with its existence, leaving it, after
all that has been given in evidence, fair matter for judicial consideration, as to whether
the court should or should not decree it.158

[s 13.2] "Right".—
The rights contemplated by this section are plainly conceived as admitting of proof by
cumulative instances and transactions, and not by a single and decisive and ﬁnal way,
namely the terms of a document. The whole context indicates that the section is
dealing with continuing rights which may be interrupted without being necessarily
destroyed. The term "right" comprehends every right known to the law.159 It includes
both corporeal and incorporeal rights including "a right of ownership".160 This is the
view of the Bombay, the Madras and the Allahabad High Courts. The Calcutta High
Court has, however, held that the term "right" includes only incorporeal rights.161 But its

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
decisions are conﬂicting.162 The Patna High Court agreed with the Bombay, the Madras
and the Allahabad High Courts in one case,163 but, in a subsequent case, a single
Judge has adopted the view of the Calcutta High Court.164
The section is not conﬁned to public rights but covers private rights also, e.g., see the
illustration to the section. The way in which a property and its income have been
treated has been held relevant to consider whether it is secular or religious.165 Right to
perform Kali puja can be proved by showing that it was reasonable, ancient, and
exercised openly and peaceably. It is not necessary to prove exercise of the right since
time immemorial.166 The court cited the opinion of the Privy Council that the true legal
basis of such right lies in custom, and customary right can be claimed only in respect
of the inhabitants of a district, and not of the public at large.167
The court also cited the opinion of the Supreme Court as to what is meant by an
immemorial custom:168 A phenomenon is said to be happening from time immemorial
when the date of its commencement is shrouded in the merits of antiquity.
"Having regard to the circumstances under which local customs have arisen, and do
arise in India, both with reference to Muslims and Hindus and the case and frequency
with which people migrate from one district or province to another, it would, in their
Lordships' opinion, create great perplexity in the already uncertain character of
customary law to require that, in every case the antiquity of a custom must be carried
back to a period which is beyond the memory of man."169
Previous judicial determination of the basis of valuation of land can be cited in a
subsequent acquisition matter.170

[s 13.3] "Custom".—
A custom is a rule which in a particular family or in a particular district, has from long
usage obtained the force of law.171 The English rule that "a custom, in order that it may
be legal and binding, must have been used so long that the memory of man runneth not
to the contrary" does not apply to conditions in India. A custom observed in a particular
district derives its force from the fact that it has, from long usage, obtained in that
district the force of law. It must be ancient, but it is not of the essence of this rule that
its antiquity must in every case be carried back to a period beyond the memory of man.
It will depend upon the circumstances of each case what antiquity must be established
before the custom can be accepted. What is necessary to be proved is that the usage
has been acted upon in practice for such a long period and with such invariability as to
show that it has, by common consent, been submitted to as the established governing
rule of the particular district.172
A custom to be recognized by a court should be—
(1) Ancient,
(2) continuous and uniform,
(3) reasonable
(4) certain,
(5) compulsory and not optional,
(6) peaceable, and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(7) not immoral.

The customs which will be recognized under the Act will be—
(1) general, e.g., customs common to a class of people living in the same district or

belonging to the same caste or community;
(2) public, i.e., any custom which is a matter of public interest;
(3) private, e.g., family customs and usages. The burden of proving a custom lies on

the party setting it up.
In order to prove a custom—
(1) The evidence should be such as to prove the uniformity and continuity of the usage
and the conviction of those following it that they were acting in accordance with law, and
this conviction must be inferred from the evidence. Oral evidence of witnesses who
depose to having heard of the custom from their deceased ancestors is admissible.173
(2) Evidence of acts of the kind, acquiescence in those acts, their publicity, decisions of
courts, or even of panchayats upholding such acts, the statements of experienced and
competent persons of their belief that such acts were legal and valid will all be
admissible, but it is obvious that, although admissible, evidence of this latter kind will
be of little weight if unsupported by actual examples of the usage asserted.174
It is incumbent on a party setting up a custom to allege and prove the custom on which
he relies and it is not any theory of custom or deductions from other customs which
can be made a rule of decision but only any custom applicable to the parties concerned
that can be the rule of decision in a particular case. Custom cannot be extended by
analogy and it cannot be established by a priori methods.175
The rule of custom should prevail in all cases and if any aberrations have to be
corrected such correction must take the court in the direction of re-establishing the rule
of custom.176
A trade usage or custom may be proved in the same way as a family custom, except
that it is unnecessary to show that such a custom is either ancient or continuous. A
trade usage may be still in course of growth; it may require evidence for its support in
each case; but in the result it is enough if it appears to be so well known and
acquiesced in, that it may be reasonably presumed to have been an ingredient tacitly
imported by the parties into their contract.177
There was a custom of appointing the senior most trustee as the President of a trust, in
absence of any other provision, it was held that the senior most trustee would be
entitled to assume the oﬃce of President, even though the custom was not of a
suﬃciently long standing.178

[s 13.4] "Transaction".—
A transaction, in the ordinary sense of the word, is some business or dealing which is
carried on or transacted between two or more persons.
The term "transaction" is not conﬁned to a dealing with property between two persons
inter vivos, but includes a testamentary dealing with the property.179

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Whether judgments not inter partes (between the same parties) are admissible in
evidence under this section as "transactions" [clause (a)] or "particular instances"
[clause (b)] gave rise to conﬂicting decisions,180 but, in view of subsequent
pronouncements of the Judicial Committee, under certain circumstances, in certain
cases, the judgment in a previous suit, to which one of the parties in a subsequent suit
was not a party, may be admissible in evidence for certain purposes and with certain
objects in the subsequent suit.181
Police orders made under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure to prevent
breaches of the peace, in cases of dispute as to immovable property are held
admissible in evidence under this section to show the fact that such orders were made.
This necessarily makes them evidence of the facts appearing on the orders
themselves, viz., who the parties to the dispute were; what the land in dispute was; and
who was declared entitled to retain possession. For this purpose and to this extent
such orders are admissible in evidence for and against anyone, when the fact of
possession at the date of the order has to be ascertained.182
Judgments not inter partes might be admissible in evidence as establishing a particular
transaction, if any, by which the relevant right was asserted, recognised, claimed or
denied, but in no case the reasons and the ﬁndings of fact arrived at in them would be
admissible in evidence.183
The judgment of a court is a document which usually contains both a description of the
litigation and the adjudication, with the reasons for the adjudication. The narrative
given in a judgment not inter partes of the nature of the litigation, the names of the
parties and witnesses, the rival assertions or claims, and the character of the evidence
oral and documentary is admissible under section 35 to prove those facts, if relevant
under this or any other section. The court's written judgment is often the most
convenient means of proof, and, in the case of an old proceeding, sometimes the only
available proof of these matters. Thus a statement in a decree that a certain pedigree
table had been put in evidence by one of the parties was admitted in evidence of that
fact under section 35 in a subsequent suit between other parties.184
In the case of an adjudication not inter partes its existence alone is admissible under
section 43, and only in cases where such existence is relevant. Its correctness or
incorrectness is not admissible, nor are the reasons on which it is based. Although a
judgment (an adjudication) in a proceeding A v B may perhaps be used in a subsequent
proceeding A and B v C as evidence that there was a decision on a certain point, it
cannot be used as evidence that there was an accurate decision based on true
facts.185
A ﬁnding of fact arrived at on the evidence in one case is not evidence of that fact in
another case between different parties.186 So far as regards the truth of the matter
decided, a judgment is not admissible as evidence against one who is a stranger to the
suit. In a suit for possession of land a judgment in a previous suit, though admissible
as evidence of assertion of a right to the land, is not evidence of the right as against a
stranger.187 Where the right of a party has been concluded by a judgment that
judgment is admissible to prove that fact.188
The original owner (mortgager) bequeathed the property under a will in favour of the
plaintiff. The legal heirs of the original owner could not assail the validity of the will.
The title became declared in favour of the plaintiff. The judgment was held to be
admissible in the subsequent suit for redemption of the mortgage even though the
mortgagee was not a party to the earlier suit. The judgment had the effect of being a
part of the transaction of will.189

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 13.5] "Claimed".—
This word indicates that the right is asserted to the knowledge and in the presence of
the person whose right will be affected by the establishment of the claim. The mere
assertion of a right in a document to which the person against whom the right is
asserted is not a party and of which he knows nothing is not to claim the right.190

[s 13.6] Judgment.—
"It may be taken to be fairly settled that the judgment in a previous suit though not inter
partes is admissible in proof of a transaction or a particular instance in which the
relationship was asserted and recognised or denied. A judgment in the previous suit
though not conclusive is admissible in evidence like any other fact to be weighed in the
balance. It is not the correctness of the previous decision but the fact that there has
been a previous decision that is established by the judgment".191 The court reviewed
earlier authorities.192
In a Calcutta case193 a question arose whether a judgment not inter partes was
admissible under section 13 and Garth CJ expressed the view that the former judgment
was not a transaction and that the right claimed in the particular suit was not a right
within the meaning of section 13. A Full Bench of the Allahabad High Court194 came to
a different conclusion and held that such judgments were admissible under section 13.
Their Lordships observed that the majority view of the Calcutta decision had put too
narrow a construction on the word "right" as used in section 13 and that the term
includes not only incorporated rights, but also right of ownership. It was further held
that though the judgment itself was not a transaction, the suit or the litigation in which
it was pronounced might be treated as a transaction or an instance in which a right
may have been asserted, acknowledged or denied. In the case of Sital Das v Sant
Ram,195 the Supreme Court held that in a dispute as to the succession to the oﬃce of a
Mohunt, a previous judgment in a suit by the former Mohunt is admissible as a
transaction in which a person from whom one of the parties purported to derive his
title, asserted his right as a spiritual collateral of the former Mohunt and on that footing
got a decree. Their Lordships also observed that although the judgment in the previous
suit was not conclusive and had to be weighed and appraised for what it is worth, it
could be used in support of the oral evidence adduced in the case. The Andhra Pradesh
High Court196 held that a previous judgment was admissible under section 13 to show
that the right of the plaintiff as the son of the sixth defendant was claimed and
recognised. In one of the cases197 a judgment not inter partes in a previous case in
which an adoption was upheld was held to be a relevant piece of evidence under
section 13. In still another case198 section 13 was held applicable to the class of cases
where the alleged relationship admitted of assertion, denial and recognition. A
judgment in which the illegitimacy of a person was recognised was held to be
admissible under section 13,199 where the question of his legitimacy was in issue in a
subsequent suit.
In view of these authorities, it may be taken to be fairly settled that the judgment in a
previous suit though not inter partes, is admissible in evidence like any other fact to be
weighed in the balance. It is not the correctness of the previous decision but the fact
that there has been a previous decision that is established by the judgment. The ﬁnding
of fact arrived at on the evidence of one case cannot be evidence of that fact in
another case.200
A judgment, not inter partes, and mentioning a fact not relevant in that case, is
inadmissible in evidence to prove that fact in a subsequent case. Thus the previous

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
decision not inter partes, in which it was mentioned that N took F in adoption, when the
fact of adoption was not relevant in that case is inadmissible to prove F's adoption to N
in a subsequent case.201
In a case of sale of property which was under attachment, the District Court gave the
ﬁnding that the decree in respect of some other portion of the property was vitiated by
fraud. In a suit for permanent injunction in respect of the other portion, it was held that
the earlier ﬁnding might not operate as res judicata but it was admissible under section
13 as the transaction was the same and section 43 was no bar.202
A judgment is relevant if it is earlier to the case even though the case was ﬁled
subsequently.203 The plaintiff ﬁled a suit in his capacity as a lessee of the suit property
for mandatory injunction for protection of his possession. The defendant claimed that
he was in possession of the property. An earlier judgment was cited by the plaintiff in
which the lessor's (temple) proceedings for recovery of possession were dismissed. He
also cited another judgment in which his right to possession was decreed and the
temple was restrained from interfering with his possession. The court said that these
judgments could not be said to be irrelevant. They could not be said to be irrelevant
only because they were not inter-partes, particularly when the defendant was claiming
to be in possession of the property.204
Judgments which support a plea of res judicata under section 11, Code of Civil
Procedure, or that of autrefois acquit under section 300, Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, judgments in rem, and judgments which refer to matters of public nature, are
expressly made relevant by the Act. But other judgments are irrelevant, unless their
existence is either a fact in issue or relevant under some other section of the Act. That
there are cases where the existence of a judgment might become a fact in issue or a
relevant fact under some other section of the Act, is perfectly clear from the
illustrations to section 43.

[s 13.7] "Recognized".—
Judicial recognition of a custom is relevant under this section as an instance of the
custom being recognised.205 But a judicial decision is far from having the same
importance as a clear-cut instance of custom recognised by the parties themselves.206

[s 13.8] Will.—
The validity of a will was directly in question in an earlier proceedings in which its
validity was upheld. It was held that such fact could not be discarded by the court in
subsequent proceedings. This was particularly so because all the reasons on which
wills are generally discarded were found to be missing in the earlier proceedings. The
validity of a will which has been determined in an earlier proceedings has a high
probative content. It is a valid document to be considered as a sound piece of evidence
under section 13.207

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
158 Mahamad v Hasan, (1906) 31 Bom 143 : 9 Bom LR 65.
159 Per Beaman J, in Mahamad v Hasan, (1906) 31 Bom 143, 154, 155 : 9 Bom LR 65, 75.
160 The Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, (1889) 12 All 1 FB; Ranchhoddas Krishnadas v

Bapu Narhar, (1886) 10 Bom 439; Lakshman v Amrit, (1900) 24 Bom 591, 599 : 2 Bom LR 386;
Ramasami v Appavu, (1887) 12 Mad 9; Venkatasami v Venkatreddi, (1891) 15 Mad 12; Vythilinga
v Venkatachala, (1892) 16 Mad 194.
161

Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 FB; Kalidhun Chuttapadhya v Shiba Nath

Chuttapadhya, (1882) 8 Cal 483 , 505 FB.
162 See Tepu Khan v Rajani Mohun Das, (1898) 25 Cal 522 FB, and the judgment of Mitter J, in

Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 FB.
163 Sabran Sheikh v Odoy Mahto, (1922) 1 Pat 375.
164 Ram Kishun v Niranjan Pande, (1932) 12 Pat 285.
165 Phani Bhusandas v Kenaram Bhaniya, AIR 1980 Cal 255 .
166 Purna Chandra v Durlav Chandra, AIR 1980 Cal 11 . Radha Krishna Kandolkar v Tukaram, AIR

1991 Bom 119 , use of a right (drawing water) for 30 years does not by itself create a customary
right.
167 Lakshmidhar Misra v Rangalal, AIR 1950 PC 56 . Their Lordships held in this case that the

villagers acquired a customary right in respect of a portion of the land for cremation purposes.
168 Patneedi Rudrayya v Velu Gubantala, AIR 1961 SC 1821 .
169 For another Privy Council decision see Baba Narayan v Sabossa, AIR 1943 PC 111 .
170 State of Bihar v Mosaﬁr Thakur, AIR 1980 Pat 40 .
171 Hurpurshad v Sheo Dyal, (1876) 3 IA 259 , 285.
172 Subhani v Nawab, (1940) 43 Bom LR 432 : (1941) 22 Lah 154: 68 IA 1.
173 Sri Krishan Datt v Ahmadi Bibi, (1934) 57 All 588 .
174 Gopalayyan v Raghupatiyyan, (1873) 7 Mad HCR 250 , 254.
175 Saraswathi Ammal v Jagadambal, AIR 1953 SC 201 : 1953 SCR 939 .
176 Rajendra Ram v Devendra Doss, AIR 1973 SC 268 : (1973) 1 SCC 14 , approving Annasami

Pillai v Ramakrishna Mudaliar, (1900) 24 Mad 219.
177 Juggomohun Ghose v Manickchund, (1859) 7 Moo Ind App 263 , 282. See also Rajendra

Ram v Devendra Das, AIR 1973 SC 268 : (1973) 1 SCC 14 , as to proof of customs.
178 Homi P Ranina v Eruch B Desai, AIR 1996 Bom 141 , following Harihar Prasad v Balmiki

Prasad, AIR 1975 SC 733 : (1995) 1 SCC 212 and Gokal Chand v Pravin Kumari, AIR 1952 SC 231 ,
234 : 1952 SCR 825 .
179 Chandrakant v Sharatchandra, (1954) MB 123.
180 Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 FB; approved of in Surender Nath Pal Chowdhry v

Brojo Nath Pal Chowdhry, (1886) 13 Cal 352 FB; Subramanyan v Paramaswaran, (1887) 11 Mad
116; Nilakanta v Imamsahib, (1892) 16 Mad 361; Ranchhoddas Krishnadas v Bapu Narhar, (1886)
10 Bom 439; Ram Kishun v Niranjan Pande, (1932) 12 Pat 285; Indar Singh v Fateh Singh, (1920) 1
Lah 540; Shankar v Kesheo, (1929) 26 NLR 33 FB. Not approved of in the Collector of Gorakhpur v
Palakdhari Singh, (1889) 12 All 1 FB; Tepu Khan v Rajani Mohun Das, (1898) 25 Cal 522 FB;
Lakshman v Amrit, (1900) 24 Bom 591: 2 Bom LR 386; Govindji v Chhotalal, (1900) 2 Bom LR 651
; Mahamad v Hasan, (1906) 31 Bom 143: 9 Bom LR 65; Devidatt v Shriram Narayandas, (1931) 56
Bom 324: 34 Bom LR 236; Shreemati Purnima Debya v Nand Lal Ojha, (1931) 11 Pat 50.
181 Ram Ranjan Chuckerbutty v Ram Narain Singh, (1984) 22 IA 60 : 22 Cal 533; Bitto Kunwar v

Kesho Pershad, (1897) 24 IA 10 : 19 All 277.
182 Dinomoni Chowdhrani v Brojo Mohini Chowdhrani, (1901) 29 IA 24 , 33: 4 Bom LR 167: 29

Cal 187.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
183 Gajanfar Ali Khan v Province of Assam, (1944) 1 Cal 203 . See also Hira Lal v Hari Narain, AIR

1964 All 302 , where it is held that it is inherent in the scheme of this section that only a
judgment which has become ﬁnal can be said to be a transaction or an instance for the
purposes of this section.
184 Collector of Gorakhpur v Ram Sundar Mal, (1934) 61 IA 286 : 36 Bom LR 867: 56 All 468.
185 Gobinda Narayan Singh v Sham Lal Singh, (1931) 58 IA 125 , 136: 33 Bom LR 885: 58 Cal

1187; Devidatt v Shriram Narayandas, (1931) 56 Bom 324: 34 Bom LR 236.
186 Gopika Raman Roy v Atal Singh, (1929) 56 IA 119 : 31 Bom LR 734: 56 Cal 1003, followed in

Shankar v Kesheo, (1929) 26 NLR 33 FB.
187 Kesheo Prasad v Bhagjogna Kuer, (1937) 39 Bom LR 731 : 16 Pat 258 PC.
188 Maroti v Jagannathdas, (1940) Nag 699.
189 Sohan Singh v Murti Rani, AIR 2008 P&H 129 : (2008) 2 PLR 591 .
190 Raja Sri Sri Jyoti Prasad Singh Deo v Bharat Shah Babu, (1935) 15 Pat 260.
191 Rama Chandra v Gadhadhar Mohapatra, AIR 1980 Ori 54 citing Gopika Raman Roy v Satpal

Singh, AIR 1929 PC 99 ; Gobinda Narayan Singh v Sham Lal Singh, AIR 1931 PC 89 ; Kesho Pd.
Singh v Bhagjogna, AIR 1937 PC 69 . The Calcutta High Court in Gujja Lal v Fatteh Lal (1881) ILR
6 Cal 171 had held a judgment not relevant under section 13; The Allahabad High Court had held
otherwise : Collector ofGorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, (1890) ILR 12 All 1 FB The Supreme Court
in Sital Das v Sant Ram, AIR 1954 SC 606 has held a judgment on the right to be Mohunt to be
relevant.
192 At p 56, AIR 1980 Ori.
193 Gujja Lal v Fatteh Lal, (1881) ILR 6 Cal 171.
194 Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, 1890 ILR 12 All 1.
195 Sital Das v Sant Ram, AIR 1954 SC 606 .
196 Ajjarrapu Subbarao v Pallavenkata Rama Ras, AIR 1964 AP 58 .
197 Yamunabai v Dhannalal, (1929) 114 IC 616 .
198 Secy. of State for India v Subraya, 115 Mad WN 962; Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanam v KM

Krishnaiah, AIR 1998 SC 1132 : (1998) 3 SCC 331 , a judgment was produced in evidence to
prove title to the suit property, it was held to be admissible in evidence though the plaintiff was
not a party to the suit.
199 Raj Fateh Singh v Baldeo Singh, (1928) 109 IC 310 (Oudh).
200 Ajjarrapu Subbarao v Pallowenkata Rawa Rao, AIR 1964 AP 58 .
201 Dalu v Juhar Mal, (1951) 1 Raj 166 .
202 N Subhakaran v K Rajmany, 1996 AIHC 1024 (Ker), following Sital Das v Sant Rams, AIR

1954 SC 606 .
203 Qazi Sharaf v Dau Singh, AIR 1996 Raj 227 .
204 S Govindarasu Udayar v Pattu, AIR 1999 Mad 435 .
205 Mst Janat Bibi v Ghulam Hussain, (1934) 16 Lah 307.
206 Dewan Singh v Mst. Santi, (1936) 17 Lah 809.
207 Ajmer Singh v Gurdev Singh, AIR 2010 NOC 700 (P&H).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 14] Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body, or bodily feeling.—
Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge, good
faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or good-will towards any particular person, or
showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the
existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue, or relevant.
208[Explanation 1.—A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of

mind must show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the
particular matter in question.
Explanation 2.—But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the
previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of
this section, the previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.]
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved

that he was in possession of a particular stolen article.
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many other stolen
articles is relevant, as tending to show that he knew each and all of the articles
of which he was in possession to be stolen.
(b) 209[A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit coin

which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit.
The fact that, at the time of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other
pieces of counterfeit coin is relevant.
The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as
genuine a counterfeit coin knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.]
(c) (c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B's, which B knew to be ferocious.

The facts that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made
complaints to B, are relevant.
(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the

name of the payee was ﬁctitious.
The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same manner before they
could have been transmitted to him by the payee if the payee had been a real
person, is relevant as showing that A knew that the payee was a ﬁctitious
person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
reputation of B.
The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the part
of A towards B is relevant as proving A's intention to harm B's reputation by the
particular publication in question.
The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A and B, and that A
repeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing that A
did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B,

being induced to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss.
The fact that at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to
be solvent by his neighbours and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as
showing that A made the representation in good faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner,

by the order of C, a contractor.
A's defence is that B's contract was with C.
The fact that A paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did,
in good faith, make over to C the management of the work in question, so that C
was in a position to contract with B on C's own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found,

and the question is whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith
that the real owner could not be found.
The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been given in the place
where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe that the
real owner of the property could not be found.
The fact that A knew, or had reason to believe, that the notice was given
fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the property and wished to set up
a false claim to it, is relevant as showing that the fact that A knew of the notice
did not disprove A's good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A's intent

the fact of A's having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously

sent by A to B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.

Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the
alleged cruelty are relevant facts.
(l) The question is, whether A's death was caused by poison.

Statements made by A during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(m) The question is, what was the state of A's health at the time when an assurance

on his life was effected.
(n) Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in

question are relevant facts.
(o) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a carriage for hire not reasonably

ﬁt for use, whereby A was injured.
The fact that B's attention was drawn on other occasions to the defect of that
particular carriage is relevant. The fact that B was habitually negligent about the
carriages which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead.

The fact that A on other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention
to shoot B.
The fact that A was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them
is irrelevant.
(q) A is tried for a crime.

The fact that he said something indicating an intention to commit that particular
crime is relevant.
The fact that he said something indicating a general disposition to commit
crimes of that class is irrelevant.

COMMENT
[s 14.1] Principle.—
This section declares that facts which show the existence of any state of (1) mind, viz.,
intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will, good-will or (2) body or
(3) bodily feeling are relevant when such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in
issue or relevant.
Intention, knowledge, and similar other states of mind, are matters of cogent inquiry in
criminal cases; in some civil cases they are very material, e.g., in cases of malicious
prosecution, fraud, negligence etc.
Where the question is as to knowledge, intent, motive, or any bodily or mental state,
evidence of other acts done, showing the existence of such knowledge, intent, motive,
or bodily or mental state, are admissible, even though it involves the proof of other
crimes. Evidence admitted for such purpose must be conﬁned within the limits for
which it is admitted.
See the illustrations. Illustrations (e), (i) and (j) deal with intention; (a), (b), (c) and (d)
with knowledge; (f), (g) and (h), with good faith; (n) with negligence and knowledge; (k),
(l) and (m), with mental and bodily feeling. To explain states of mind evidence is
admissible though it does not otherwise bear upon the issue to be tried.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The principle on which evidence of similar acts is admissible is not to show that
because the defendant has committed one crime therefore he would be likely to
commit another, but to establish the animus of the act and rebut, by anticipation, the
obvious defences, of ignorance, accident, mistake or other innocent state of mind.210
What is "intended" is a matter of the mind. Therefore, unless actions speak for
themselves, no presumption can be drawn on the "intent" of a party. When a party
expresses its design repeatedly in writing, no contrary assumption should normally be
drawn. No one can be presumed or deemed to be intending something, which is
contrary to law. Obviously therefore, "intent" has its limitations also, conﬁning it within
the conﬁnes of lawfulness.211
Where a man is prosecuted for making speeches promoting hatred and enmity
between different communities (section 153A, Indian Penal Code), previous speeches
made by him are admissible in evidence against him to show his intention in making
the speeches which are the subject-matter of the proceedings.212

[s 14.2] Scope.—
The conduct of each individual co-conspirator including his acts, writings and
statements irrespective of the time to which it relates can be relied on by the
prosecution to show the criminality of the intention of the individual accused with
reference to his proved participation in the alleged conspiracy to rebut a probable
defence that the participation, though proved, was innocent. Such evidence is
admissible under this section.213
Jagannath Das J said: There can be no doubt that such conduct can be relied on by the
prosecution to show the criminality of the intention of the individual accused with
reference to his proved participation in the alleged conspiracy, that is, to rebut a
probable defence viz., that the participation was innocent.

[s 14.3] Speciﬁc state of mind, not general.—
[Explanation 1].—Illustrations (n), (o) and (p) explain the purport of this Explanation.
Under this Explanation evidence of general reputation is excluded. The evidence
relating to the state of mind of a person must show that the state of mind exists not
generally but in reference to the particular matter in question. Evidence of general
disposition, habit or tendencies is inadmissible.214 Anything having a distinct and
immediate reference to the particular matter in question is admissible.215 See
illustrations (a) and (b).

[s 14.4] Previous convictions—
[Explanation 2].—This Explanation distinctly states that, where the previous commission
of an offence is relevant, the previous conviction of such person should also be a
relevant fact. The Explanation is a particular application of the general rule contained in
the section itself. Previous convictions become relevant when the existence of any
state of mind, or body, or bodily feeling, is in issue or relevant.216 See illustrations (e)
and (f) to section 43.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

208 Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, section 1, for Explanation.
209 Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, section 1, for Illustration (b).
210 Phipson, 7th Edn, p 167.
211 Sahara India Real Estate Corp Ltd v SEBI, (2013) 1 SCC 1 , at para 291-292.
212 Jagannath Prasad v Crown, (1942) Nag 62.
213 Sardul Singh Caveeshar v State of Bombay, (1958) SCR 161 .
214 See Emperor v Gangaram, (1920) 22 Bom LR 1274 ; Emperor v Haji Sher Mahomed, (1921)

25 Bom LR 214 : 46 Bom 958.
215 Emperor v Debendra Prosad, (1909) 36 Cal 573 .
216 Emperor v Alloomiya Husan, (1903) 28 Bom 129, 135, 5 Bom LR 805. See Wazir v Queen

Empress, (1895) PR No. 7 of 1895 (Cr).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 15] Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional.—
When there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, 217[or done
with a particular knowledge or intention], the fact that such act formed part of a series
of similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is
relevant.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is

insured.
The facts that A lived in several houses successively, each of which he insured,
in each of which a ﬁre occurred, and after each of such ﬁre, A received payment
from a different insurance oﬃce, are relevant, as tending to show that the ﬁres
were not accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A's duty to make

entries in a book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry
showing that on a particular occasion he received less than he really did receive.
The question is, whether this false entry was accidental or intentional.
The facts that other entries made by A in the same book are false, and that the
false entry is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit rupee. The question is,

whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental.
The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit
rupees to C, D and E are relevant, as showing that the delivery to B was not
accidental.

COMMENT
[s 15.1] Principle.—
Where it is uncertain, whether an act was done with a guilty knowledge or intention or
whether it was innocent or accidental, proof that it formed one of a series of similar
acts raises the presumption that the act in question and the others, together forming a
series, were done upon system, and were therefore not innocent or accidental. This
section is an application of the general rule laid down in section 14, and the words of
the section as well as of Illustration (a) show that it is not necessary that all the acts
should form parts of one transaction, but that they should be parts of a series of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
similar occurrences.218 For example under Illustration (a) the fact that the shops of the
same person insured against ﬁre were successively burnt down on different occasions
is relevant to prove that the incidents were not accidental but part of a design.219
Section 14 provides that the facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as
intention or knowledge, are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind is in
issue or relevant; and this section provides speciﬁcally for allowing evidence of similar
occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, whenever there
is a question whether an act is done with a particular knowledge or intention.220 In this
section, as in section 14, the intention of the party, is taken into account. But if there is
no common link between the fact to be proved and the evidentiary fact, they cannot
form a series. A regular system worked by the common intention should be proved.
Evidence tending to show that the accused has been guilty of criminal acts other than
those covered by the indictment is not admissible unless upon the issue whether the
acts charged against the accused were designed or accidental, or unless to rebut a
defence otherwise open to him.
Whenever it is necessary to rebut, even by anticipation, the defence of accident,
mistake or other innocent condition of mind, evidence may be given to prove that the
accused has been concerned in a systematic course of conduct of the same speciﬁc
kind and proximate in time to the conduct in question.221

217 Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, section 2.
218 Emperor v Debendra Prosad, (1904) 36 Cal 573 . See also Emperor v Panchu Das, (1920) 47

Cal 671 FB; Gandhi v King, (1941) Ran 566. Where it was not shown that the director of a
company was instrumental in the late posting of the notice of a shareholders' meeting, this
section was not attracted. There was no question of the delay being intentional or accidental.
Needle Industries (India) Ltd v Needle Industries Newey (India) Holding Ltd, AIR 1981 SC 1298 :
(1981) 3 SCC 333 : (1981) 3 SCR 698 : (1981) 51 Com Cas 743 .
219 Nural Amin v Emperor, (1939) 1 Cal 511 . Repeated violation of Stock Exchange bye-laws by

not paying in time, declaration as defaulter legal. Akhileshwar Upadhyaya v Magadh Stock
Exchange Assn, AIR 1992 Pat 61 .
220 Emperor v Harjivan Valji, (1925) 50 Bom 174, 182 : 28 Bom LR 115.
221 Amrita Lal Hazara v Emperor, (1915) 42 Cal 957 ; Emperor v Harjivan Valji, (1925) 50 Bom

174: 28 Bom LR 115.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS
[s 16] Existence of course of business when relevant.—
When there is a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any
course of business, [s 16.2] according to which it naturally would have been done, is a
relevant fact.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was despatched.

The facts that it was the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a
certain place to be carried to the post, and that that particular letter was put in
that place, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was

posted in due course, and was not returned through the Dead Letter Oﬃce, are
relevant.

COMMENT
[s 16.1] Principle.—
Under this section when the ordinary course of a particular business is proved, the
court is asked to presume that, on the particular occasion in question, there was no
departure from the ordinary and general rule. For instance, if letters properly directed to
a gentleman be left with his servant it is only reasonable to presume prima facie that
they reached his hands. Section 114, illustration (f), lays down that the court may
presume that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases.
This presumption is an application of the general maxim omnia proesumuntur rite esse
acta (all acts are presumed to be rightly done), and is based on the fact that the
conduct of men in oﬃcial and commercial matters is, to a great extent, uniform. In
such cases there is a strong presumption that the general regularity will not, in any
particular instance, be departed from. This, however, is a rebuttable presumption.

[s 16.2] "Course of business".—
This must mean the ordinary course of a professional avocation or mercantile
transaction or trade or business. The section covers both private and public oﬃces.222
Illustration (a) relates to the former; illustration (b), to the latter, viz., the post oﬃce.
Illustration (b) only means that each one of the facts mentioned therein is relevant; it
cannot be read as indicating that without a combination of these facts no presumption

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
can arise.223 The usage in a private house, however methodical, cannot convey the
same weight as the ordinary routine of an oﬃce.

[s 16.3] CASES
[s 16.3.1] Registered letters.—
A person refusing a registered letter sent by post cannot afterwards plead ignorance of
its contents.224 Similarly, if a letter is put into a post oﬃce, that is prima facie evidence,
till rebutted, that the addressee received it in due course. The post marks on letters are
considered as evidence of the dates and places mentioned therein.
A detenu under COFEPOSA contended that he posted a letter under certiﬁcate of
posting withdrawing his statement. He ﬁled a photo copy of the certiﬁcate of posting
but not of the letter itself. The letter was also not traceable in the Department. No
presumption of posting was raised.225 See also comment under Illustration (f) of
section 114.
Where a representation against preventive detention was sent by registered post but
the acknowledgement receipt which was produced in proof of service was not signed
on behalf of the Central Government, no question of considering the representation
arose.226

222 Ningawa v Bharmappa, (1897) 23 Bom 63, 66.
223 Mobarik Ali Ahmed v State of Bombay, AIR 1957 SC 857 : (1957) Cr LJ 1346 .
224 Loolf Ali Meah v Pearce Mohun Roy, (1871) 16 WR (Civil) 223; Budha v Bedariya, AIR 1981

MP 76 .
225 LMS Uma Saleema v BB Gujral, AIR 1981 SC 1191 : 1981 Cr LJ 889 .
226 Abdul Shakur Khan v RD Tyagi, 1999 Cr LJ 1524 (Bom).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 17] Admission deﬁned.—
An admission is a statement, 227[oral or documentary, or contained in electronic form]
which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is
made by any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.

COMMENT
An "admission" is a statement of fact which waives or dispenses with the production of
evidence by conceding that the fact asserted by the opponent is true. Admissions are
admitted because the conduct of a party to a proceeding, in respect to the matter in
dispute, whether by acts, speech, or writing, which is clearly inconsistent with the truth
of his contention, is a fact relevant to the issue. Admissions are very weak kind of
evidence and the court may reject them if it is satisﬁed from other circumstances that
they are untrue.228
Admission of a party in the proceedings either in the pleadings or oral is the best
evidence and the same does not need any further corroboration.229
The Supreme Court has observed: Admissions as deﬁned in sections 17 and 20 and
fulﬁlling the requirements of section 21 are substantive evidence, propio vigore. An
admission is the best evidence against the party making it and, though not conclusive,
shifts the onus to the maker on the principle that what a party himself admits to be true
may be reasonably presumed to be true so that until the presumption is rebutted the
fact admitted must be taken to be true.230 An assessee cannot resile from his
admission made in tax return even at appellate stage.231
There is this observation in Phipson on Evidence232 "Subject to certain exceptions, the
general rule, then both in civil and criminal cases, is that any relevant statement made
by a party is evidence against himself. R v Erdheim.233 The weight of the declaration is,
of course, a totally different matter; this may vary with the circumstances and will not
doubt, be greater if against interest at the time, than the contrary."
In ECT Farming Society case,234 Beg J of the Supreme Court observed:
It is well settled that the effect of an admission depends upon the circumstances in which it
was made.

A statement to be used as an admission must be clear, speciﬁc and unambiguous and
in the own words of the person making it and has to be proved to be so. It is not an
inference drawn by anybody which should be taken as an admission. An admission to
be worthy of being received in evidence, considered and relied upon, it should ﬁrstly be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the clear-cut and accurate statement of that very person in his own works. It has to be
proved to be the statement of the person who made it.235
An admission must be examined as a whole and not in parts.236 "It is settled law that
an admission of any party has to be read in its entirety and no statement out of context
can constitute admission of any fact."237 Statements in pleadings are admissions
against the party making them. He cannot be heard to rely upon favourable parts and
throw the rest by oral evidence.238 In UOI v Moksh Builders etc,239 the Supreme Court
cited a statement from its own earlier decision240 to the effect that an admission is
substantive evidence of the fact admitted and when properly proved is relevant
irrespective of the fact whether the maker approved in the witness-box or not and when
he appears, whether he was confronted with those statements or not in case he made
a statement contrary to his admissions. The court cited a statement from Wigmore on
Evidence241 to the effect that an admission need not be contrary to the maker's
interest. Thus it is not necessary before admitting the evidence of an admission that it
should be brought to the notice of the party who made it.242
An admission in so far as facts are concerned would bind the maker of the admission
but not in so far as it relates to a question of law.243
It is immaterial to whom an admission is made.244 The word "confession" has not been
deﬁned anywhere. A confession is an admission made at any time by a person charged
with a crime, stating or suggesting the inference that he committed the crime.245
Statement is a genus, admission is the species and confession is the sub-species. A
confession, therefore, is a statement made by an accused admitting his guilt.246 When
a party accepts his statement made in earlier proceedings, it amounts to admission.247

[s 17.1] Prior statement.—
A prior statement in one's own interest may not be evidence, but a prior statement
adverse to one's interest would be evidence.248

[s 17.2] Admissions in criminal proceedings.—
Every admission made by an accused person is not, in the view of the law, a
confession, nor can it be held that admissions mean only statements made by parties
to civil proceedings, and do not include statements made by parties in criminal
proceedings. Every statement, oral or documentary, which suggests any inference as to
any fact in issue or relevant fact made by an accused person is an admission under
sections 17 and 18, and under section 19 an admission may be proved as against the
person who makes it unless, under some provision of the Evidence Act or other law, it
is rendered inadmissible. Under sections 24 to 26 statements made by accused
persons are inadmissible, subject to the provisions of sections 27 to 29, when such
statements are confessions.249 A confession which is inadmissible may yet for other
purposes be admissible as an admission under section 18 against the person who
makes it in civil matters.250 Thus, admission of guilt by a person to a police oﬃcer,
though not receivable in evidence in a criminal trial, may be proved in civil proceedings
as an admission under this section and sections 18 and 21.251 In Sashidhara Kurup v
UOI, it was held that the admissibility of plea of guilt can be determined only if the plea
is recorded in the words used by the accused. The accused simply said that he was
guilty of the charge. This did not constitute an admission of guilt.252

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 17.3] Admissions in publication.—
The court said that statements made in a book, though cannot be regarded as
conclusive admissions, they can be taken as an additional circumstance along with the
other circumstances for determining whether the conduct of the appellant amounted to
waiver and/or abandonment of the right in respect of the articles in question.253

[s 17.4] Oral or documentary.—Judicial or extra-judicial.—
Admissions may be oral or contained in documents, e.g., letters, depositions, aﬃdavits,
plaints, written statements, deeds, receipts, horoscopes. Admissions in pleadings are
judicial admissions.
They can be made the foundation of rights.254 In KK Chari v RM Sheshadri,255 Dua J
said:
If the tenant in fact admits that the landlord is entitled to possession on one or the other of
the statutory grounds mentioned in the Act, it is open to the Court to act on that admission
and make an order for possession in favour of the landlord without further enquiry.

The material for the satisfaction of the court "may take the shape either of evidence
recorded or produced in the case, or it may partly or wholly be in shape of an express or
implied admission made in the compromise agreement itself."256
Explaining the weight of a judicial admission as compared with informal or casual
admissions, Sarkaria J said:
Admissions, if true and clear, are by far the best proof of the facts admitted. Admissions in
pleadings or judicial admissions, admissible under s. 58, made by the parties or their agents
at or before the hearing of the case, stand on a higher footing than evidentiary admissions.
The former class of admissions are fully binding upon the party that makes them and
constitutes a waiver of proof. They by themselves can be the foundation of the rights of the
parties. On the other hand, evidentiary admissions which are receivable at the trial as
evidence, are by themselves not conclusive. They can be shown to be wrong.

A post-dated cheque in satisfaction of debts amounts to acknowledgment of liability
irrespective of the fact whether the cheque is honoured or not.257 Admissions may be
implied from the acquiescence of a party.258 Admissions in the written statement ﬁled
in some other case have been held by the Supreme Court to be an important piece of
evidence and, therefore, entitled to its due weight, though like all other admissions, it is
neither conclusive nor irrebutable.259 The general rule is that admissions are
admissible against the party making them and not against any other party. The
exceptions to this rule are mentioned in sections 18 to 20.
A statement by an applicant for old age pension in her cross-examination that she was
getting old age pension and that her form was ﬁlled by the pradhan of the village was
held not to have the effect of an admission in respect of the contents of her
application.260

[s 17.5] Voluntary.—
For an admission to have the effect of substantive evidence it must be voluntary. An
examinee gave undertaking that if he did not ﬁle his employer's permission, the
university might do anything it liked. That did not put him out of court. "It is well settled
that admission made in ignorance of legal rights or under duress cannot bind the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
maker." The examinee submitted the undertaking under the constraint of not being
permitted. The consequences of the University's failure to scrutinise his form and to
ﬁnd out the fraud, if any, cannot be visited upon the candidate.261 Similarly, an
admission made by a party in a previous criminal proceeding in order to get rid of the
chances of conviction was held to be in terrorem and, therefore, of very little
signiﬁcance.262 In a suit for eviction, vague allegations about the ownership of the
premises by the tenant, could not be treated as his admission about the contract of
tenancy with the landlord.263

[s 17.6] Admissions as hearsay.—
Examining the nature of the evidence of an admission and distinguishing it from
hearsay, PARKE B said:264
The rule as to the production of the best evidence is not at all infringed. It does not apply to
the present case (oral admissions as to the contents of a document). That rule is founded
on the supposition that a party is going to offer worse evidence than the nature of the case
admits. But what is said by a party to the suit is not open to that objection. We, therefore,
think it is a sound rule that admissions made by a party to a suit may be received against
him.

There is no general agreement on admissions as hearsay. A learned commentator
says:
Whether an admission is an exception to the hearsay rule depends upon one's deﬁnition of
hearsay. If we deﬁne hearsay as an extra-judicial statement offered as tending to prove the
truth of the matter stated, an admission clearly falls within it. It must be conceded that the
rule which makes admissions receivable is older than the hearsay rule and is a necessary
concomitant of the accepted doctrine that evidence of any relevant conduct of a party is
admissible against him.265

A passage in Wigmore on Evidence,266 has been adopted by the Allahabad High
Court,267 and the Supreme Court.268 "The theory of the hearsay rule is that an extrajudicial assertion is excluded unless there has been a suﬃcient opportunity to test the
grounds of assertion and the credit of the witness by cross-examination by the party
against whom it is offered, e.g., if Jones had said out of court, "The party-opponent
Smith borrowed this ﬁfty dollars." Smith is entitled to an opportunity to cross-examine
Jones upon that assertion. But if it is Smith himself who said out of court, "I borrowed
this ﬁfty dollars", certainly Smith cannot complain of lack of opportunity to crossexamine himself before his assertion is admitted against him. Such a request would be
absurd. Hence the objection of the hearsay rule falls away, because the very basis of
the rule is lacking viz., the need and prudence of affording an opportunity for crossexamination."

[s 17.7] Persons whose admissions are relevant.—
List of persons whose admissions are relevant is to be found in the provisions of
sections 18 to 20. Admissions made by any other persons are not receivable in
evidence. Thus, the statements of some oﬃcers admitting their guilt that lesser
number of persons were shown on records of the factory so as to keep it out of the
application of the Central Excise was held to be not an admission against the owner.
Failure to prove the defence does not amount to an admission, nor does it reverse or
discharge the burden of proof of the plaintiff.269

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Legally enforceable admission has to be made by adversary against whom a relief is
claimed, not by a person who asserts a claim.270

227 Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–2, for "oral or documentary" (w.e.f. 17-10-

2000).
228 Latafat Husain v Lala Onkar Mal, (1934) 10 Luck 423 ; Raja Partab Bahadur Singh v Raja

Rajgan Maharaja Jagatjit Singh, (1936) 12 Luck 371 : (1977) 3 SCC 540 ; UOI v Roop Narain, AIR
1977 Raj 123 , in a claim against railway for loss of goods in transit, the railway receipt
contained the remark : "said to contain" held, this was not admission on the part of the railway
as to what were the contents of the consignment. Other records would have to be examined to
see what was the real state of the consignment at the starting point and terminus.
229 Ahmedsaheb v Sayed Ismail, (2012) 8 SCC 516 .
230 Thiru John v Returning Oﬃcer, AIR 1977 SC 1724 , admission of age by the returned

candidate.
231 Federal Bank Ltd v State, AIR 1995 Ker 62 .
232 Phipson on Evidence, 9th Edn, 1952, p 231.
233 R v Erdheim, (1986) 2 QB 260 .
234 ECT Farming Society case (1974) 2 SCC 319 at 321 : AIR 1974 SC 1121 .
235 HG Ramachandra Rao v Master Srikantha, AIR 1997 Kant 347 .
236 Mohammad Koya v Muthuboya, (1979) 1 SCR 664 : AIR 1979 SC 154 .
237 Dharamwati Bai v Shiv Singh, AIR 1991 MP 18 . Accordingly a statement of the claimant that

her personal estate arising before 1956 Hindu Succession Act was in the management of the
Court of Wards could not be taken as an admission that the property in question was not her
estate.
238 Sunil Chandra v Hemendra, AIR 1985 Cal 233 .
239 UOI v Moksh Builders etc., AIR 1977 SC 408 : 1977 Cr LJ 376 .
240 Bharat Singh v Bhagrathi, AIR 1977 SC 408 : 1977 Cr LJ 376 .
241 Vol 4, p 1048.
242 Maimunna Bibi v Rasool Mian, AIR 1991 Pat 203 .
243 Banarsi Das v Kanshi Ram, AIR 1963 SC 1165 : (1964) 1 SCR 316 .
244 Rakesh Wadhawan v Jagdambha Industrial Corpon., AIR 2002 SC 2004 , : (2002) 5 SCC 440 ,

the value of an admission depends upon the circumstances in which it is made and to whom it
is made. Failure to object to wrong averment as to rate of rent made in a partition suit. This was
held to be nothing more than an admission. It could not outweigh admissions made by tenants
as to rate of rent in lease deed and letters written by them to the landlord.
245 Queen-Empress v Babu Lal, (1884) 6 All 509 , 539 FB; Sahoo v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 40 :

1966 Cr LJ 68 .
246 Sahoo v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 40 : 1966 Cr LJ 68 .
247 Alpana v Mohanlal, 1993 Cr LJ 1008 ; Krishan Mohan v Balkrishna Chaturvedi, AIR 2001 All

334 , a plea that the admission was not accepted just by itself. No proof of that fact was offered

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
either in evidence or in written statement. Bare argument without any basis was held to be not
tenable.
248 Satrucharla Vijaya Rama Raju v Nimmaka Jaya Raju, (2006) 1 SCC 212 : AIR 2006 SC 543 .
249 Ilahi Baksh v The Empress, (1886) PR No. 16 of 1886 (Cr); Raj Mal v Empress, (1879) PR No.

3 of 1880 (Cr); Shree Singh v The Empress, (1881) PR No. 21 of 1881 (Cr).
250 Queen-Empress v Tribhovan Manekchand, (1884) 9 Bom 131, 134.
251 Bishen Das v Ram Labhaya, (1915) PR No. 106 of 1915 (Civil). Where a woman stated that

she caused death to save herself from being raped, since this did not amount to a confession, it
was admissible under this section as an admission of the fact, State of Orissa v Nirupama, 1989
Cr L J 621 (Ori).
252 KK Chari v R.M Sheshadri, 1994 Cr LJ 375 (Gau).
253 Karan Singh (Dr) v State of J&K, (2004) 5 SCC 698 : AIR 2004 SC 2480 .
254 Satish Mohan v State of UP, AIR 1986 All 126 .
255 KK Chari v RM Sheshadri, (1973) 1 SCC 761 , at p 774 : AIR 1973 SC 1311 .
256 Nagindas Ramdas v Dalpatram, (1974) 1 SCC 242 , at p 252 : AIR 1974 SC 471 .
257 Rajpati Pd. v Kaushalya Kaur, AIR 1981 Pat 187 .
258 Kehar Singh v State (Delhi Admn.), (1998) 3 SCC 609 , allegations against the accused made

by police is application for extension of remand were held as not amounting to admissions on
the part of the accused only for his failure to object to them.
259 Shankarrao Dajisaheb Shinde v Vithalrao Ganpatrao Shinde, AIR 1989 SC 879 : 1989 Supp (2)

SCC 162 .
260 Twatku v Surti, AIR 1997 HP 76 .
261 Shri Krishan v Kurukshetra University, AIR 1976 SC 376 : (1976) 1 SCC 311 .
262 Mohd v Mohd, AIR 1976 SC 1569 : (1976) 4 SCC 780 .
263 Anurag Misra v Ravindra Singh, AIR 1994 All 174 .
264 Shatleric v Pooley, (1840) 151 ER 579 .
265 Morgan, Basic Principles of Evidence, 265 cited by Edwards, Cases on Evidence in Australia,

507 (1968).
266 Vol 4, section 1048.
267 Ayodhaya Prasad Bhargava v Bhawani Shankar Bhargava, AIR 1957 All 15 : ILR (1956) 2 All

399 .
268 UOI v Mokshi Builders, (1977) 1 SCC 60 at p 68 : AIR 1977 SC 409 .
269 LIC v Ram Pal Singh Bisen, (2010) 4 SCC 491 .
270 N Murali Krishna v South Central Railway, Secunderabad, AIR 2014 AP 100 (para 10) (DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 18] Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.—
Statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such party,
whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or
impliedly authorized by him to make them, are admissions.
by suitor in representative character.—Statements made by parties to suits suing or
sued in a representative character, are not admissions, unless they were made while
the party making them held that character.
Statements made by—
(1) party interested in subject-matter.—persons who have any proprietary or

pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the proceeding, and who make the
statement in their character of persons so interested, or
(2) person from whom interest derived.—persons from whom the parties to the

suit have derived their interest in the subject-matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons
making the statements.

COMMENT
Sections 18 and 19 indicate the persons by whom an admission must be made.
Statements by the accused are admissions under section 18.271
Section 18 lays down ﬁve classes of persons who can make admissions—
(1) Party to the proceeding.
(2) Agent authorized by such party.
(3) Party suing or sued in a representative character making admissions while

holding such character.
(4) Person who has any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of

the proceeding during the continuance of such interest.
(5) Person from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the

subject-matter of the suit during the continuance of such interest.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(1) Party to the proceedings.—What is admitted by a party to be true must be
presumed to be true unless the contrary is shown;272 but before this proposition can be
invoked, it must be shown that there is a clear and unambiguous statement by the
party such as will be conclusive unless explained.273 A statement made by a party in a
former suit between the same or different parties is admissible. The proceeding may
be civil or criminal.274 A statement made by a party in a pleading cannot be evidence in
subsequent proceedings before a court of law unless it amounts to an admission.275
"When several persons are jointly interested in the subject-matter of the suit, the
general rule is that the admissions of any one of these persons are receivable against
himself and fellows, whether they be all jointly suing or sued, or whether an action be
brought in favour of or against one or more of them separately, provided the
admissions relate to the subject-matter in dispute, and be made by the declarant in his
character of a person jointly interested with the party against whom the evidence is
tendered."276 Admissions made by a party's witness cannot be treated as admissions
made by the party. Such admissions do not bind the party.277
When a fact pleaded in a plaint is not speciﬁcally denied but mere ignorance about its
existence is pleaded, it amounts to admission unless by necessary implication it
amounts to denial.278
(2) Agent.—The admissions of an agent are admissible because the principal is bound
by the acts of his agent done in the course of business and within the scope of his
authority. A statement made by an agent whom the court regards, under the
circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorized to make it, is
admissible though not on oath,279 e.g., a statement by an agent before a settlement
oﬃcer that his principal was a bastard.280 Before the statements of an agent can be
relevant as admissions, the fact of agency must be proved. Where there is no such
relationship, the statement in question would not qualify for relevancy. Thus, where
over a matter of sub-letting, the tenant's brother stated on aﬃdavit before Income-tax
Authorities that he was the tenant, there being no agency relationship between the two
brothers, nor there being signature of the tenant, the Supreme Court held that the
statement was not admissible against the tenant.281
Counsel, pleader, attorney.—Admissions of facts made by a pleader in the conduct of a
suit on his client's behalf are binding on the client.282 But a party is not bound,
generally speaking, by a pleader's admission in argument on what is a pure question of
law.283 Generally, admissions of fact made by a counsel are binding upon their
principals (clients)as long as they are unequivocal, where, however, doubt exists as to a
purported admission, the court should be vary to accept such admissions until and
unless the counsel or the advocate is authorised by his principal to make admissions.
Furthermore, a client is not bound by a statement or admission which he or his lawyer
was not authorised to make. A lawyer generally has no implied or apparent authority to
make an admission or statement, which would directly surrender or conclude the
substantial legal rights of the client, unless such an admission or statement is clearly a
proper step in accomplishing the purpose for which the lawyer was employed. Neither
the client nor the court is bound by the lawyer's statements or admissions as to
matters of law or legal conclusions. Thus, according to the generally accepted notions
of professional responsibility, the lawyers should follow their client's instructions rather
than substitute their judgment for that of the client. In some cases the lawyers can
make decisions without consulting the client, while in others, the decision is reserved
for the client. The lawyers can make decision as to tactics without consulting the client,
while the client has a right to make decisions that can affect his rights.284 The
admissions of a party's solicitors before the commencement of litigation are not
relevant. Observation of formalities is, however, something different. The testimony of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
counsel that the thumb impression taken as a specimen was that of his client cannot
be excluded on the ground that a counsel cannot admit facts on client's behalf.285 The
counsel of a tenant admitted, against the stand taken by the tenant, that the landlord
was a public charitable institution and it needed the premises for its purposes. The
court said such statement could not be admitted in evidence as an admission made by
the party. The Additional Rent Controller could not record his satisfaction on the basis
of such statement. The order of eviction was held to be without justiﬁcation.286
Admission by defendant.—The defendant sought declaration that she was the only
legally married wife of her deceased husband. The court said that it was a clear
admission by the defendant that she was the legally married wife of the deceased. No
evidence was produced to show divorce between them. Under such circumstances, it
was held that the order of the ﬁrst appellate court accepting the admission as a
substantive evidence in support of the marriage was proper.287
Co-defendants.—An admission or a confession of judgment by one of several
defendants in a suit is no evidence against another defendant. No defendant can, by an
admission or consent, convey the right, or delegate the authority to one, for more than
his own share in property.288 Thus, the admissions by one defendant will not be
relevant against a co-defendant, because it would be unjust to bind a co-defendant by
the admission of another whom he has had no opportunity to answer or cross-examine;
it would afford to the plaintiff opportunities of defeating his opponent by unfair means.
Even a confession of judgment by one of several defendants is no evidence against
another defendant.289
Co-owners.—Admission by one of the co-owners that the other co-owner had one-third
share in the joint properties, can be relied upon.290
Partner.—Partners are agents of one another so far as the business of partnership is
concerned. Where several persons are engaged in one common business or dealing, a
statement made by one of them with reference to any transaction which forms part of
their joint business, has always been held admissible as evidence against the
others.291 Each member of a ﬁrm, being the agent of the others for all purposes within
the scope of the partnership business, admissions by one member are binding on all.
Admissions by a partner of a dissolved ﬁrm are binding on the other partners when
they have an identical interest in the subject-matter of the suit.292
Principal and surety.—"The admissions of a principal can sometimes (but only seldom)
be received as evidence in an action against the surety upon his collateral undertaking.
In these cases the main inquiry is whether the declarations of the principal were made
during the transaction of the business for which the surety was bound, so as to
become part of the res gestae. If so, they are admissible; otherwise, they are not."293
Guardian.—The admissions of a guardian ad litem, or next friend, do not bind the minor.
The guardian of an infant has no power to bind him by admissions. According to the
Bombay and the Madras High Courts, a guardian appointed under the Guardians and
Wards Act can sign an acknowledgment of liability in respect of, or pay in part the
principal of, a debt, so as to extend the period of limitation against his ward, provided
the guardian's act was for the beneﬁt of the ward's property.294
(3) Party suing or sued in a representative character.—This means trustees, executors,
administrators, managers in the character of an executor or administrator, or the
assignee of a bankrupt.
It is important that such persons must make "the statement in their character of
persons so interested". A statement made by a trustee, executor or administrator, is not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
admissible against him when sued as trustee, etc., if it was made before he became
trustee, etc. This principle is grounded on the fact that a statement against the interest
of a person making it will not be made unless truth compelled it. But the fact that two
persons have a common interest in the subject-matter does not entitle them to make
admissions, respecting it, as against each other.295
(4) Person who has any proprietary or pecuniary interest.—When several persons are
jointly interested in the subject-matter of a suit, an admission of any one of these
persons is receivable not only against himself but also against the other defendants,
whether they be all jointly suing or sued, provided that the admission relates to the
subject-matter in dispute and be made by the declarant in his character of a person
jointly interested with the party against whom the evidence is tendered.296 In a suit for
declaration of title, a statement by the suitor's father that the defendant was in
possession was admitted.297 Admissions made by a person about his ownership of
property after he had transferred it are not relevant to the prejudice of the buyer's
interest. After transfer he no longer had any interest in the property.298 In a tenancy
matter, an admission made by the tenant's brother was not relevant because he had no
pecuniary or proprietary interest in the matter of the tenancy.299 Admission by a party
is not possible after parting with his interest in the property.300
An admission made by one of several parties in fraud of the others jointly interested
will not bind the others.
(5) Persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the
subject-matter of the suit.—Statements made either by parties interested or by
persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest are admissions
only if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons making the
statement. The admissions of a former owner of property after he has ceased to have
any interest in it are not evidence against the party in possession.301 A, a landowner,
ﬁled a suit for ejectment against B, a tenant. B alleged that he was a permanent tenant
at a ﬁxed rent under an agreement with the original owner of the land, who was dead,
and put in evidence, statements made by the original owner after he had transferred his
interest. It was held that the statements were inadmissible.302 Where the deceased
father of the plaintiff admitted that the defendant was his second legally wedded wife
and her children were his legitimate children, the admission was binding on the
plaintiff.303
This clause indicates that there ought to be a privity, i.e., mutual or successive
relationship to the same right of property. Privies are of three kinds:—
(1) Privies in blood, as an heir, an ancestor, and coparceners.
(2) Privies in law, as executor and testator, administrator and a person dying

intestate.
(3) Privies in estate or interest, as vendor and purchaser, lessor and lessee,

mortgagor and mortgagee, donor and donee.
The grounds upon which admissions are evidence against those in privity with the
party making them are that they are identiﬁed in interest. Where it was proved that an
agreement sued on was made by the plaintiff on behalf of himself and the other
proprietors of a theatre, evidence of the declarations of one of such other proprietors
was held admissible on the part of the defendant.304 But where a gift deed executed by
father contained certain admissions, it did not bind the sons because they were
claiming not through him, but in their own right as coparceners.305

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

271 Azimuddy v Emperor, (1926) 54 Cal 237 .
272 Nathoo Lal v Durga Prasad, AIR 1954 SC 355 : (1955) 1 SCR 51 .
273 Nagubai v B Shama Rao, AIR 1956 SC 593 : (1956) SCR 451 ; Special Land Acquisition

Oﬃcer v Pari Keshaulal Jamnadas, (1987) 3 SCC 306 , a concession on a question of fact should
not be disregarded.Jagdish Parshad v Sarwan Kumar, AIR 2003 P&H 3, the person in question
who had since died, signed and stated in the bahi of visitors maintained by the Panda of a
temple that the person claiming a share in his property was not his brother. This admission was
held to be relevant for showing absence of relationship.
274 Dattatraya Shripati v Shankar, (1959) 61 Bom LR 792 .
275 Raj Kumar v Gopi Nath, AIR 1971 All 273 .
276 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 743, p 475; Meajan Matbar v Alimuddi Mia, (1916) 44 Cal 130 , 143,

144. Dulal Chandra Adnk v Gunadhar Patra, AIR 1998 Cal 150 , statements of a party to the
proceeding are of a binding nature. The dispute was about the genuineness of a gift deed. The
suit was for declaring it as a forged document. Statements made by co-plaintiff admitting the
claim of the defendant. They bound the plaintiff also. The court also said that averments made
in the plaint also have a binding effect. They cannot be allowed to be abandoned unless
explained by cogent evidence.
277 Krishna Mohan v Bal Krishna Chaturvedi, AIR 2001 All 334 .
278

Roopi Bai v Mahaveer, AIR 1994 Raj 133 , relying on Jahuri Sah v Dwarka Prasad

Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1967 SC 109 : 1966 Supp SCR 280.
279 Govindji v Chhotalal, (1900) 2 Bom LR 651 .
280 Raj Fateh Singh Thakur v Baldeo Singh Thakur, (1928) 3 Luck 416 .
281 Sri Chand Gupta v Gulzar Singh, (1992) 1 SCC 143 : AIR 1992 SC 123 .
282 Khajah Abdool Gunee v Gour Monee Debia, (1868) 9 WR (Civil) 375; Mahadev v Sundrabai,

(1901) 3 Bom LR 467 ; Emperor v Bansilal Gangaram, (1928) 30 Bom LR 646 : 52 Bom 686.
283 Narayan v Venkatacharya, (1904) 6 Bom LR 434 : 28 Bom 408.
284 Himalayan Cooperative Group Housing Societyv. Balwan Singh, (2015) 7 SCC 373 , para 32.
285 Raghunath v State of UP, AIR 1973 SC 1100 : (1973) 1 SCC 564 .
286 Sri Swami Krishnanand v MD Oswal Hosiery, AIR 2002 SC 1162 .
287 Damayanti Nahak v Kalpana Bhatacharya, AIR 2007 NOC 294 (Ori) : (2006) 2 CutLR 395.
288 Lachman Singh v Tansukh, (1884) 6 All 395 ; Azizullah Khan v Ahmad Ali Khan, (1885) 7 All

353 .
289 Aumirtolall Bose v Rajoneekant Mitter, (1874-75) 2 IA 113 : (1875) 23 WR 214 .
290 Raj Kumar v Oﬃcial Receiver, Chiranji Lal Ram Chand, AIR 1996 SC 941 : (1996) 2 SCC 288 .
291 Kowsulliah Sundari Dasi v Mukta Sundari Dasi, (1885) 11 Cal 588 .
292 Sohanlal v Gulab Chand, AIR 1966 Raj 229 .
293 Taylor, 12th Edn, Vol I, section 785, p 494.
294 Annapagauda v Sangadyapa, (1901) 3 Bom LR 817 : 26 Bom 221, FB; Kailasa Padaiachi v

Ponnukannu Achi, (1894) 18 Mad 456. See, Limitation Act, 1963, section 20(1).
295 Stephen's Dig, Article 17.
296 Meajan Matbar v Alimuddi Mia, (1916) 44 Cal 130 , 143; Taylor, 12th Edn, section 743, p 475;

Ambika Devi v Balmukand Pandey, AIR 1981 Pat 111 , a matter of family partition.
297 Sahdeo v Board of Rev., AIR 1980 All 408 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
298 Hardatt Sharma v Jaikishan, AIR 1983 J&K 29.
299 Sri Chand Gupta v Gulzar Singh, AIR 1992 SC 123 : (1992) 1 SCC 143 .
300 Chironjilal v Khatoon Bi, AIR 1995 MP 238 .
301 Khenum Kuree Chowdhrain v Gour Chunder Mojoomdar, (1866) 5 WR 267 .
302 Shwe Yat Aung v Da Li, (1916) 9 LBR 27.
303 Nirmala v Rukminibai, AIR 1994 Kant 247 .
304 Kemble v Farren, (1829) 3 C&P 623; Taylor, 12th Edn, Vol I, section 743, p 475.
305 Avtar Singh v Atma Singh, AIR 1982 J&K 141.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 19] Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as against party
to suit.—
Statements made by persons whose position or liability it is necessary to prove as
against any party to the suit, are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as
against such persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by or
against them, and if they are made whilst the person making them occupies such
position or is subject to such liability.
ILLUSTRATION
A undertakes to collect rents for B.
B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B.
A denies that rent was due from C to B.
A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is a relevant fact as against
A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.

COMMENT
The admission of a third person against his own interest when it affects his position or
liability and when that position or liability has to be proved as against a party to the suit,
is relevant against the party. Ordinary statements by strangers to a proceeding are not
relevant as against the parties.

[s 19.1] Object.—
The object of this section is not to lay down that certain statements are relevant or
admissible but merely to add to the category of persons by whom a statement may be
made before it can be considered to be an admission within the terms of the Act.

[s 19.2] Principle.—
This section forms an exception to the rule that statements made by strangers to a
proceeding are not admissible as against the parties. Thus, in an action by the trustees
of a bankrupt, the latter's admissions, made before the act of bankruptcy, are
admissible in proof of the petitioning creditor's debt.306
The illustration exempliﬁes that when the liability of a person who is one of the parties
to a suit depends upon the liability of a stranger to the suit, then an admission by the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
stranger in respect of his liability amounts to an admission on the part of that person.
Where a landlord died and the tenant questioned the title of the lady living with him
saying that she was not the wife of the deceased landlord, a thirty three year old
registered deed was produced which showed the landlord's admission about the lady
to be his wife, it was held that the right of the lady was conclusively proved by the
admission.307
Execution of a will cannot be doubted merely because of delay in applying for letters of
administration which was satisfactorily explained, more so when due execution of the
will was admitted by preferential heirs to the estate of the testatrix against their own
interest.308

[s 19.3] Scope.—
The statements referred to in this section become admissible only provided that they
satisfy the requirements of section 17 as regards their nature and section 21 or any of
the following sections as regards their liability.

306 Appavu Chettiar v Nanjappa Goundan, (1913) 25 Mad LJ 329; Taylor, 12th Edn, section 759,

Vol I, p 484.
307 Sivalingam v Sakthivel, AIR 1989 Mad 252 .
308 Laxmi Bai v A Chandravati, AIR 1995 Ori 131 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 20] Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit.—
Statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for
information [s 20.2] in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.
ILLUSTRATION
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B—"Go and ask C, C knows all about it." C's statement is an admission.

COMMENT
This section forms another exception to the rule that admissions by strangers to a suit
are not relevant. Under it the admissions of a third person are also receivable in
evidence against, and have frequently been held to be in fact binding upon, the party
who has expressly referred another to him for information in regard to an uncertain or
disputed matter.309

[s 20.1] Principle.—
If a reference is made over a disputed matter to a third person, not in the nature of a
submission to arbitration, but rather as an aid to the settlement of the differences
existing between the parties and to enable the parties themselves to effect a
settlement on the information, in such cases the party is bound by the declaration of
the person referred to in the same manner and to the same extent as if it was made by
himself.310

[s 20.2] "Expressly referred for information".—
There must be an express reference for information in order to make the statement of
the person referred to admissible. Such admissions come very near to the case of
arbitration. In the application of this principle, it matters not whether the question
referred be one of law or of fact, whether the person to whom reference is made have
or have not any peculiar knowledge on the subject, or whether the statements of the
referee be adduced in evidence in an action on contract, or in an action for tort.311
If one party in a cause offers to the other party to settle it, provided that a witness
makes a statement on oath as to a certain fact in dispute, and the statement is made, it
shall bind the party making the offer.312 Where the defendant said, "If C will say that he
did deliver the goods, I will pay for them," it was held that C's statement was admissible

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
and the defendant was bound by it.313 Explaining the term "information", the Supreme
Court has said: "The word "information" occurring in section 20 is not to be understood
in the sense that the parties desired to know something which none of them had any
knowledge of. Where there is a dispute as regards a certain question and the court is in
need of information regarding the truth on that point, any statement that the referee
may make is nevertheless information within the meaning of section 20".314 The court
accordingly regarded the report of an assessor "information" within the meaning of the
section. The court said that it would also include reference to arbitration. Explaining the
point of information, the court proceeded as follows: Section 20 is the second
exception to the general rule laid down in section 18. It deals with one of the classes of
vicarious admissions. Where a party refers to a third person for some information or an
opinion on a matter in dispute, the statements made by the third person are receivable
as admissions against the person making the reference. The word "Information"
occurring in section 20 is not to be understood in the sense that the parties desired to
know something of which none of them had any knowledge. Where there is a dispute
as regards a certain question and the court is in need of information regarding the truth
on that point, any statement which the referee may make is nevertheless information
within the purview of section 20 and is admissible. The reason behind admissibility of
the statement is that when a party refers to another person for a statement of his
views, the party approves of his utterance in anticipation and adopts that as his own.
The principle is the same as that of reference to arbitration. The reference under
section 20 may be by express words or by conduct, but in any case there must be a
clear intention to refer and the statements made by the referee are generally
conclusive. Admissions so obtained may operate as an estoppel and they do so where
parties had agreed to abide by them. In the present case though the concerned
Minister had deputed a Town Planning Oﬃcer to assess the valuation of the disputed
land but he did not make any commitment on behalf of the State Government that
whatever assessment was made by him would be binding on the Government. The
Government never agreed to abide by the valuation made by the assessor.
Where in a suit for eviction, one of the tenants on the basis of power of attorney from
other tenants, admitted in his statement before the court the liability as regards the
arrears of rent, such a statement would bind the tenants as their own admission within
the meaning of section 20 of the Evidence Act.315 A suit was ﬁled for a declaration that
the resignation tendered by the plaintiff from his post was involuntary having been
extracted by fraud, coercion, threat, etc. In the course of the proceedings, the plaintiff
ﬁled an application that if the two named persons stated on special oath, one in
Gurdwara, and the other in temple, that the resignation was not extracted as alleged, he
would withdraw that aspect of the matter. An oath commissioner was appointed to
record the respective statements. They went against the plaintiff. He was held bound
by the statements.316

309 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 760, p 484.
310 Sloman v Herne, (1799) 2 Esp. 695; Williams v Bridges, (1817) 2 Stark 42.
311 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 761, p 485.
312 Lloyd v Willan, (1794) 1 Esp. 178.
313 Daniel v Pitt, (1806) 1 Camp 366n.
314 Hirachand Kothari v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1985 SC 998 , at 1000-1 : 1985 Supp SCC 17 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
315 Ram Sahai v Jai Prakash, AIR 1993 MP 147 .
316 KM Singh v Secretary, Assn. of Indian Universities, (1992) 3 SCC 129 : AIR 1992 SC 1536 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 21] Proof of admissions against persons making them and by or on their
behalf.—
Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them, [s
21.2] or his representative in interest; [s 21.3] but they cannot be proved by or on behalf

of the person who makes them or by his representative in interest, except in the
following cases:—
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it is

of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as
between third persons under section 32.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it

consists of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant
or in issue, made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed,
and is accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable.
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is

relevant otherwise than as an admission.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not

forged. A aﬃrms that it is genuine, B that it is forged.
A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may prove
a statement by A that the deed is forged; but A cannot prove a statement
by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by
himself that the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away.

Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken out of her proper
course.
A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his business
showing observations alleged to have been taken by him from day to day,
and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A
may prove these statements, because they would be admissible between
third parties, if he were dead, under section 32, clause (2).
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Calcutta.

He produces a letter written by himself and dated at Lahore on that day,
and bearing the Lahore post mark of that day.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were
dead, it would be admissible under section 32, clause (2).
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. He

offers to prove that he refused to sell them below their value.
A may prove these statements, though they are admissions, because
they are explanatory of conduct inﬂuenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit coin

which he knew to be counterfeit.
He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the coin as
he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that that person did
examine it and told him it was genuine.
A may prove these facts for the reasons stated in the last preceding
illustration.

COMMENT
This section lays down as a general rule that admissions are relevant and may be
proved against the person who makes them or his representative in interest.
Admissions must be clear if they are to be used against the person making it.
Admissions are substantive evidence by themselves, in view of section 17 and this
section, though they are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted. Admissions duly
proved are admissible evidence irrespective of whether the party making them
appeared in the witness-box or not and whether that party when appearing as witness
was confronted with those statements in case he made a statement contrary to those
admissions.317 In certain circumstances an admission may operate as an estoppel.318
The effect usually given to admissions proved against persons who make them is
destructive, not constructive. Whether they are true or not does not matter. The
effective point is that they destroy the force of inconsistent statements made later.
What a party himself admits to be true may reasonably be presumed to be so, and until
that presumption is rebutted, the fact admitted should be taken to be established.319 A
contractor's ﬁnal bill expressly stating that it would be a ﬁnal settlement of his claim
under the contract was allowed to be proved against him as an admission of ﬁnality. He
could get rid of it by showing something else, like a mistake etc.320 The person against
whom an admission is proved is at liberty to show that it was mistaken or untrue. When
an admission is duly proved and the person against whom it is proved does not satisfy
the court that it was mistaken or untrue, the court may decide the case in accordance
with it. An erroneous admission does not bind the person making such admission.
Admission must be considered as a whole;321 but the court is not bound to believe or
disbelieve the statement as a whole.322
An admission made by a party in a plaint signed and veriﬁed by him may be used
against him in other suits. In other suits, this admission cannot be regarded as
conclusive, and it is open to the party to show that it is not true.323 If an admission in a
pleading is made subject to a condition it must be either accepted subject to that
condition or not accepted at all.324 The value of an admission depends upon the
circumstances in which it was made. Where those circumstances had not been
properly investigated, the court was not able to determine the value of the alleged
admission.325 An admission is distinct from the former statement of a witness which

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is cited to contradict him. An admission can be proved without confronting the maker
with his earlier statements.326 Krishna Iyer J said in this case:327 "There is a cardinal
distinction between a party who is the author of a prior statement and a witness who is
examined and is sought to be discredited by the use of his prior statement. In the
former case in admission by a party is a substantive evidence if it fulﬁls the
requirement of section 21; in the latter case a prior statement is used to discredit the
credibility of the witness and does not become substantive evidence. In the former
there is not necessary requirement of the statement containing the admission having
to be put to the party because it is evidence proprio vigore; in the latter case the court
cannot be invited to disbelieve a witness on the strength of the prior contradictory
statement unless it has been put to him, as required by section 145."
This distinction was clearly made out in Bharat Singh v Bhagirathi,328 where the court
disposed of a similar argument with the following observation: "Admissions are
substantive evidence by themselves, in view of sections 17 and 21 of the Act, though
they are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted. We are of opinion that
admissions duly proved are admissible evidence irrespective of whether the party
making them appeared in the witness-box or not and whether he was confronted with
these statements in case he made a statement contrary to those admission. An
admission is a substantive evidence of the fact admitted while a previous statement
used to contradict a witness does not become substantive evidence and merely serves
the purpose of throwing doubt on the veracity of the witness."
Admissions cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes them, or by his
representative in interest, except
(1) when it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be

relevant as between third persons under section 32;
(2) when it consists of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body

made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is
accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(3) when it is relevant otherwise than as an admission.

[s 21.1] Scope.—
There is nothing in sections 18 to 21 to suggest that they apply to civil cases only; they
apply also to admissions in criminal cases.329 The accused went to a police station
and lodged a FIR of murder, narrating the events preceding the commission of the
offence and stating further how the offence was committed. It was held that the
narrative of the antecedent events was admissible as admissions not amounting to
confessions.330 Illustration (a) exempliﬁes this rule.
The principle laid down in this section must be taken subject to sections 24, 25 and 26
of this Act and sections 164 and 201 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.331 A
confession made to a Magistrate but not recorded by him, under section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, cannot be proved by tendering the oral evidence of the
Magistrate.332
The scheme of sections 21 to 27 shows that this group of sections relate to
admissions of which a confession made by an accused is a species and to certain
circumstances which may prohibit the proof of such confessions or admissions. A
confession is a kind of admission and there is no clear-cut line of demarcation between
the two. Again, admissions may be relevant in civil as well as in criminal cases, and
admissions that might be proved in civil cases are not inadmissible in criminal cases
as such.333

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 21.2] "As against the person who makes them".—
The rule as regards statements made by a person is that they may be proved only when
they are against him; otherwise a party may manufacture any amount of evidence in his
own favour.334 Where the statements are against the interest of the person making
them there is a natural presumption of truth, and they may be proved. An admission is
not conclusive as to the truth of the matters stated therein. It is only a piece of
evidence, the weight to be attached to which must depend on the circumstances under
which it is made. It can be shown to be erroneous or untrue, so long as the person to
whom it was made has not acted upon it to his detriment, when it might become
conclusive by way of estoppel.335
In a transaction for sale of property, the vendors admitted in the agreement, aﬃdavits
and other papers that the delivery of possession was made on the date of the
agreement itself. It was held that there was a heavy burden on the vendor to prove that
the statement in the agreement was not correct. The admission was coupled with the
fact that a very big amount was paid to the vendors on the date of the agreement for
vacating the property immediately. This was a strong circumstance in support of the
fact of admission. The vendors could not turn around and say that the recital regarding
delivery of possession in the agreement was made for the sake of completing the
papers only.336
An admission by a plaintiff of her marriage with a person made before there was any
dispute about such marriage may be proved by or on behalf of her under clause (1) of
this section read with section 32.337
A receipt is nothing but an admission by the party making it that he has received the
amount speciﬁed in the document. It is an admission against his own interest and he is
of course bound by it, and so are those who claim through or under him.338

[s 21.3] "Representative in interest".—
This expression will include those who are privies in blood, law or estate. The
purchaser at an ordinary execution sale is in privy with, and is the representative-ininterest of the judgment-debtor so as to be bound by the latter's admission.339 There is
a distinction between the position of a purchaser in a private sale and in a public sale in
execution of a decree. In the former he derives his title through, and cannot acquire a
better title than, the vendor: in the latter he acquires his title by operation of law
adversely to the judgment-debtor and so freed from all alienations and encumbrances
effected by the debtor subsequently to the attachment of the property sold in
execution.340 But the purchaser in a public or a private sale acquires only the right, title
and interest of the judgment-debtor with all its defects and the creditor takes the
property subject to all equities which would affect it in the debtor's hands.

[s 21.4] Exceptions.—
Admissions cannot be proved by, or on behalf of, the person who makes them, because
a person will always naturally make statements that are favourable to him. Thus the
opinion of a person as to the valuation of his property which is under acquisition is not
relevant.341 To this principle three Exceptions are laid down in the section:—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 21.4.1] Statements of deceased person relevant in dispute between third
parties.—[ Exception 1 ].—
This exception enables a person to prove his own statement where the circumstances
are such that if he were dead, the statement would have been relevant in a dispute
between third parties.342

[s 21.4.2] Explanation of state of mind or body or mental or bodily feeling.— [
Exception 2 ].—
The state of a man's mind or body is relevant under section 14; and statements
narrating such facts indicating the state of mind or body may be proved on behalf of a
person narrating them. But such statements should have been made at or about the
time when such state of mind or body existed; see illustrations (d) and (e). Section 14
merely declares that such statements are relevant. This clause shows that such facts
or statements may be proved on behalf of the person making them, notwithstanding
the general rule that persons cannot make evidence for themselves by what they
choose to say.

[s 21.4.3] Facts otherwise relevant.—[ Exception 3 ].—
This Exception lays down that facts which are relevant under sections 6 to 13 will not
be rendered inadmissible because they may be proved on behalf of the person making
them. Illustrations (d) and (e) refer to this Exception.343 A person who sought
exemption from the application of the Urban Land Ceiling Act of his land was not taken
thereby to have admitted that the Act was applicable to his land, the application of the
Act to a given situation being a question of law.344 Where an injured accused person
was examined by a doctor and in the course of such examination he explained the
cause of his injuries, it was held by the Supreme Court that the statement was not an
admission and was a relevant evidence under section 3 otherwise than as an
admission. He could prove his own statement.345
A "yadi" being a contemporaneous document prepared by a prosecution witness was
held to be something which could be relied upon.346

317 Bharat Singh v Bhagirathi, AIR 1966 SC 405 : (1966) 1 SCR 606 . Followed in Mudaliar Bapuji

Valve v Yallappa Lalu Chaugule, AIR 1994 Bom 358 .
318 KS Srinivasan v UOI, AIR 1958 SC 419 : 1958 SCR 1295 .
319 Revappa v Madhava Rao, AIR 1960 Mys. 97 ; Sardar Tota Singh v Gold Field Leather Works,

AIR 1985 SC 507 : (1985) 1 SCC 414 , admission as to the lawful nature of a sub-tenancy in an
eviction proceeding.
320 Central Coalﬁelds Ltd v Mining Construction and Multi Contract Pvt Ltd, (1982) 1 SCC 415 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
321 Mahendra v Sushila, AIR 1965 SC 364 : (1964) 7 SCR 267 ; Abida Khatoon v State of UP, AIR

1963 All 260 .
322 Shiv Ram v Shiv Charan, AIR 1964 Raj 126 .
323 Basant Singh v Janki Singh, AIR 1967 SC 341 : (1967) 1 SCR 1 .
324 Calcutta National Bank v Rangaroon Tea Co, AIR 1967 Cal 294 .
325 Prem Ex-servicemen Co-operative Society v State of Haryana, AIR 1974 SC 1121 : (1974) 2

SCC 319 ; State of Orissa v Ghanshyam Mohanty, 1987 Cr LJ 1008 Orissa, a statement before a
Magistrate, before investigation, allowed to be proved as an admission, though not a confession
under section 164 CrPC.
326 Biswanath Pd. v Dwarka Pd, AIR 1974 SC 117 : (1974) 1 SCC 78 .
327 Ibid, p 81.
328 AIR 1966 SC 405 : (1966) 1 SCR 606 : (1966) 2 SCJ 53 .
329 Md Baksh v Crown, (1914) Kar 257 .
330 Legal Remembrancer v Lalit Mohan Singh Roy, (1921) 49 Cal 167 ; Pakala Narayana Swamy v

King-Emperor, (1937) 17 Pat 15.
331 Queen-Empress v Bhairab Chunder Chuckerbutty, (1898) 2 Cal WN 702.
332 Nazir Ahmad v The King-Emperor, (1936) 63 IA 372 , 38 Bom LR 987 : 17 Lah 629.
333 Ramchandran, (1960) Mad 224; Salil Kumar Roy v Banu Devi Bhansali, AIR 1999 Cal 270 , a

letter was tendered in evidence by the earlier defendant. It was not necessary to show that letter
to the substituted defendant before calling upon him to make a statement on the point.
334 Ramani Pershad Narain Singh v Mahanth Adaiya Gossain, (1903) 31 Cal 380 ; Mahendra v

Sushila, AIR 1965 SC 364 : (1964) 7 SCR 267 .
335 Nagubai v B Shama Rao, AIR 1956 SC 593 : (1956) SCR 451 .
336 Chetak Constructions Ltd v Om Prakash, AIR 2003 MP 145 .
337 Musammat Bashiran v Mohammad Husain, (1941) 16 Luck 615 .
338 Akal Sahu v King-Emperor, (1947) 26 Pat 49; Idandas v Anant Ramchandra Phadke, AIR 1982

SC 127 : (1982) 1SCR 1197 : (1982) 1 SCC 27 : 1982 Mah LJ 328 , entries in counterfoils are not
admissions against the opposite party of the maker of the entries. State of Rajasthan v Vinod
Malhotra, 1997 Cr LJ 1488 (Raj), statements which do not amount to admissions or confessions
are outside the scope of the section. They are provable like any other relevant statement. In this
case a police oﬃcer received information on telephone which was probably conveyed by the
accused. The information led to discovery of dead bodies, which fact was also admissible under
section 27.
339 Ishan Chunder Sirkar v Beni Madhub Sirkar, (1896) 24 Cal 62 FB; Mahomed Mozuffer Hossein

v Kishori Mohun Roy, (1895) 22 Cal 909 : 22 IA 129.
340 Dinendronath Sannyal v Ramcoomar Ghose, (1880) 8 IA 65 , 75: 7 Cal 107. See, Thakur Bhim

Singh v Thakur Kan Singh, AIR 1980 SC 727 : (1980) 2 SCR 628 , admission in 1955 about a
transaction in 1940 admitted against the legal representative of the maker.
341 Mariam v State of Kerala, AIR 1980 Ker 176 .
342 See Illustrations (a) and (b).
343 See, Basanti v State of HP, 1987 Cr LJ 1869 : AIR 1987 SC 1572 : (1987) 3 SCC 227 : 1987

SCC (Cri) 473 , where the statement outside the court by the wife of the deceased that she and
other named persons had committed the murder was held to be not provable under this section.
344 Dilipsinh Mohansinh v SJ Mansha, AIR 1995 Guj 1 .
345 Ammini v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 481 (SC).
346 Subhash Maruti Avasare v State of Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 631 : 2006 (4) Crimes 304

(SC).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 22] When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.—
Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant, unless and until
the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary
evidence of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter contained, or
unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question.

COMMENT
[s 22.1] Principle.—
The contents of a document which is capable of being produced must be proved by the
instrument itself and not by oral evidence.
Oral admissions as to contents of a document are excluded under this section. They
are, however, admissible when the party is entitled to give secondary evidence of the
contents of such document under sections 65 and 66. Such admissions are also
admissible when the genuineness of the document produced is in question.
As to the validity of a gift deed, one of the donors stated that he was minor at the time
of its execution. But in the gift deed itself he admitted his age to be 22. This admission
was contained in the registered deed. This was held to be binding on him unless he
could show any vitiating circumstance like fraud, coercion, etc.347

347 Patel Prabhudas Hargovandas v Heirs of Patel Babubhai Kachrabhai, AIR 2007 Guj 148 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
348[s 22A] When oral admission as to contents of electronic records are

relevant.—
Oral admissions as to the contents of electronic records are not relevant, unless the
genuineness of the electronic record produced is in question].

COMMENT
[s 22A.1] Information Technology Act.—
Section 22A has been inserted into the Evidence Act by the Information Technology
Act, 2000. The purpose of this section is to provide for the circumstances in which an
oral admission could be proved as to the contents of an electronic record. The section
disallows the evidence of oral admission as to the contents of an electronic record. It
then talks of an exceptional situation, which is that when the genuineness of the
electronic record produced before the court is itself in question. The section says that
oral admissions as to the contents of an electronic record may be proved in evidence
when the genuineness of the record has been questioned.

348 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–3 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 23] Admissions in civil cases when relevant.—
In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition
that evidence of it is not to be given, [s 23.2] or under circumstances from which the
Court can infer that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be
given. [s 23.3]
Explanation.—Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any barrister, pleader,
attorney or vakil from giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to
give evidence under section 126.

COMMENT
[s 23.1] Principle.—
This section lays down that in civil cases an admission is not relevant when it is made
(1) upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or (2) under
circumstances from which the court can infer that the parties agreed together that
evidence of it should not be given. The section gives effect to the maxim, interest
reipublicae ut sit ﬁnis litium (it is for the interest of the State that there should be an end
of litigation). "The law relating to communications without prejudice is of course
familiar. As a matter of policy, the law has long excluded from evidence admissions by
words or conduct made by parties in the course of negotiations to settle litigation. The
purpose is to enable parties in an attempt to compromise litigation to communicate
with one another freely and without the embarrassment which the liability of their
communications to be put in evidence subsequently might impose upon them. The law
relieves them of this embarrassment so that their negotiations to avoid litigation or to
settle it may go unhampered...The privilege covers admissions by words or conduct.
For example, neither party can use the readiness of the other to negotiate as an implied
admission."349

[s 23.2] "Express condition that evidence of it is not to be given".—
This section protects communications made "without prejudice". Conﬁdential overtures
of paciﬁcation and any other offers or propositions between litigating parties, expressly
or impliedly made without prejudice are excluded on grounds of public policy. For, if
parties were to be prejudiced by their efforts to compromise it would be impossible to
attempt any amicable arrangement of differences.350 The expression "without
prejudice" means without prejudice to the writer of the letter if the terms he proposes
are not accepted. It means this: "I make you an offer which you may accept or not, as

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
you like; but if you do not accept it, my having made it is to have no effect at all".351 If
the terms proposed in the letter are accepted, a complete contract is established, and
the letter, although written without prejudice, operates to alter the old state of things
and to establish a new one.352 If letters marked "without prejudice" are tendered in
evidence and the other party admits them, the admission implies that the privilege is
withdrawn and the letters are free to be used as evidence in a judicial proceeding.
Letters so marked show the writer's desire as to the privilege, but unless there are
circumstances from which it can be inferred that the other party agreed to respect the
privilege, the letters cannot be excluded under this section.353
The reply to a letter written "without prejudice" cannot be admitted in evidence even
though not guarded in a similar manner. The words once used will exclude an entire
correspondence. Thus, where "without prejudice" negotiations led to an agreed
settlement between two parties engaged in litigation, the content of those negotiations
was not discoverable to another party in the litigation, nor would it be admissible
evidence.354
The rule which excludes documents marked "without prejudice" has no application
unless some person is in dispute or negotiation with another and terms are offered for
the settlement of the dispute or negotiation.355 Thus, where letters were written
without reference to any dispute, they were held to be not privileged though they were
marked "without prejudice."356 The fact that the document is headed "without
prejudice" does not conclusively or automatically render it privileged from admission in
evidence in any subsequent proceedings, and if a claim for such privilege of the
document is challenged the court will look at the document to determine its nature.
However, all documents which form part of negotiations between the parties are prima
facie privileged from admission in evidence if they are marked "without prejudice" even
if the document in question merely initiates the negotiations and even if the document
does not itself contain an offer.357
An admission made to a stranger, under whatever terms as to secrecy, is not protected
by law from disclosure.

[s 23.3] "Under circumstances from which the Court can infer that the parties
agreed together that evidence of it should not be given".—
Such circumstances must be of such a character that the court must naturally come to
the conclusion that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
In a suit for rent, there was a talk of settlement between the plaintiff's pleader and one
of the defendants when the suit was about to be instituted. It was held that the mere
fact of the conversation taking place when the parties were contemplating that a suit
might be instituted was not in itself suﬃcient to prevent the conversation from being
put in evidence.358

[s 23.4] Use of "without prejudice" material by one party.—
Where one party used "without prejudice" material for the purpose of a freezing
injunction which had been issued against it, the court said that the other party also
become entitled to demand production of the documents containing that materials.
The court observed that it would be unfair to allow one party to rely on without
prejudice material on an interlocutory application which concerned the merits of a case
without also allowing the other party to use that material at the trial. Since the merits of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the case had been relevant for the purpose of the opponent's application for a freezing
injunction, the plaintiff would be permitted to rely on the without prejudice discussions
at the trial.359

[s 23.5] Restraint of use of without prejudice material in subsequent connected
proceedings.—
It has been held that the use of without prejudice documents in subsequent connected
proceedings with the same subject matter is restrained. It is likely that the without
prejudice document are subject to an implied condition that they would not be used in
litigation and, unless protection extended to subsequent litigation, the public policy aim
of allowing without prejudice documents to be drawn up freely would be defeated.360
The court followed Unilever Plc v Proctor and Gamble Co.361

349 Dixon CJ in Field v Commissioner for Railways, (1957)99 CLR 285 , cited Edward's Cases on

Evidence in Australia, 519 at p 520 (1968).
350 Hoghton v Hoghton, (1852) 15 Beav 278.
351 Re River Steamer Co, (1871) LR 6 Ch 822, 832.
352 Walker v Wilsher, (1889) 23 QBD 335 .
353 The Lucknow Improvement Trust v PL Jaitly & Co, (1929) 5 Luck 465 .
354 Rush and Tompkins v Greater London Council, The Independent, Nov 4, 1988 HL; 1988 CLY

2956; without prejudice correspondence between the parties about their claims as to costs
were not allowed to be disclosed without their consent. Simaan General Contracting Co v
Pilkington Glass Ltd, (1987) 1 All ER 345 (QBD).
355 Madhavrav v Gulabbhai, (1898) 23 Bom 177, 180.
356 Dentrey Re, ex p Holt, (1893) 2 QB 116 , 119-20.
357 South Shropshire District Council v Amos, (1987) 1 All ER 340 CA; applying Holt Ex p., (1891-

4) All ER Rep 209 and Cutts v Head, (1984) 1 All ER 611 .
358 Meajan Matbar v Alimuddi Mia, (1916) 44 Cal 130 ; Uybl Ltd v British Railways Board, (2000)

97 (42) LSG 45 (CA), negotiations concerning the settling of disputes which were made without
prejudice to any forthcoming litigation, and thus at a future trial "without prejudice" documents
could not be referred to. Counsel had not cited any authorities and therefore the issue was a
diﬃcult one, although Rush & Tompkins Ltd v Greater London Council, (1989) AC 1280 : (1989)
CLY 1701 approved the principles of the without prejudice rule set out in Cutts v Head, (1984)
Ch. 290 : (1984) CLY 2608 which acknowledged that unless a without prejudice letter was
marked "without prejudice save as to costs", it was not admissible on the costs hearing
following trial. The draft report was a draft and the ﬁgures enclosed were wholly different to
those in the ﬁnal report.
359 Somatra Ltd v Sinclair Roche & Temperley; Sinclair Roche & Temperley v Somatra Ltd, (2000)

1 WLR 2453 (CA).
360 Instance v Denny Bros Printing Ltd (interim injunction) (2000) FSR 869 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
361 Unilever Plc v Proctor and Gamble Co, 2000 FSR 344 (UK) : (1999) 2 All ER 691 : (1999)

LWLR 1630 (Ch D).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 24] Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in
criminal proceeding.—
A confession [s 24.2] made by an accused person [s 24.3] is irrelevant in a criminal
proceeding, if the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused
by any inducement, threat or promise [s 24.4] having reference to the charge against
the accused person, [s 24.5] proceeding from a person in authority [s 24.6] and
suﬃcient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds which
would appear to him reasonable [s 24.7] for supposing that by making it he would gain
any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature [s 24.8] in reference to the
proceedings against him.

COMMENT
The substantive law of confession is contained in sections 24 to 30 of the Evidence Act
and the adjective law, in sections 164, 281 and 463 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. Confessions are received in evidence in criminal cases upon the same principle
on which admissions are received in civil cases, namely, the presumption that a person
will not make an untrue statement against his own interest. A man of sound mind and
full age, who makes a statement in ordinary simple language and has not been the
victim of malpractices, threat or inducement in making such statement, must be bound
by the language of the statement and by its ordinary plain meaning and the act spoken
of must be given its legal consequence.362 This section does not require positive proof
as deﬁned in section 3 of improper inducement. A well-grounded conjecture reasonably
based upon circumstances disclosed in the evidence, is suﬃcient to exclude a
confession.363
The confession of an accused is only relevant against himself, though section 30 is an
exception to this rule.

[s 24.1] Principle.—
According to this section a confession by an accused is irrelevant if it is caused by (1)
inducement; (2) threat; or (3) promise. The inducement, threat, or promise should have
(a) reference to the charge against the accused, (b) proceeded from a person in
authority, and (c) suﬃciently given the accused person reasonable grounds for
supposing that by making the confession he would gain any advantage or avoid any
evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.
A confession is relevant—
(1)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
if it is made after the impression caused by any such inducement, threat or
promise has been fully removed (section 28);
(2) if it is not made to a police oﬃcer (section 25); or
(3) if it is made in the presence of a Magistrate when the accused is in the custody

of a police oﬃcer (section 26).

[s 24.2] "Confession".—
The word "confession" has not been deﬁned anywhere in the Act. A "confession" is an
admission made at any time by a person charged with a crime, stating or suggesting
the inference that he committed that crime.364 This deﬁnition was adopted by Lord
Atkin in Pakala Narain Swami v Emperor,365 His Lordship said: "A confession must
either admit in terms the offence, or at any rate substantially all the facts which
constitute the offence. An admission of a gravely incriminating fact, even a
conclusively incriminating fact, is not in itself a confession, for example, an admission
that the accused is the owner of and was in recent possession of the knife or revolver
which caused death with no explanation of any other man's possession. The deﬁnition
is not contained in the Evidence Act, 1872; and in that Act it would not be consistent
with the natural use of language to construe confession as a statement by an accused
suggesting the inference that he committed the crime."
In order to decide whether a statement is confessional or not, it must be read as a
whole.366 A statement which might, at the most, be described as suggesting an
inference that the accused committed the crime does not amount to confession.367 An
admission of a gravely incriminating fact is not of itself a confession.368 Where the
accused admitted his complicity in crime merely by stating that he was in the company
of the other accused who strangulated the deceased, it was held that such statement
could not be construed as confession of his involvement in the crime, hence it was
inadmissible in evidence.369
Merely because one of the witnesses to the confessional statement did not support the
confession in its entirety, the entire confession should not be brushed aside as
unreliable, even though an independent witness had supported the recording of
conviction. However, the conviction of the accused was not based merely on the
confessional statements but also on other substantial evidence relied upon by the
prosecution viz. recovery of the dead body, post-mortem report matching with
confessional statements, evidence of other independent witnesses, who corroborated
the recording of confessional statement in their presence and thus do not create doubt
about the credibility of the prosecution case, so as to discard the same. The Supreme
Court found no inﬁrmity in the judgment and order of the High Court, holding the
accused guilty.370
The principles governing admissibility of an extra-judicial confession capable of
forming the basis of conviction of an accused have been summed up by Supreme
Court371 as follows:
(i) The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by itself. It has to be examined

by the court with greater care and caution.
(ii) It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful.
(iii) It should inspire conﬁdence.
(iv)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
An extra-judicial confession attains greater credibility and evidentiary value if it
is supported by a chain of cogent circumstances and is further corroborated by
other prosecution evidence.
(v) For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of conviction, it should not suffer

from any material discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.
(vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any other fact and in

accordance with law.
An extra-judicial confession can be relied upon only if the same is voluntary and true
and made in a ﬁt state of mind. The value of evidence as to the confession like any
other evidence depends upon the veracity of the witness to whom it has been made.
The value of the evidence as to the confession depends on the reliability of the witness
who gives the evidence. But is not open to any court to start with the presumption that
extra-judicial confession is insuﬃcient to convict the accused, even though it is
supported by the other circumstantial evidence and corroborated by independent
witness, as is the position in the instant case and the courts cannot be unmindful of
the legal position, that if the evidence relating to extra-judicial confession is found
credible after being tested on the touchstone of credibility and acceptability, it can
solely form the basis of conviction.372 Extra-judicial confession is a weak piece of
evidence and the courts are to view it with greater care and caution. For an extrajudicial confession to form the basis of a conviction, it should not suffer from any
material discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.373 The accused was suspected of
committing the rape and murder of the victim only after the Investigating Oﬃcer found
it was aﬃrmed with a witness, that he was seen close to the place of occurrence.
Thereafter, he made an extra-judicial confession to the Village Administrative Oﬃcer
who was an unrelated person both to the complainant and the accused. The nonrecording of the extra-judicial confession over a long period of time was held to be of
no consequence. Further, the Village Administrative Oﬃcer was not inimical to the
accused. The extra-judicial confession was relied on.374
Before a confession can be accepted in evidence, it must be established by cogent
evidence what were the exact words used by the accused.375 Even if so much is
established, prudence and justice demand that such evidence cannot be made the sole
ground of conviction. It may be used only as a corroborative piece of evidence.376 The
rule of prudence does not require that each and every circumstance mentioned in the
confession with regard to the participation of the accused person in the crime must be
separately and independently corroborated, nor is it essential that the corroboration
must come from facts and circumstances discovered after the confession was
made.377 An extra-judicial confession may or may not be a weak evidence. Each case
has to be examined on the basis of its own facts and circumstances.378 Deliberate and
voluntary confessions of guilt, if clearly proved, are among the most effectual proofs in
law.379 The court should not start with the presumption that extra-judicial confession is
a weak type of evidence.380 The court should apply two tests: Is it voluntary? Is it true?
381 The Supreme Court prescribed this guideline in a case where it held that the

evidentiary value of a confession was not destroyed by the facts that the accused was
taken from one place to another because of the non-availability of a Magistrate there
and that a police station was not in the vicinity of the judicial lock-up. If it appears that
the confession has been improperly induced, then the court is bound to exclude it, no
matter how true it may be.382 An extra-judicial confession is in the very nature of things
a weak evidence.383 the acceptability of an extra-judicial confession will depend upon
the reliability of the evidence of the person to whom such confession is said to have
been made.384

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The accused, while in police custody, was produced before the magistrate on three
different occasions. He was then remanded to judicial custody and made a confession
after being in such custody for seven days. He admitted in full length the role played by
him along with the other accused. The magistrate certiﬁed that in his opinion the
accused made the confession voluntarily. The Supreme Court held that it could not be
said that the accused was pressurised by the police or was prevailed upon by any
extraneous inﬂuences to make the confession.385
It is the duty of the court to inquire very carefully into all the circumstances under which
the confession was made, and particularly as to the length of time during which the
accused was in custody.386 Where the Magistrate while recording a confession elicited
answers by questioning the accused, it could not be said that the answers given were
voluntary statements of the accused.387 A statement made under section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, which does not amount to a confession, can be used
against the maker as an admission within the purview of sections 18 to 21.388
A confession which has not been retracted even up to the last stage of the trial and
also accepted by the accused in examination under section 313, CrPC, can be fully
relied upon.389

[s 24.2.1] Confession of the co-accused.—
Confession of the co-accused cannot be treated as substantive evidence.390 [See
further under section 30].

[s 24.2.2] Recording of confession.—
Giving warning that it will be used against the person making it, is fundamental basic
principle of Criminal Jurisprudence.391 Where confessional statement of the accused
could be recorded only by Judicial Magistrate, the same recorded by Executive
Magistrate was not admissible in evidence.392
A confessional statement recorded under section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962 was
held to be admissible in evidence although the requirements of section 164 CrPC,
regarding recording of confessions were not complied with, this provision being not
applicable to recording of confessions under the Customs Act.393
Where the accused was produced before the magistrate hand cuffed from police
custody and he recorded the confession without ascertaining the possibility of
pressurisation by police, the confession was held to be wasted.394

[s 24.2.3] To be accepted as a whole or rejected as a whole.—
It is a well accepted rule regarding the use of confessions and admissions that these
must be accepted as a whole or rejected as a whole and that the court is not
competent to accept only the inculpatory part while rejecting the exculpatory part as
inherently incredible.395 A statement that contains self-exculpatory matter cannot
amount to a confession, if the exculpatory matter includes some fact, which if true
would negative the offence alleged to be confessed. A confession must either admit in
terms the offence or at any rate substantially all the facts that constitute the
offence.396 However, where the exculpatory part of a confessional statement is not
only inherently improbable but is contradicted by other evidence, the court can accept

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the inculpatory part and piecing the same with the other evidence convict the
accused.397 Thus exculpatory part may be excluded where the evidence on record
disproves it398 or where it is apparently false.399 When a statement, treated as a
confessional statement, contains both exculpatory as well as inculpatory statements, it
is possible for the court to reject the exculpatory part of such a confessional
statement, which stands belied by the other evidence on record, and rely upon that
inculpatory part of the confessional statement, which is proved to be true by the
evidence on record.400

[s 24.2.4] Points of difference between confession and admission.—
A confession differs from an admission:
(1) A confession is a statement made by an accused person which is sought to be
proved against him in a criminal proceeding to establish the commission of an offence
by him; while an admission usually relates to a civil transaction and comprises all
statements amounting to admissions as deﬁned in section 18.
(2) A confession if deliberately and voluntarily made may be accepted as conclusive in
itself of the matters confessed;401 an admission is not a conclusive proof of the
matters admitted, but may operate as an estoppel.
(3) A confession always goes against the person making it; an admission may be used
on behalf of the person making it under the Exceptions provided in section 21.
(4) The confession of one of two or more accused jointly tried for the same offence
can be taken into consideration against the co-accused (section 30). But an admission
by one of several defendants in a suit is no evidence against another defendant.
See Comment on section 17, supra.

[s 24.3] "By an accused person".—
The expression "accused person" describes the person against whom evidence is
sought to be led in a criminal proceeding. This expression has the same connotation as
the expression "a person accused of any offence" in the following section.402 If a
person makes a statement when he is a suspect but not an accused person and
subsequently becomes an accused, his statement will be regarded as a confession.403
When a person states that he has done certain acts which amount to an offence, he
accuses himself of committing the offence, and the statement is, therefore, a
confession by an "accused person" within the meaning of this section.404

[s 24.4] "Appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement, threat
or promise".—
Going by the prescriptions contained in section 164, CrPC, 1973, what is to be ensured
is that the confession is made voluntarily by the offender, that there was no external
pressure particularly by the police, that the concerned person's mindset while making
the confession was uninﬂuenced by any external factors, that he was fully conscious of
what he was saying, that he was also fully aware that based on his statement there is
every scope for his suffering the conviction, which may result in the imposition of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
extreme punishment of life imprisonment and even capital punishment of death, that
prior to the making of the confession he was in a free state of mind and was not in the
midst of any persons who would have inﬂuenced his mind in any manner for making
the confession, that the statement was made in the presence of the Judicial Magistrate
and none else, that while making the confession there was no other person present
other than the accused and the Magistrate concerned and that if he expressed his
desire not to make the confession after appearing before the Magistrate, the
Magistrate should ensure that he is not entrusted to police custody. All this is to ensure
that the confession was recorded at the free will of the accused and was not inﬂuenced
by any other factor. The trial Judge has to analyse the confession carefully and if while
making such analysis, he develops an iota of doubt, the same will be rejected at the
very outset. However, in the instant case, there was no such doubt as to its veracity.405
Protection against self-incrimination is available even at the stage of investigation.
Such protection ensures reliability of the statement and of its voluntary nature. Police
powers of investigation cannot override constitutional protection.406
The appropriate meaning of the word "appears" is "seems". It imports a lesser degree
of probability than proof. The standard of a prudent man is not completely displaced,
but the stringent rule of proof is relaxed. Even so, the laxity of proof permitted does not
warrant a court's opinion based on pure surmise. A prima facie opinion based on
evidence and circumstances may be adopted as the standard laid down.407 The word
"appears" is not so strong as the expression "proved".408

[s 24.5] "Having reference to the charge against the accused person".—
Charge" means a criminal charge or a charge of an offence in a criminal proceeding.
The inducement, threat, or promise, must be with reference to the offence, with which
the accused is charged.

[s 24.6] "Person in authority"—
Where a confession was made to a tahsildar who was a person of some inﬂuence in
the village, but had no interest in the prosecution of the accused other than the interest
which every citizen has in the maintenance of law and order, and the confession was
made in consequence of questions put, and a promise made by him, it was held that
the tahsildar not being a person empowered to examine the accused or one who could
legitimately inﬂuence the course of proceeding, the confession was not excluded by
this section.409 Customs Oﬃcers410 as well as Excise Oﬃcers411 are persons in
authority.
But a confession made by a person while he was in the custody of customs oﬃcials for
the purposes of an enquiry on the orders of a magistrate was held to be not barred.412

[s 24.7] "Grounds which would appear to him reasonable".—
The Supreme Court has held that the mere existence of the threat, inducement or
promise is not enough, but, in the opinion of the court, the said threat, inducement or
promise shall be suﬃcient to cause a reasonable belief in the mind of the accused that
by confessing he would get an advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
reference to the proceedings against him: while the opinion is that of the court the
criterion is the reasonable belief of the accused.413

[s 24.8] "Temporal nature".—
The inducement must be of a temporal kind, i.e., not spiritual or religious. Confessions
obtained by spiritual exhortations are admissible in evidence. A merely moral
exhortation to tell the truth is not objectionable.414

[s 24.9] Retracted confessions.—
As to this see notes under section 30.

[s 24.10] Extra-judicial confessions.—
[For notes see under section 26].

[s 24.11] Panchayat.—
In Kansa Bahera v State of Orissa,415 the Supreme Court held a confession to be
irrelevant which was made by the accused before the village Pradhan, (President) on
the assurance that he would not be handed over to the police.

[s 24.12] Intelligence Oﬃcer of NCB—
Where the confessional statement was recorded by Intelligence Oﬃcer of Narcotics
Control Bureau, he being not a police oﬃcer, such statement was held to be admissible
in evidence.416

[s 24.13] Confessional statement following assault and beating.—
An extra-judicial confession made by the accused person following assault and beating
was not taken to be either voluntary or natural. It was not relied upon for any purpose
whatsoever.417

[s 24.14] Exculpatory statement.—
Where the statement made by the accused contained an admission that she had
placed the dead body of her husband in a trunk and had carried it in a jeep and thrown
it into a well, but with regard to the cause of the death the statement made by her was
that her husband had accidentally taken a poisonous substance which was meant for
washing photos erroneously thinking it to be a medicine, it was held that the statement

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
read as a whole was exculpatory in character and that the whole statement was
inadmissible in evidence.418

[s 24.15] Corroboration.—
Judicial confession were made both by the accused and his co-accused. The High
Court rejected the confession made by the co-accused and acquitted him. This position
remained undisturbed for some other reasons. The Supreme Court held that no part of
such a confession could be used for the purpose of corroborating the confession of the
accused.419
Extra-judicial confession is by its very nature, a rather weak type of evidence and
requires appreciation with great deal of care and caution. Where an extra-judicial
confession is warranted by suspicious circumstances, its credibility becomes doubtful
and it loses its importance. It is for this reason that court generally looks for an
independent reliable corroboration before placing any reliance upon such a confession.
However, in the instant case, the extra-judicial confession was reliably corroborated
and was relied upon.420 Extra judicial confession can form basis for conviction if
supported by other substantive evidence, which is lacking in this case.421

362 Per Mears CJ, in Raggha v Emperor, (1925) 23 A LJR 821, 826 FB.
363 Bhukin v King-Emperor, (1948) Nag 147; see generally Kamlesh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 3191

(All) : State of HP v Prakash Chand, 1997 Cr LJ 1979 (HP); Rajan Johnsonhai Christy v State, 1997
Cr LJ 3702 (Guj).
364 Stephen's Dig, 12th Edn, Article 22; Queen-Empress v Babu Lal, (1884) 6 All 509 , 539 FB;

Queen Empress v Nana, (1889) 14 Bom 260 FB; Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal
Affairs, Bengal v Bhaju Majhi, (1929) 57 Cal 1062 ; Shankar v State of Tamil Nadu, (1994) 4 SCC
478 : 1994 Cr LJ 3071 , a confession is a form of admission consisting of direct
acknowledgement of guilt in a criminal charge. It must be an admission in express words by the
accused person of the truth of the guilty fact charged or some essential part of it. A statement
that contains a self-exculpatory matter cannot amount to a confession. The confession should
be a voluntary one, that is to say, not caused by inducement, threat or promise. Whether a
confession is voluntary or not is essentially a question of fact. Mahabir Biswas v State of WB,
(1995) 2 SCC 25 : 1995 SCC (Cr) 308, a confession should be proved to be voluntary and true,
before it should be acted upon : State of Karnataka v Thangaraj, AIR 1995 SC 2134 , a confession
conﬁrmed by circumstances. Ganesh Traders v District Collector, Karimnagar, 2002 Cr LJ 1108
(AP), confession must relate to the offence in question. If the purported admission makes out
no offence, the provisions relating to confession would not come into play.
365 Pakala Narain Swami v Emperor, AIR 1939 PC 47 .
366 Lokeman Shah v State of West Bengal, 2001 Cr LJ 2196 : AIR 2001 SC 1760 .
367 Om Prakash v State of UP, AIR 1960 SC 409 : 1960 Cr LJ 544 . See further, Pandru Khadia v

State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 762 (Ori), where it was pointed out that a confessional statement

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
must be addressed to some person and that, therefore, the accused going round the village and
shouting that he had killed his wife did not amount to confession.
368 Palvinder Kaur v State of Punjab, AIR 1952 SC 354 : 1953 Cr LJ 154 : 1953 SCR 94 .
369 Valiyaveetil Ashraf v State of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 555 (Ker); Shankar v State of Tamil Nadu,

1994 Cr LJ 3071 , a statement containing self-exculpatory matter cannot amount to a
confession. Suresh Bhudarmal Kalani v State of Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 4592 : AIR 1998 SC
3258 : (1998) 7 SCC 337 , a self-exculpatory statement by an accused person was held to be not
an admissible confession.
370 Baskaran v State of TN, (2014) 5 SCC 765 (paras 18 and 19), aﬃrming Baskaran v State,

Criminal Appeal No. 9 of 2005, decided on 9.11.2006 (Mad).
371 Sahadevan v State of TN, (2012) 6 SCC 403 .
372 Baskaran v State of TN, (2014) 5 SCC 765 (para 17).
373 Vijay Shankar v State of Haryana, (2015) 12 SCC 644 , para 19.
374 Kadamanian @ Manikandan v State, AIR 2016 SC 4266 , paras 12 and 15 : (2016) 9 SCC 325

.
375

State of Assam v Manik Chandra Dey, 1989 Cr LJ 1495 Gau, stereotype recording of

confession not showing the words used by the accused and what was his rational motive in
confessing, evidence rejected. To the same effect, Arjun Sahu v State of Orissa, 1988 Cr LJ 1086
(Ori), following Rahim Beg v State of UP, AIR 1973 SC 343 : 1972 Cr LJ 1260 and Heramba
Brahma v State of Assam, AIR 1982 SC 1595 : 1983 Cr LJ 149 : (1982) 3 SCC 351 : 1983 SCC
(Cri) 40 . Prosecution witness deposing that the accused told him that he strangled the woman
to rob her, but not telling the words spoken by the accused, confession not reliable. Santosh v
State of Kerala, 1991 Cr LJ 570 Ker.
376 Sahoo v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 40 : 1966 Cr LJ 68 . See, Chandrakant Chimanlal Desai v

State of Gujarat, (1992) 1 SCC 473 : 1992 Cr LJ 2757 , where the Supreme Court laid that the
same principles should be followed as were enunciated in Kashmira Singh v State of MP, AIR
1952 SC 159 : 1952 SCR 526 : 1952 Cr LJ 839 , namely, such evidence should be used only to
lend assurance to other evidence. The Supreme Court has observed that a confession can be
acted upon without corroboration for the purpose of entering conviction. The confession in this
case was recorded by a judicial magistrate. Its voluntariness, therefore, was not in doubt. It
explained the circumstances in which a prisoner died in custody. Lokeman Shah v State of WB,
2001 Cr LJ 2196 : AIR 2001 SC 1760 .
377 Balbir Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1957 SC 216 : 1957 Cr LJ 481 . Confession corroborated

by circumstantial evidence, Lavji Mona v State of Gujarat, 1993 Cr LJ 3148 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 53 :
AIR 1993 SC 2480 .
378 Sivakumar v State, (2006) 1 SCC 714 : AIR 2006 SC 653 : 2006 Cr LJ 536 .
379 Emperor v Narayen, (1907) 9 Bom LR 789 , 801: 32 Bom 111 FB Kishan Lal v State, 1991 Cr

LJ 742 (Del), confession as to rape, neither commanding belief nor supported by medical
evidence, conviction quashed, the court relying upon State of UP v MK Anthony, AIR 1985 SC 48 :
1985 Cr LJ 493 : (1985) 1 SCC 505 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 105 ; Pyara Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1977
SC 2274 : 1977 Cr LJ 1941 , weak evidence; Heramba Brahma v State of Assam, AIR 1982 SC
1595 : 1983 Cr LJ 149 : (1982) 3 SCC 351 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 40 ; Rahim Beg v State of UP, AIR 1973
SC 343 : 1972 Cr LJ 1260 , exact words of confession not reproduced; Kishore Chand v State of
HP, 1990 Cr LJ 2289 SC : 1990 JT SC 662 : (1991) 1 SCC 286 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 172 : AIR 1990 SC
2140 . See, Manjit Singh v State of Punjab, 1991 Cr LJ 2265 (P&H), confession before a
respectable person of the town followed by recovery of dead body and weapon at the instance
of the accused in the presence of the Sarpanch, motive also established, proper evidence,
conviction conﬁrmed. Balkar Singh v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 77 (All), the circumstances should

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
show the reasons for the desire to confess and that it was natural for him to confess to the
person appearing as a witness. This cannot happen in reference to a perfect stranger.
380 Narayan Singh v State of MP, AIR 1985 SC 1678 : 1985 Cr LJ 1862 : (1985) 4 SCC 26 : 1985

SCC Cri 460 . But, see, Akanman Bora v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 573 (Gau), extra-judicial
confession not disclosing the name of the victim, held not reliable.
381 Shankaria v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1978 SC 1248 : 1978 Cr LJ 1251 . Followed in Ganesh

Prasad Singh v State of Orissa, 1987 Cr LJ 1345 (Ori), confession recorded by Magistrate, but no
corroboration, rejected; State of Orissa v Adiknanda, 1987 Cr LJ 603 , another uncorroborated
confession.
382 Emperor v Bhagi, (1906) 8 Bom LR 697 , 699.
383 Makhan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1705 : 1988 Supp SCC 526 : 1988 SCC (Cri)

916 , where the confession was made to a person who was harassing the accused and the
motivation was only to get rid of the harassment, held, confession not reliable though the
person causing harassment had no oﬃcial status.
384 State of Kerala v Thomas, (1986) 2 SCC 411 at p 414 : 1986 SCC (Cr) 176.
385 State of TN v Kutty, AIR 2001 SC 2778 : 2001 Cr LJ 4168 .
386 Queen-Emp. v Narayan, (1901) 3 Bom LR 122 , 124 : 25 Bom 543.
387 Lingiah, (1954) Mys 27; State of MP v Dayaram Hansraj, AIR 1981 SC 2007 : 1981 Cr LJ

1688 : 1981 Supp SCC 14 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 601 .Bhagwati Singh v State of MP, AIR 2003 SC 1088 ,
accused produced before the magistrate hand-cuffed in police custody, record of the statement
did not show what questions were put to see whether he was mentally or physically pressurised,
the record was also not in proper form. The statement was also retracted by the accused. Not
suﬃcient to prove his guilt.
388 Ghulam Hussain v King, (1949) 52 Bom LR 508 : 77 IA 65.
389 Bishnu Prasad Sinha v State of Assam, AIR 2007 SC 848 : (2007) 11 SCC 467 .
390 Balbir Singh v State of Orissa, 1995 Cr LJ 1762 (Ori); Haricharan Kurmi v State of Bihar, AIR

1964 SC 1184 .
391 NSR Krishna Prasad v Directorate of Enforcement LBK Market, 1992 Cr LJ 1888 (AP).
392 State of Haryana v Parmanand, 1995 Cr LJ 396 (P&H).
393 Gulam Husain Shaikh Chougule v S Reynolds, Suptd.of Customs, Marmgoa, AIR 2001 SC

2930 : 2001 Cr LJ 4755 .
394 Bhagwan Singh v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 1262 . Gurdeep Singh v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR

1999 SC 3646 : (2000) 1 SCC 498 : 1999 Cr LJ 4573 .
395 State of TN v Kutty, 2001 Cr LJ 4168 : AIR 2001 SC 2778 , confession to be read as a whole.

So read it became clear that the accused had clearly described the role played by him along with
others in murdering two ladies. Confession admissible. It was immaterial that he did not say
that he too had inﬂicted a stab injury.
396 Palvinder Kaur v State of Punjab, 1953 SCR 94 : 1953 Cr LJ 154 : AIR 1952 SC 354 .

Followed in Kasim Babamiya Shaikh v, State of Maharashtra, 1996 AIHC 18 (Bom); Hanumant
Govind Nargundkar v State of MP, AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1953 Cr LJ 129 .
397 Nishi Kant v State of Bihar, AIR 1969 SC 422 : 1969 Cr LJ 671 ; Jamuram v State of

Rajasthan, 1995 Cr LJ 1333 (Raj), exculpatory part false, inculpatory part can be accepted.
398 Mohan Lal v Ajit Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1183 : 1978 Cr LJ 1107 .
399 Keshoram Bora v Assam, AIR 1978 SC 1096 : 1978 Cr LJ 1089 . Followed in Rajesh Thakur v

State of WB, 1988 Cr LJ 1477 (Cal).
400 Irshad Alam v State of Bihar, 2014 Cr LJ 2107 (para 89) : 2015 (1) Pat LJR 368 (Pat—DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
401 Queen-Empress v Sangappa, (1889) Unrep. Cr C 463, Cr R No. 22 of 1896; Emperor v

Narayen, (1907) 9 Bom LR 789 , 801 : 32 Bom 111 FB.
402 State of UP v Deoman, AIR 1960 SC 1125 : 1960 Cr LJ 1504 .
403 Emperor v Bhagwandas Bisesar, (1940) 42 Bom LR 938 : (1941) Bom 27.
404 Santokhi Beldar v King-Emperor, (1932) 12 Pat 241 FB.
405 Mohd Jamiludin Nasir v State of West Bengal, (2014) 7 SCC 443 (para 21) : AIR 2014 SC

2587 .
406 Selvi v State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 1974 : (2010) 7 SCC 263 .
407 Pyare Lal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1094 and Percy Rustomji Basta v State of

Maharashtra, AIR 1971 SC 1087 : 1971 Cr LJ 933 , followed in Budhwara Bai v State of MP, 1991
Cr LJ 354 MP, the lady in this case confessed because of threats.
408 Khiro Mandal v The Emperor, (1929) 57 Cal 649 .State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005)

11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 , the extent of proof of vitiation of
voluntariness of confession has to be of prima facie nature, creating a reasonable belief.
409 Santokhi Beldar v King-Emperor, (1932) 12 Pat 241 FB. In Taula v King-Emperor, (1929) 5

Luck 91 , it was held that a ziladar serving under a big estate was a person in authority. Gura
Munda v State of Orissa, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 24 (Ori), extra-judicial made to a ward member who
was not a person in authority, held admissible.
410 Vallabhdas v Asst. Collector, Customs, (1964) 66 Bom LR 482 (SC); SK Modi v State of

Maharashtra, AIR 1979 SC 705 : 1979 Cr LJ 645 ; State of Maharashtra v PK Pathak, AIR 1980 SC
1224 . See also, Banshidhar Maharana v State of Bihar, 1993 Cr LJ 1310 .
411 Harbansingh v State, (1968) 71 Bom LR 599 .
412 CCE v C. Fernandez, (1982) 3 SCC 512 : 1983 SCC (Cr) 109.
413 Pyare Lal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1094 : (1963) 2 Cr LJ 178 .
414 King-Emperor v Akhileshwari Prasad, (1925) 4 Pat 646.
415 AIR 1987 SC 1507 ; 1987 Cr LJ 1857 .
416 Nandi Francis Nwazor v Narcotics Control Bureau, 1995 Cr LJ 665 (Del).
417 Param Hans Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1987 SC 955 : 1987 Cr LJ 789 : (1987) 2 SCC 197 .
418 Palvinder Kaur v State of Punjab, AIR 1952 SC 354 : 1953 Cr LJ 154 : 1953 SCR 94 . See

further, Keshroam Bora v State of Assam, AIR 1978 SC 1096 : 1978 Cr LJ 1089 ; Mohan Lal v Ajit
Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1183 : 1978 Cr LJ 1107 ; Bhagwan Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1976 SC
1797 : 1976 Cr LJ 1379 , noted elsewhere under this section.
419 State of Tamil Nadu v Kutty, AIR 2001 SC 2778 : 2001 Cr LJ 4168 .
420 Pargan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2014 SC 3790 : (2014) 14 SCC 619 (para 24), relying on

Balwinder Singh v State of Punjab, 1995 Supp (4) SCC 259 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 59 .
421 State of Karnataka v P Ravikumar, AIR 2018 SC 3993 : (2018) 9 SCC 614 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 25] Confession to police oﬃcer not to be proved.—
No confession [s 25.4] made to a police-oﬃcer [s 25.5] shall be proved as against a
person accused of any offence. [s 25.6]

COMMENT
[s 25.1] Principle.—
The Supreme Court explained the effect of provisions in these words.422
The fascicule of sections 24 to 30 aim to zealously protect the accused against
becoming the victim of his own delusion or the mechanisation of others to selfincriminate in crime. The confession, therefore, is not received with an assurance, if its
source be not omni suspicious mojes, above and free from the remotest taint of
suspicion. The mind of the accused before he makes a confession must be in a state
of perfect equanimity and must not have been operated upon by fear or hope or
inducement. Hence, threat or promise or inducement held out to an accused makes the
confession irrelevant and excludes it from consideration. A confession made to a
police oﬃcer while the accused is in the custody or made before he became an
accused, is not provable against him in any proceeding in which he is charged to the
commission of an offence. Equally a confession made by him, while in the custody of
the police oﬃcer, to any other person is also not probable in a proceeding in which he is
charged with the commission of the offence unless it is made in the immediate
presence of a Magistrate. Police oﬃcer is inherently suspect of employing coercion to
obtain confession. Therefore, the confession made to a police oﬃcer under section 25
should totally be excluded from evidence. The reasons seem to be that the custody of
police oﬃcer provides easy opportunities of coercion for extorting confession. Section
25 rests upon the principle that it is dangerous to depend upon a confession made to a
police oﬃcer which cannot extricate itself from the suspicion that it might have been
produced by the exercise of coercion. The legislative policy and practical reality
emphasise that a statement obtained, while the accused is in police custody, truly be
not the product of his free choice.
Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure enacts that neither statement made by
any person to a police-oﬃcer in the course of an investigation shall, if taken down in
writing, be signed by the person making it, nor shall such writing be used as evidence.

[s 25.2] Object.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Under the next section a confession made to a private person by a person in custody of
the police is inadmissible in evidence.

[s 25.3] Scope.—
This section covers a confession made by the accused when he was free and not in
police custody, as also a confession made before any investigation has begun.423 No
part of a ﬁrst information report lodged by the accused with the police could be
admitted into evidence if it was in the nature of a confessional statement. The
statement can, however, be admitted to identify the accused as the maker of the
report.424
Where in a case of murder, the FIR given by the accused contained confession as well
as incriminating facts, it was held to be not admissible in evidence.425
The confessional part of the FIR cannot be used in evidence against the accused
except to the limited extent allowed by section 27. But the non-confessional part can
be used against him as an evidence of conduct under section 8.426 A confessional
statement in the FIR was used for the purpose of examining whether the case fell
within Exception 1 of section 300, IPC and for throwing light on the origin of the quarrel
which resulted in the attack.427
A confession contained in a letter written and signed by the accused and addressed to
a police-oﬃcer was held to be admissible as the letter was not written in presence of
the police-oﬃcer.428

[s 25.4] "Confession".—
A confession must either admit in terms the offence, or at any rate substantially all the
facts which constitute the offence. No statement that contains self-exculpatory matter
can amount to a confession, if the exculpatory statement is of some fact which if true
would negative the offence alleged to be confessed.429 An admission of a gravely
incriminating fact, even a conclusively incriminating fact, is not of itself a confession,
e.g., an admission that the accused is the owner of and was in recent possession of
the knife or revolver which caused a death with no explanation of any other man's
possession.430 The accused can insist that the entire admission including the
exculpatory part must be tendered in evidence.431
Communication to another is not a necessary ingredient of the concept of
confession.432 The word "statement" includes both oral and written statement. If the
statement is an admission of guilt, it would amount to a confession whether it is
communicated to any one or not.433
This section does not exclude all statements by an accused to the police but only
confessions. There is a distinction between mere admission and confessions which
are statements either directly admitting guilt or suggesting the inference of guilt of the
crime charged. The general rule in the section is further subject to that which admits
statements leading to discovery whether they amount to confessions or not.

[s 25.5] "Police-oﬃcer".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The term cannot be construed in so wide a sense as to include persons on whom only
some of the powers exercised by the police are conferred.434 It applies to everypoliceoﬃcer and is not restricted to oﬃcers in a regular police force. Thus a Chowkidar,435 a
Police Patel,436 a village headman,437 an excise peon,438 and an excise oﬃcer,
according to the Calcutta439 and Bombay440 High Courts, are police-oﬃcers. A homeguard has been held by the Orissa High Court to be a police personnel for the purposes
of this section.441 But a member of a village defence party constituted under Assam
Village Defence Organisation Act, 1966 has been held to be not a police oﬃcer.442 A
grama rakhi has been held to be a police oﬃcer.443 The Supreme Court has held that
the test for determining whether a person is a police-oﬃcer for purposes of this section
would be whether the powers of a police oﬃcer which are conferred on him or which
are exercisable by him establish a direct or substantial relationship with the prohibition
enacted by this section, that is relating to the recording of a confession.444 A Central
Excise Oﬃcer who has the powers of a police-oﬃcer for investigation but not the power
to frame a charge-sheet under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not a
police-oﬃcer for the purposes of this section.445 A Customs Oﬃcer is not a policeoﬃcer.446 The Supreme Court held that a confessional statement made by an accused
person to the Superintendent of Excise under the provisions of the Bihar and Orissa
Excise Act, 1915 was inadmissible in evidence, since an Excise Oﬃcer was a police
oﬃcer within the meaning of section 25.447
The Supreme Court in Gulam Hussain Shaikh Chougule v S Reynolds448 cited the effect
of some earlier authorities as follows: "We hold that a statement recorded by Customs
Oﬃcers under section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962 is admissible in evidence. The
court has to test whether the inculpating portions were made voluntarily or whether it is
vitiated on account of any of the premises envisaged in section 24 of the Evidence
Act."449 The court also said that the provisions of section 16 CrPC are not applicable to
the recording of such confessions. The members of the Railway Protection Force
constituted under the Railway Protection Force Act, 1957, are not Police Oﬃcers.450 A
constable of the Rajasthan Armed Constabulary has been held to be not a police
oﬃcer. The FIR was lodged after a confessional statement was made before him. The
provisions of section 25 were not attracted.451 Confessional statements made to
Customs Oﬃcers have been held by the Supreme Court not to come within the
inhibitions of sections 24 and 25 because they are not police oﬃcers.452 An oﬃcer
under the FERA is not an oﬃcer in charge of a police station, though he has certain
powers which are similar to the powers of a police oﬃcer. The Act does not confer
upon him the power to lodge a report under section 173 CrPC. He can only ﬁle a
complaint. He is not competent to submit a report. Powers of investigation are not
conferred upon him. Hence he cannot be said to be a police oﬃcer.453 Accordingly the
statement of an accused person recorded by an oﬃcer under the Act is not excluded.
A Reserve Police Force Oﬃcer has been held to be a police oﬃcer appointed under the
State Reserve Police Force Act and an oﬃcer-in-charge of a police station under the
Bombay Police Act. But he is not a police oﬃcer for the purposes of Chapter XII of
CrPC. Hence, section 25 of the Evidence Act would not be attracted.454 A forest oﬃcer
under an Orissa legislation has been held to be not a police oﬃcer though certain
powers of police oﬃcers have been conferred on him. A confession made to such an
oﬃcer was held to be admissible in evidence.455
Oﬃcers empowered under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
have been held to be not police oﬃcers. Hence, a confessional statement made to
them was held to be admissible against the person making the confession.456

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 25.6] "Accused of any offence".—
This expression covers a person accused of an offence at the trial whether or not he
was accused of the offence when he made the confession.457
The concept was thus explained by the Supreme Court in Bheru Singh v State of
Rajasthan:458 By virtue of the provisions of section 25 of the Evidence Act, a
confession made to police oﬃcer is not admissible in evidence under any
circumstances. A confession made to a policeman even before investigation had
begun is also ruled out. The expression "accused of any offence" in section 25 would
cover the case of an accused who has since been put on trial, whether or not at the
time when he made the confessional statement, he was under arrest or in custody as
an accused. Inadmissibility of a confessional statement made to a police oﬃcer under
section 25 is based on the ground of public policy. The section excludes all statement
of incriminating nature made to a police oﬃcer whether made before or after becoming
an accused person.

[s 25.7] FIR in form of confession.—
The FIR written at the instance of a person who is accused of an offence is
inadmissible under section 25 unless some recovery in pursuance to the statement is
made and only that part is admissible.459 A confessional FIR cannot be used against
the accused himself or against his co-accused whom he implicated in it. If he offers
himself as a witness at the trial, the statements in the FIR can be used to contradict or
corroborate his testimony.460

[s 25.8] Confession under NDPS Act.—
A statement of the accused under section 67 of the Narcotic Drugs and Substances
Act, 1985 is not the same as a statement under section 161, CrPC. It can be used as a
confession against him. It is excluded from the operation of sections 24-27 of the
Evidence Act. A conviction can be based on it.461 The Supreme Court has added this
note of caution that such confession should be subjected to close scrutiny.462

[s 25.9] Confession in Departmental proceedings.—
A confession was made by the delinquent to the police in the course of Departmental
proceedings. This was held to be admissible. The court said that the embargo placed
on admissibility of confessions under section 25 does not apply to Departmental
proceedings.463

422 Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, 1994 Cr LJ 3139 , per K Ramaswamy J.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
423 Pakala Narayana Swami v King-Emperor, (1939) 66 IA 66 : 41 Bom LR 428 : 18 Pat 234 :

(1941) Ran 789n; A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 .
424 A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 , followed in KH Amulakh v

State of Gujarat, AIR 1972 SC 922 .
425 Metropolitan SJ, Vijayawada v B Srinivasa Rao, 1992 Cr LJ 3027 (AP).
426 Bheru Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1994) 1 Crimes 630 : (1994) 2 SCC 467 . The statements

showing the relationship of the accused with the deceased, the motive for multiple murders,
presence of the sister-in-law at the scene, were not in the nature of confessions, hence relevant
under sections 7 and 8.
427 Murli v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1994 SC 610 : 1994 Cr LJ 1114 .
428 Sita Ram v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 1906 : 1966 Cr LJ 1519 . Statement of an accused

made to police oﬃcer during investigation is inadmissible and it does not become admissible
merely because the accused is dead. Amar Singh v State of MP, 1996 Cr LJ 1582 (MP).Murli v
State of Rajasthan, 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 39 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 57 : AIR 1994 SC 610 : 1994 Cr LJ
1114 . A confessional FIR cannot be used for any purpose in favour of the prosecution and
against the accused, such a statement can be taken into account to examine whether the case
fell under Exception 1 to section 300, IPC particularly when there was no evidence disclosing as
to how the quarrel ensued and attack took place.
429 A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 .
430 Pakala Narayana Swami v King-Emperor, (1939) 66 IA 66 , at p 81 : 41 Bom LR 428 : 18 Pat

234 : (1941) Ran 789n.
431 A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 .
432 Sahoo v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 40 : 1966 Cr LJ 68 . See also, Luku Paike v State of Orissa,

1995 Cr LJ 1207 (Ori).
433 Shiv Karam Payaswami Tewari v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 1692 : (2009) 11 SCC

262 .
434 Raj Kumar Karwal v UOI, (1990) 2 SCC 409 : AIR 1991 SC 45 : (1990) 48 ELT 496 ; 1990 SCC

(Cr) 330 : 1991 Cr LJ 97 , an oﬃcer invested with some of the powers analogous with those of
an investigating police oﬃcer. (Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985).
435 Queen-Empress v Salemuddin Sheik, (1899) 26 Cal 569 ; King-Emperor v Pancham, (1933) 8

Luck 410 ; Emperor v Deokinandan, (1937) All 85 , FB; Budha Majhi, (1962) Cut 366. In the Punjab
a village chaukidar is held to be not a "police-oﬃcer": Khuda Bakhsh v The Crown, (1917) PR No.
42 of 1917 (Cr).
436 Empress v Rama Birapa, (1878) 3 Bom 12; Queen-Empress v Bhima, (1892) 17 Bom 485.
437 Lu Bein v Queen-Empress, (1889) SJLB 479; Po Sin v King-Emperor, (1907) 3 LBR 283.
438 Emperor v Dinshaw Driver, (1928) 31 Bom LR 49 .
439 Ibrahim Ahmad v King-Emperor, (1931) 58 Cal 1260 , dissenting from Ah Foong v Emperor,

(1918) 46 Cal 411 ; Ameen Sharif v Emperor, (1934) 61 Cal 607 FB.
440 Emperor v Nanoo, (1926) 28 Bom LR 1196 , 51 Bom 78 FB; overruling, Pereira v Emperor,

(1926) 28 Bom LR 674 .
441 State of Orissa v Dubuga Tubud, 1989 Cr LJ 1556 (Ori).
442 Akanman Bora v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 573 (Gau). A Kotwar has been held to be not a

police oﬃcer. State of MP v Premlal, 1987 Cr LJ 204 MP FB Alluri Ramayya v State of
Maharashtra, 1987 Cr LJ 1172 , confession to crowd, among whom a police patil was also
present, relevant.
443 Pandru Khadia v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 762 (Ori).
444 Raja Ram v State of Bihar, AIR 1964 SC 828 : 1964 Cr LJ 705 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
445 Badaku Joti v State of Mysore, AIR 1966 SC 1746 : 1966 Cr LJ 1353 . See, however, Rajendra

Kumar v State of UP, AIR 1966 All 42 .
446 State of Punjab v Barkat Ram, AIR 1962 SC 276 : (1962) 1 Cr LJ 217 . See, Maylavahanam,

(1947) Mad 788; Ramesh Chandra v State of West Bengal, (1968) 72 Bom LR 787 (SC); Deputy
Director ED Madras v P Mansoor Md Ali Jinnah, 1989 Cr LJ 2138 (Mad); UOI v Ashok Sukhadeo
Singh, 1991 Cr LJ 2359 (Bom). Also see, Supdt. of Customs and Central Excise, Nagercoil v R
Sunder, 1993 Cr LJ 956 , customs personnel, not to be construed as police personnel, though
powers are akin; Bashidhar Maharana v State of Bihar, 1993 Cr LJ 1310 .
447 Abdul Rashid v State of Bihar, AIR 2001 SC 2422 : 2001 Cr LJ 3290 . The court also held that

a conviction based only on the fact that the accused was found together with the co-accused
from whom the offending article was recovered and on the basis of the confession of the coaccused was liable to be set aside.
448 Gulam Hussain Shaikh Chougule v S Reynolds, 2001 Cr LJ 4755 : AIR 2001 SC 2930 .
449 A summarised version of the effect of the following authorities : Percy Rustomji Bosta v

State of Maharashtra, (1971) 1 SCC 847 : AIR 1971 SC 1087 : 1971 Cr LJ 933 and the three judge
Bench decision in Harbansingh Sardar Lenasingh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1972 SC 1224 :
1972 Cr LJ 759 ; Veera Ibrahim v State of Maharashtra, (1976) 2 SCC 302 : AIR SC 1167 : 1976 Cr
LJ 2761 and Poolpandi v Suptd. Central Excise, (1992) 3 SCC 259 : AIR 1992 SC 1795 : 1992 AIR
SCW 2012 : 1992 Cr LJ 2761 .
450

Hari Rachu v The State, (1971) 73 Bom LR 891 . Balkishan A Devidayal v State of

Maharashtra, 1980 Cr LJ 1424 : (1980) 17 ACC 300 , following, Badku Joti Savant v State of
Mysore, (1966) 3 SCR 698 : AIR 1966 SC 1746 : 1966 Cr LJ 1353 .Salim Mohamed Babul Miniyar
v State of Maharashtra, 2001 Cr LJ 58 (Bom), the accused confessed to RPF oﬃcer that he had
purchased stolen railway property. The confession was held to be relevant. Conviction on its
basis was not illegal. Santosh Kumar Karmakar v State of WB, 2001 Cr LJ 3828 (Cal) theft of
railway property, free and voluntary confession before RPF personnel, not ruled out from
evidence.
451 Ramesh Kumar v State of Rajasthan, 1999 Cr LJ 871 (Raj).
452 P Rustomji v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1971 SC 1087 : 1971 Cr LJ 933 ; Hazari Singh v UOI,

AIR 1973 SC 62 : 1974 Cr LJ 391 ; Asst. Collector of Customs v Vallabhdas, (1965) 3 SCR 854 :
AIR 1965 SC 481 : 1965 Cr LJ 490 and R.C. Mehta v West Bengal, (1969) 2 SCR 461 : AIR 1970
SC 940 ; Balkrishna v West Bengal, AIR 1974 SC 120 : 1974 Cr LJ 280 ; Assistant Collector, Central
Excise v C Fernandes, (1982) 3 SCC 512 : 1983 SCC (Cr) 109; Balkrishana Naik v State of MP,
2000 Cr LJ 4797 (MP), the Central Excise Oﬃcer under the Narcotic Drugs and Substances Act,
1985 is not a police oﬃcer. A statement made to him could be proved in evidence in accordance
with the provisions of that Act.
453 PS Barkathali v Director, Enforcement, AIR 1981 Ker 81 . Deputy Director ED Madras v P

Mansoor Md Ali Jinnah, 1989 Cr LJ 2138 , 2151. The same is the position of the oﬃcers
recording statements under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (61 of 1985).
See MB Rathod v State of Gujarat, 1989 Cr LJ 460 (Guj); Abdul Razak v Sudip, 1989 Cr LJ 2007
(Cal); Raj Kumar Karwal v UOI, 1991 Cr LJ 97 SC : AIR 1991 SC 45 : (1990) 2 SCC 405 : 1990 SCC
(Cri) 330 ; R.N Kaker v Shabir Fidahusein, 1990 Cr LJ 144 (Bom).
454 State of Gujarat v Anirudhsing, AIR 1997 SC 2780 : 1997 Cr LJ 3397 .
455 Matia Patel v State of Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 1897 (Ori).
456 Nathubhai Babarbhai Patel v State of Maharashtra, 2001 Cr LJ 536 (Bom).
457 A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 .
458 Bheru Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1994) 2 SCC 467 : (1994) 1 Crimes 630 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
459 Ram Beti v State of UP, 1996 Cr LJ 1512 (All); Naresh v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ (NOC) 19

(MP), the accused lodged FIR with the police that he killed the victim with a knife wound in the
abdomen, not allowed to be used as evidence because it was in the nature of a confession.
460 Bandlamuddi Atchuta Ramaiah v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 496 : (1996) 11 SCC 133 : 1996 Cr

LJ 4463 .
461 Kanhaiyalal v UOI, AIR 2008 SC 1044 : (2008) 4 SCC 668 , there was corroboration by other

evidence.
462 Francis Stanly v Intelligence Oﬃcer, Narcotic Central Bureau, AIR 2007 SC 794 : 2007 Cr LJ

1157 .
463 Commissioner of Police v Narender Singh, AIR 2006 SC 1800 : (2006) 4 SCC 265 : (2006)

128 DLT 801 : (2006) 3 Serv LR 31. The provisions of the Evidence Act are not applicable to
departmental proceedings.
Note—A Coroner has been declared to be a Magistrate for the purposes of this section, see the
Coroners Act, 1871 (4 of 1871), section 20.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 26] Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved
against him.—
No confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody [s 26.2] of a policeoﬃcer, [s 26.3] unless it be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate,shall be
proved as against such person.
464 [ Explanation. —In this section "Magistrate" does not include the head of a village

discharging magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 465 [***] or
elsewhere, unless such headman is a Magistrate exercising the powers of a
Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882.]

COMMENT
[s 26.1] Principle.—
Under this section no confession made by a person in custody to any person other than
a police-oﬃcer, shall be admissible, unless made in the immediate presence of a
Magistrate. Section 25 excludes confessions to police-oﬃcers under any
circumstances. This section excludes confessions to anyone else, while the person
making it is in a position to be inﬂuenced by a police-oﬃcer. The presence of the
Magistrate secures the free and voluntary nature of the confession and the confessing
person has an opportunity of making a statement uncontrolled by any fear of the
police.466 Thus, this section is a further extension of the principle laid down in section
25. Section 25 applies to all confessions made to police-oﬃcers, this section to
confessions made to persons other than police-oﬃcers but made while in police
custody. A confession made to a police-oﬃcer would, however, be admissible in
evidence under section 26 if it is made in the presence of a Magistrate and it is
recorded by him in the manner prescribed by section 164, Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898.467

[s 26.2] "Custody".—
Where the accused was in police custody regarding a different case on the date when
he was ﬁrst brought before the Magistrate for recording his confession, the Magistrate,
being aware of the procedure, instead of recording his confession on that date, sent
him to a correctional home and recorded his confession the next day. He also certiﬁed
that during the recording of the confession, no police personnel were present in his
chamber. It was held that the accused was not in police custody, when his confession
was recorded.468

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The words "in custody" which are to be found in this and other sections of the Act only
denote surveillance or restriction on the movements of the persons concerned, which
may be complete as, for instance, in the case of an arrested person, or may be
partial.469

[s 26.3] "Police-oﬃcer".—
A Jailor is not a police-oﬃcer, and a confession made to him may be given in
evidence.470

[s 26.4] Extra-judicial confessions.—
These are made by the party elsewhere than before a Magistrate or in court. The words
used by the accused in confessing are very much important and, therefore, the same
words would be necessary to give to the court an impression of what the true
confession was.471 The law in regard to extra-judicial confessions may be stated thus:
An extra-judicial confession, if voluntary, can be relied upon by the court along with
other evidence in convicting the accused.472 In examining the value of an extra-judicial
confession one factor is whether the accused was a free man while making his
confession. The second factor is that the value of the confession as an evidence on
veracity of the witness to whom it was made.473 A conviction can be founded on an
extra-judicial confession. It should be clear, speciﬁc and unambiguous. But it should
not be expected that the witness, in order to establish his credibility, should be able to
reproduce the statement in its word for word original version.474
An extra-judicial confession can be made to or before a private individual. It can also be
made before a magistrate who is not especially empowered to record confessions
under section 164 of CrPC or who receives the confession at a time when section 164
is not applying. The court also added that every inducement, threat or promise does not
vitiate a confession.475
Usually, and as a matter of caution, courts require some material corroboration to an
extra-judicial confessional statement.476 Extra-judicial confessions, voluntarily made
and fully consistent with circumstantial evidences establish the guilt of the
accused.477 Where the version of the accused as per the extra-judicial confession was
inconsistent with the medical evidence besides the same being retracted, conviction of
the accused solely on the basis of such extra-judicial confession was highly unsafe.478
A confession should be clear and unequivocal whether it is a judicial or extra-judicial
confession. The confession in this case which was made before a large number of
persons in the panchayat was more in general and vague terms. The court said that no
reliance could be placed on it.479 An extra-judicial confession was made before a
witness who was the close relative of the accused. The testimony of the witness was
found to be realistic and truthful. There was a delay of 20 days in recording his
statement which was suﬃciently explained by the investigating oﬃcer. A conviction on
the basis of the confession was held to be proper.480 A confession was supposed to
have been made to the former president of the Village Panchayat almost a week after
the occurrence. The president neither reduced it into writing nor produced the accused
before the police. Information was given to the police after many hours. The
confession was held to be unreliable.481 It was alleged that the accused assaulted the
deceased with a piece of stone. The extra-judicial confession made before the Village
Administrative Oﬃcer did not ﬁnd any corroboration on any general particulars.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Withholding of information as to the time at which the material record was prepared
also created doubt. The applicable procedure was also not followed. Confession was
not acceptable.482
The accused must be a freeman while making his confession. The evidentiary value of
the confessional statement depends on the credibility of the witness to whom it is
made.483
It is a well settled law that confession must be addressed to somebody. It has been
observed for the making of a confessional statement, communication to another
person is not necessary. Utterances made in soliloquy are also statements.484 Extrajudicial confession made before stock witness who was casually knowing the accused,
was held to be not acceptable.485 Where it was alleged that the accused made extrajudicial confession to a doctor and another person, both strangers and the same was
tape-recorded as if it was anticipated and the tape-recorder kept ready. It was held that
evidently it denoted inﬂuence and involuntariness.486 Where extra-judicial confession
was made to a stranger and exact words were not recorded and corpus deliciti, i.e.,
substance or foundation of an offence was also not available, it was held that the
confession could not be relied upon.487 It was wholly unlikely that the accused would
have made an extra-judicial confession to a person whom they never know.488
In Sakharam Shankar Bansode v State of Maharashtra,489 the Supreme Court held that
conviction could not be based solely on retracted extra-judicial confession. Where
details of alleged retracted extra-judicial confession were not extracted and there was
no corroborative evidence, the fact that the accused persons and the deceased were
together on the night of occurrence, might raise suspicion but it would not be suﬃcient
to hold the accused persons guilty.490
The Supreme Court considered the position of extra-judicial confession in State of
Karnataka v MN Ramdas.491 In this case, the accused killed his companion in a room in
a lodge where they were staying and was then supposed to have confessed to a
stranger just only because he was a friend of the owner of the lodge. The court
surveyed authorities on extra-judicial confession in order to support the relevancy of
the confession in this case492: "With regard to the extra judicial confession, the trial
court neither discarded nor relied upon it apparently for the reason that according to
the decision cited before him—Rahim Beg v State of UP.493 Such confession is a weak
evidence especially when it is made before a person with whom the accused had no
previous contacts. The learned Sessions Judge observed that even if the extra judicial
confession is eschewed from consideration the other circumstances referred to supra
are suﬃcient to establish the guilt of the accused."
Going further the court said: "We deem it appropriate to refer to a recent decision of
this court in Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan,494 wherein the evidentiary value to be
attached to the extra-judicial confession has been explained thus: 'It is settled position
of law that extra-judicial confession, if true and voluntary, it can be relied upon by the
court to convict the accused for the commission of the crime alleged. Despite inherent
weakness of extra-judicial confession as an item of evidence, it cannot be ignored
when shown that such confession was made before a person who has no reason to
state falsely and to whom it is made in the circumstances which tend to support the
statement. Relying upon an earlier judgment in Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh v State of
Vindhya Pradesh495 this court again in Maghar Singh v State of Punjab496 held the
evidence in the form of extra-judicial confession made by the accused to witness
cannot be always termed to be a tainted evidence. Corroboration of such evidence is
required only by way of abundant caution. If the court believes the witness before
whom the confession is made and is satisﬁed that the confession was true and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
voluntarily made, then the conviction can be founded on such evidence alone. In
Narayan Singh v State of MP497 this court cautioned that it is not open to the court
trying the criminal case to start with a presumption that extra-judicial confession is
always a weak type of evidence. It would depend on the nature of the circumstances,
the time when the confession is made and the credibility of the witnesses who speak
for such a confession. The retraction of extra-judicial confession which is a usual
phenomenon in criminal cases would itself not weaken the case of the prosecution
based upon such a confession. In Kishore Chand v State of HP498, this court held that
an unambiguous extra-judicial confession possesses high probative value force as it
emanates from the person who committed the crime and is admissible in evidence
provided it is free from suspicion and suggestion of any falsity. However, before relying
on the alleged confession, the court has to be satisﬁed that it is voluntary and is not the
result of inducement, threat or promise envisaged under section 24 of the Evidence Act
or was brought about in suspicious circumstances to circumvent sections 25 and 26.
The court is required to look into the surrounding circumstances to ﬁnd out as to
whether such confession is not inspired by any improper or collateral consideration or
circumvention of law suggesting that it may not be true. All relevant circumstances
such as the person to whom the confession is made the time and place of making it,
the circumstances in which it was made have to be scrutinized.'"
In Piara Singh v State of Punjab,499 the Supreme Court explained the value of an extrajudicial confession and observed that the law does not require that the evidence of an
extra-judicial confession should in all cases be corroborated. In the instant case, the
extra-judicial confession was proved by an independent witness (Sarpanch) who was a
responsible oﬃcer and who bore no animus against the appellants and was
corroborated by the recovery of an empty cartridge from the place of occurrence.
The Supreme Court held that minor discrepancies should be ignored in appreciating the
evidentiary value of an extra-judicial confession..500 In this case, the confession was
made inside the police station but its contents were disclosed to a witness a long
before they were reduced to writing. The bar of section 26 was not attracted.501
The principles which would make an extra-judicial confession an admissible piece of
evidence capable of forming the basis of conviction of an accused have been thus
summed up by Supreme Court:502
(i) The extra-judicial confession is a weak evidence by itself. It has to be examined

by the court with greater care and caution.
(ii) It should be made voluntarily and should be truthful.
(iii) It should inspire conﬁdence.
(iv) An extra-judicial confession attains greater credibility and evidentiary value if it

is supported by a chain of cogent circumstances and is further corroborated by
other prosecution evidence.
(v) For an extra-judicial confession to be the basis of conviction, it should not suffer

from any material discrepancies and inherent improbabilities.
(vi) Such statement essentially has to be proved like any other fact and in

accordance with law.
A confession to an under-trial co-prisoner was not allowed to be proved.503 Where the
accused whilst in police custody made a statement before the doctor that the injury on
his person was caused by the murdered person, as the statement does not amount to a
confession, it is not barred under this section but can be relied upon as an admission
under section 21 of the fact that he was in the deceased's room.504

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

464 Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, section 3.
465 The words "or in Burma" omitted by the A.O. 1937.
466 Hiran Miya, (1877) 1 CLR 21 .
467 Zwinglee Ariel v State of MP, AIR 1954 SC 15 : 1954 Cr LJ 230 . Sarkar Mardi v State of WB,

1992 Cr LJ 367 (Cal), where a confession so recorded inspired all round conﬁdence, it being
immaterial that no counsel was made available to the indigent accused at that time. Hemant
Kumar v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 3239 (All), not recorded by observing the requirements of
section 164 CrPC, no good confession.
468 Mohd. Jamiludin Nasir v State of WB, (2014) 7 SCC 443 (paras 27 to 30) : AIR 2014 SC 2587

.
469 Harban Singh v State, (1968) 71 Bom LR 599 .Ram Singh v Sonia, AIR 2007 SC 1218 : 2007

Cr LJ 1642 : (2007) 3 SCC 1 , the accused in hospital at the time of his statement. There was
nothing to show any custody established on him by the police.
470 Queen-Empress v Bhima, (1892) 17 Bom 485; Queen-Empress v Tatya, (1895) 20 Bom 795;

State of Gujarat v Anirudhsing, AIR 1997 SC 2780 : 1997 Cr LJ 3397 , confession to a Reserve
Police Force Oﬃcer who was on duty at the place of occurrence. There was evidence of another
police oﬃcer who stated that a confession was made to someone. This was held to be hearsay.
The statement in FIR could not be used to corroborate it. The statement to the RPF personnel
was not on record.
471 Bhanwar Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1988 Cr LJ 1054 (Raj). See further, Sudhir Sarkar v State

of Tripura, 1992 Cr LJ 13 (Gau), where what the accused said was not produced and he was kept
chained till arrival of police, confession unreliable. Extra-judicial confession must be free from
suspicion and must be within reasonable time and corroborated by circumstantial evidence.
Chandraiahgari Ananthareddi v State of AP, 1996 Cr LJ 2109 (AP). Balvinder Singh v State of
Punjab, 1996 Cr LJ 883 : AIR 1996 SC 607 : 1995 Supp (4) SCC 259 , confession to a
socialworker, suspicious, because the accused remained with the police even though for some
other crime. Kailash v State of Rajasthan, 1995 Cr LJ 3111 (Raj), witness did not tell the police
about the confession during confession, doubtful. Extra-judicial confession made in the custody
of police cannot be made the basis of conviction as the same cannot be said to be voluntary.
Kausar Ali Gazi v State of WB, 1996 Cr LJ 1745 (Cal). State of HP v Diwana, 1995 Cr LJ 3002
(HP), confession to the inimical village pradhan, unbelievable.
472 Mulk Raj v State of UP, AIR 1959 SC 902 : 1959 Cr LJ 1219 ; Francis Stanly v Intelligence

Oﬃcer, Narcotic Control Bureau, AIR 2007 SC 794 : 2007 Cr LJ 1157 , value of extra-judicial
confession explained. Farid Khan v State of J&K, 2000 Cr LJ 2680 (J&K), the conviction was
based on a voluntary confession by the accused, no infraction or violation of any rule of
substantive or procedural law was made out. Conviction was held to be legal. The trial was
under the Ranbir Penal Code (12 of 1989).Jaswant Gir v State of Punjab, (2005) 12 SCC 438 ,
extra-judicial confession found to be not reliable. State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11
SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 : 2005 Cr LJ 3950 , retracted confession requires corroboration,
extent of requisite corroboration explained. The court also explained the effect of delay in
retraction and inconsistent grounds of retraction. Statements made to TV and press reporters

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
by the accused in immediate presence of and while in police custody, held, inadmissible.
Relationship between confession and admission explained.
473 Chattar Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2009 SC 378 : 2009 Cr LJ 319 . Kusuma Ankama v

State of AP, AIR (2008) SC 2819 : 2008 Cr LJ 3502 : (2008) 13 SCC 257 , the accused should be
a free man at the time.
474 Shiva Karam Payaswami Tewari v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 1692 : (2009) 11 SCC

262 ; Kusuma Ankama Rao v State of AP, AIR 2008 SC 2819 : 2008 Cr LJ 3502 : (2008) 13 SCC
257 , conviction on its basis when the witness passes the rigorous test of credibility; Ajay Singh
v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2007 SC 2188 : (2007) 12 SCC 341 exact words need not be
reproduced, but there should not material or vital difference.
475 State of Punjab v Harjagdev Singh, AIR 2009 SC 2693 : (2009) 16 SCC 91 . The confession

was made in this case to a village resident, but proper procedure for recording the same was
not followed.
476 Ratan Gonda v State of Bihar, AIR 1959 SC 18 : 1959 Cr LJ 108 . Piara Singh v State of

Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 2274 : 1977 Cr LJ 1941 , followed in Jarinakhatun v State of Assam, 1992 Cr
LJ 733 , 735 (Gau), where the extra-judicial confession was testiﬁed to the court by as many as
six independent witnesses; Badhna Kharia v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 1412 (Gau), where the
court added that where such a confession is spoken by a person having no reason to state
falsely against the accused, it is of material value. Nirmal Singh v State of HP, 1987 Cr LJ 1644
(HP), confession made several days after the incident and that too to a person living 80 to 90
miles away from the residence of the accused, rejected.
477 Gokaraju Venkatanarasa Raju v State of AP, (1993) 3 Crimes 235 : 1993 Supp (4) SCC 191 .

Extra judicial confession corroborated by circumstantial evidence, held, could not be brushed
aside as unreliable, State of Kerala v Mani, 1992 Cr LJ 1682 (Ker). Chhinder Singh v State of
Rajasthan, 1993 Cr LJ 1616 (Raj), can be used for corroboration of other material on record. S.V
Chalke v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3364 (Bom), requires suﬃcient and reliable
corroboration. Extra-judicial confession, no corroboration, cannot be relied upon, Naga Reddy v
State of AP, 1994 Cr LJ 2545 .
478 Chhittar v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1994 SC 214 : 1994 Cr LJ 245 : (1995) Supp 4 SCC 519.
479 Kishan Lal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1999 SC 3062 : (2000) 1 SCC 310 : 1999 Cr LJ 4070 .
480 Ram Khilari v State of Rajasthan, 1999 Cr LJ 1450 : AIR 1999 SC 1002 .
481 Inspector of Police v Palanisamy, AIR 2009 SC 1012 : 2009 Cr LJ 788 .
482 State of TN v Manmatharaj, AIR 2009 SC 1757 : (2008) 16 SCC 61 .
483 Mohd. Azad v State of WB, AIR 2009 SC 1307 : (2008) 15 SCC 449 .
484 Ajay Singh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2007 SC 2188 : (2007) 12 SCC 341 .
485 Tarseem Kumar v Delhi Administration, 1995 Cr LJ 470 : AIR 1994 SC 2585 : 1994 Supp (3)

SCC 374 .
486 State of Haryana v Ved Prakash, AIR 1994 SC 468 : 1994 Cr LJ 140 .
487 Palani v State of TN, 1993 Cr LJ 1679 (Mad); Sandeep v State of Haryana, AIR 2001 SC 1103

: 2001 Cr LJ 1456 the reason for the accused persons to go to the residence of the witness for
the purpose of confessing to their crimes not made clear; that person did not have the status of
inﬂuence in the society so as to be of any help; the statement of the witness was that only one
of the accused persons confessed. All this made the statement unreliable.
488 Sunny Kapoor v State (UT) of Chandigarh, AIR 2006 SC 2242 : (2006) 10 SCC 182 : 2006 Cr

LJ 2920 .
489 Sakharam Shankar Bansode v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1994 SC 1594 : 1994 Cr LJ 2189 .
490 Uttam Sadda v State of Punjab, 1993 Cr LJ 2597 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 1020 .
491 State of Karnataka v MN Ramdas, AIR 2002 SC 3109

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
492 Ibid, pp 3111-3112.
493 Rahim Beg v State of UP, (1972) 3 SCC 759 : AIR 1973 SC 343 : 1972 Cr LJ 1260 . See also

State of Karnataka v AB Nagaraj, AIR 2003 SC 666 , allegation that the girl was killed by her father
and step-mother in the national park, confession made by them during detention in forest oﬃce.
This was not mentioned in the report given to the police, nor any witness was present at that
time, confession not relied upon.
494 Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan, (2001) 2 SCC 205 : AIR 2001 SC 330 : AIR SCW 4439 : 2001

Cr LJ 487 .
495 Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh v State of Vindhya Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 322 : 1954 Cr LJ 910 .
496 Maghar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 1320 : 1975 Cr LJ 1102 .
497 Narayan Singh v State of MP AIR 1985 SC 1678 at p 1680 : 1985 Cr LJ 1862 .
498 Kishore Chand v State of HP, AIR 1990 SC 2140 : 1990 Cr LJ 2289 .
499 Piara Singh v State of Punjab, (1977) 4 SCC 452 at p 459 : AIR 1977 SC 2274 : 1977 Cr LJ

1941 . Polyami Sukada v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 2977 : 2010 Cr LJ 4273 : (2010) 12 SCC 142 ,
an extra-judicial confession need not be corroborated in all cases. Conviction can be based
solely on such confession. In this case, the witnesses of confession did not inspire conﬁdence.
Their evidence was slippery. Conviction was not proper even if there was recovery of weapon on
the basis of confession.
500 State of AP v Gangula Satya Murthy, AIR 1997 SC 1585 : 1997 Cr LJ 774 . State of MP v

Nisar, AIR 2007 SC 2316 : (2007) 5 SCC 658 , an extra-judicial confession made even before the
FIR was lodged, but not mentioned in the FIR, reliability doubtful, improbable that the informant
must have forgotten, recovery of the weapon on the basis of confession but blood stain on it
matched with that of the deceased, not acceptable.
501 Ibid
502 Sahadevan v State of Tamil Nadu, (2012) 6 SCC 403 .
503 Heramba Brahma v State of Assam, AIR 1982 SC 1595 : 1983 Cr LJ 149 : (1982) 3 SCC 351 :

1983 SCC (Cri) 40 .
504 K Padayachi v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1972 SC 66 : 1972 Cr LJ 11 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 27] How much of information received from accused may be proved.—
Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information [s 27.5] received from a person accused of any offence, [s 27.6] in the
custody of a police-oﬃcer, [s 27.7] so much of such information, whether it amounts to
a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be
proved.

COMMENT
[s 27.1] Principle.—
This section is founded on the principle that if the confession of the accused is
supported by the discovery of a fact it may be presumed to be true and not to have
been extracted. It comes into operation only:
(1) if and when certain facts are deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from an accused person in police custody; and
(2) if the information relates distinctly to the fact discovered.
The broad ground for not admitting confessions made under inducement, threat or
promise to a police-oﬃcer is the danger of admitting false confessions, but the
necessity for the exclusion disappears in a case provided for by this section when the
truth of the confession is guaranteed by the discovery of facts in consequence of the
information given.505
Section 27 starts with the word "provided". Therefore, it is a proviso by way of an
exception to sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act.506 This section is based on the
view that if a fact is actually discovered in consequence of information given, some
guarantee is afforded thereby that the information was true and accordingly can be
safely allowed to be given in evidence. But clearly the extent of the information
admissible must depend on the exact nature of the fact discovered to which such
information is required to relate.507
It is proper for the prosecution if they want to adduce evidence under this section to
prove by production of written record only so much of the statement as led to the
discovery of the article. An oral statement, without corroboration by any written record
of any such statement contemporaneously made, even if admissible, is unsafe to rely
on.508

[s 27.1.1] Doctrine of Conﬁrmation.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In the light of section 27, whatever information given by the accused, in consequence
of which a fact is discovered, only would be admissible in evidence, whether such
information amounts to a confession or not. The basic idea embedded under this
section is the doctrine of conﬁrmation by subsequent events. The doctrine is founded
on the principle that if any fact is discovered in a search made on the strength of any
information obtained from a prisoner, such a discovery is a guarantee that the
information supplied by the prisoner is true. The information might be confessional or
non-inculpatory in nature, but if it results in discovery of a fact, it becomes a reliable
information.509

[s 27.2] Object.—
The Supreme Court has held that in order that this section may apply the prosecution
must establish that the information given by the accused led to the discovery of some
fact deposed to by him. The discovery must be of some fact which the police had not
previously learnt from other sources and that the knowledge of the fact was ﬁrst
derived from information given by the accused.510

[s 27.3] Scope.—
The Supreme Court has held that this section controls sections 24, 25 and 26.511 This
section is applicable only if confessional statement leads to discovery of some new
fact.512
It is fallacious to treat the "fact discovered" in this section as equivalent to the object
produced: the fact discovered embraces the place from which the object is produced
and the knowledge of the accused as to this, and the information given must relate
distinctly to this fact. Information as to the past user, or the past history of the object
produced is not related to its discovery in the setting in which it is discovered.
Information supplied by a person in custody that "I will produce a knife concealed in the
roof of my house" does not lead to the discovery of a knife. It leads to the discovery of
the fact that a knife is concealed in the house of the informant to his knowledge; and if
the knife is proved to have been used in the commission of the offence, the fact
discovered is very relevant. But if to the statement the words be added "with which I
stabbed A", these words are inadmissible since they do not relate to the discovery of
the knife in the house of the informant.
The diﬃculty, however great, of proving that a fact discovered on information supplied
by the accused is a relevant fact can afford no justiﬁcation for reading into this section
something which is not there, and admitting in evidence a confession barred by section
26. Except in cases in which the possession or concealment of an object constitutes
the gist of the offence charged, it can seldom happen that information relating to the
discovery of a fact forms the foundation of the prosecution case. It is only one link in
the chain of proof, and the other links must be forged in manner allowed by law.513
The information becomes admissible only to the extent of the part leading to the
discovery of a fact. The facts discovered should be such which are in exclusive
knowledge of the accused and none else. If the Investigating Oﬃcer, after recording
information under section 27 of the Act from an accused in his custody, recovers some
incriminating article from an open place accessible to all and sundry, the information
and the discovery lose signiﬁcance. Likewise, if the fact discovered is known to the
Investigating Oﬃcer in advance, then the discovery made in furtherance of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
subsequent information recorded under section 27 at the instance of the accused
would be inconsequential.514
The information given by an accused person to a police-oﬃcer leading to the discovery
of a fact which may or may not prove incriminating has been made admissible in
evidence by the section unless compulsion has been used in which case it will be an
infringement of Article 20(3) of the Constitution.515 Where the fact is discovered not at
the instance of the accused but on the basis of information supplied by him, the
Supreme Court said that such information is admissible so long as it is the immediate
and proximate cause of discovery. The fact that the informant accused was not taken
to the spot of recovery would have no bearing on admissibility but it might be one of
the aspects that goes into evaluation of the particular piece of evidence.516 Signing of
the information statement by the accused in contravention of section 162(1), CrPC, has
been held by the Supreme Court to be not detracting from its admissibility to the extent
to which it is otherwise relevant.517 Simultaneous disclosure by more than one
accused also does not render it inadmissible but it may go towards evaluation.518
Where the participation of the accused persons in the incident has been proved by
unimpeachable ocular evidence, the fact that no incriminating materials were
recovered from them was held to be not a ground in itself for their acquittal.519
Where the discovery is otherwise reliable, its evidentiary value has been held to be not
diluted by the fact that the provisions of section 100(4) or (5), CrPC were not complied
with.520

[s 27.3.1] Signature upon statement.—
It is not obligatory on the part of the investigating oﬃcer to get the signature of the
accused on a confessional statement recorded under section 27.521

[s 27.4] Sections 25, 26, 27.—
The scope and effect of the provisions of these sections are as follows522:—
(i) No confession made to a police-oﬃcer by an accused person whether in custody

or not can be proved against the accused unless it be made in the immediate
presence of a Magistrate.
(ii) So much of the information received from a person accused of an offence in

custody of a police-oﬃcer as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered is
admissible under section 27 and can be proved against him; but any statement
made to a police-oﬃcer which connects the fact discovered with the offence
charged is inadmissible.
(iii) The statement of the accused while in police custody regarding the

concealment of any article or the accused's knowledge of its whereabouts and
the discovery in consequence of the said statement is admissible in
evidence.523

[s 27.5] "When any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The "fact" must be a "relevant fact" (section 5). The fact said to have been discovered
in consequence of information received from a person accused of an offence must be
of a kind which such information really helps to bring to light and which it would be
diﬃcult to ﬁnd out otherwise before it can be treated as of any substantial probative
value.524 The fact must be the consequence, and the information the cause of its
discovery. The information and the fact should be connected with each other as cause
and effect. The fact discovered must be in consequence of the information received
from the accused, and the fact should not have been already within the prior knowledge
of the police. The information should be free from any element of compulsion.525 If any
portion of the information does not satisfy this test, it should be excluded.526 In order
to utilise the provisions of this section against an accused person an ordinary recovery
cannot be turned into a discovery.527 That portion of the information which merely
explains the material thing discovered is not admissible under this section and cannot
be proved.528 Where a suspect in the custody of police makes a statement that he
committed murder and removed ornaments which he produced later, the ﬁrst part of
the statement does not fall under this section because it is not a statement required to
lead up to the production of the property.529 In a case of burglary a statement made by
the accused in police custody that he would show the place where he had hidden the
ornaments when that statement leads to the discovery of the ornaments is
admissible.530 Where recovery of the dead bodies of the victims from covered gutters
and their personal belongings from other places disclosed by the accused stood fully
established, it cast a duty on the accused to explain as to how they alone had the
information leading to the recoveries, which was admissible under this section. Failure
of the accused to give an explanation or giving of false explanation is an additional
circumstance against the accused.531
In order that a "discovery" may come under the provisions of this section, the place
from which the incriminating article was recovered must be a place of concealment
which would be diﬃcult or impossible for the police to discover without some
assistance from the accused.532 The discovery of a pistol, the murder weapon at the
instance of the accused from a place which was a public thoroughfare was held to be
not relevant.533 Recovery of the wearing apparel of the deceased more than three
weeks after the occurrence from a public place, a burrow pit nearby the place of
murder, was held to be irrelevant.534 Recovery of dead bodies three months after the
incident from an open ﬁeld which was surrounded by other ﬁelds did not constitute any
evidence under this section. It was not such a place of concealment about which
exclusive knowledge could have been attributed to the accused.535
The accused from outside the State were arrested within the limits of some other
police station, without following the procedure laid down under section 166, CrPC,
1973. Recovery on their alleged voluntary disclosure statement, was not admissible.536
Where the disclosure statement of the accused led to the recovery of crime articles
from a concealed place, it was held that prosecution should lead the best possible
evidence instead of escaping its responsibility by pleading lapse of memory on
account of passage of time or contending that no question was put to the prosecution
witness.537
Disclosure statement is not a substantive evidence to convict the accused persons but
it is only a corroborative evidence.538

[s 27.5.1] Failure of Investigating Oﬃcer to state details of information.—
The failure of the Investigating Oﬃcer to state the details of the information given by
the accused, makes the information inadmissible.539

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 27.5.1.1] Fact discovered.—
The "fact discovered" as envisaged under section 27 embraces the place from where
the object was produced, the knowledge of the accused as to it, but the information
must relate distinctly to that object.540 The facts need not be self-probatory and the
word "fact" as contemplated in section 27 is not limited to "actual physical material
object".541
Mere recovery of incriminating articles at the instance of the accused is not enough to
incriminate the accused unless it is also established that the recovered articles
connect the accused with the alleged crime.542

[s 27.5.1.2] Discovery in consequence of information given by another person.—
In the instant case, a scooter was recovered pursuant to the statement made by
another person (investigation witness) and not on the basis of any disclosure
statements made by the accused persons, given in the form of confessional
statements. Hence, section 27 was not attracted.543

[s 27.6] "Information received from a person accused of any offence".—
The Patna High Court has held that the statement must be of a person who was then
an accused. If at the time when the confession was made, the person making it was
not an accused person, the statement would not be admissible. A husband who had
fatally assaulted his wife immediately went to the police-station and stated, "I went into
the west facing room and ﬁnding my wife sitting, wounded her and she became
senseless". In consequence of this information the Sub-Inspector went to the house of
the informant and found the corpse of the woman in that room. It was held that as the
informant had not, up to the time of making the statement, been in the custody of a
police oﬃcer, the statement was not admissible.544
The expression "accused of any offence" is descriptive of the person against whom
evidence relating to information alleged to be given by him is made provable by this
section. It does not predicate a formal accusation against him at the time of making
the statement sought to be proved, as a condition of its applicability.545 Statement
leading to recovery must be proved. Where recovery took place twenty three days after
the statement, the informant being still not charged, and ultimately charged only as an
abettor, the Supreme Court upheld the exclusion of the evidence.546 Where there was
no statement on the part of the accused, recoveries were held to be useless.547
The words "accused of any offence" have been held to be descriptive of the person
making the statement. It cannot be said that section 27 would operate only after formal
arrest under section 46(1), CrPC. Recoveries were made on the basis of their
statements a day before their formal arrest but they were in police custody. Their
statements were not regarded as inadmissible under the section. Most of the
recoveries made in the presence of the grand-father of the deceased and the
investigating sub-inspector. The court said that their evidence could not be disbelieved
only on the ground that they were interested in the success of the prosecution. No
circumstance of materially adverse nature was brought forth.548

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 27.7] "In the custody of a police-oﬃcer".—
"Custody" does not necessarily mean detention or conﬁnement. A person who makes a
statement to a police-oﬃcer voluntarily confessing that he had committed an act which
the penal law regards as an offence, submits himself to the custody of the said oﬃcer
is within the meaning of this section.549
The statement of an accused person in custody to a police oﬃcer as a result of which
the murder weapon and a blood-stained bed sheet were recovered was held to be
admissible in evidence even though it was taken by the oﬃcer without the presence of
any witnesses.550

[s 27.8] Witnesses of Discovery.—
Where there was no evidence of the discovery statement and, therefore, it could not be
proved, the consequential recovery at the instance of the accused was not taken into
evidence.551 There was recovery of dead body, weapon and blood stained soil from the
house of the accused. The witness of recovery was not resident in the immediate
proximity of the house of the accused. Persons in the proximity were not joined though
available. There was also discrepancy over the fact whether the witness was called or
himself chanced to be there. The evidence of recovery was held to be doubtful.552

[s 27.9] Disclosure under duress, pressure or threat, etc.—
The information which the accused furnishes to the police oﬃcer and which leads to
the discovery of a fact is admissible in evidence. But admissibility by itself is not
enough. The court has to see whether disclosure was of voluntary origin.553

505 Bulaqi v The Crown, (1928) 9 Lah 671, 675. For another case of the same kind see, State of

Kerala v Ammini, 1988 Cr LJ 107 : AIR 1988 Ker 1 ; the evidence discovered under this section is
not important where there is direct evidence. Parduman Sinh v State of Gujarat, AIR 1992 SC 881
: 1992 Cr LJ 1111 , communal violence. Shivaji Gana Naik v State of Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 471
(Bom), the accused stated that injuries on his person were due to dog bite, but only one such
injury was found, evidence not admissible because it was not supported by any discovery.
506 Musheer Khan v State of MP, (2010) 2 SCC 748 .
507 Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v State of Bombay, (1955) SCR 903 : 1955 Cr LJ 196 : AIR

1955 SC 104 . Mahendra Mandal v State of Bihar, 1991 Cr LJ 1030 , information is usable only
against the accused giving it.
508 Panchu Gopal v State of WB, AIR 1968 Cal 38 ; State of Karnataka v David Rozario, 2002 Cr

LJ 4127 : AIR 2002 SC 3272 the Supreme Court explains the extent of information which is
admissible and the principle behind the section and also the anomalous effect of the
requirement that the statement of disclosure should occur while the accused person is in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
custody. The Supreme Court also explained whether the evidence of recovery could be the sole
basis of conviction.
509 State of Maharashtra v Damu Gopinath Shinde, (2000) 6 SCC 269 : AIR 2000 SC 1691 , See

also Pawan Kumar v State of UP, (2015) 7 SCC 148 , para 29; Raja v State of Haryana, (2015) 11
SCC 43 , paras 15 to 18.
510 Jaffer Hussein Dastagir v State of Maharashtra, AIR (1969) 73 Bom LR 26 : AIR 1970 SC

1934 : 1970 Cr LJ 1659 . Recoveries are not a material evidence where there is direct evidence.
Pradumansinh Kalubha v State of Gujarat, (1992) Cr LJ 1111 : AIR 1992 SC 881 : 1992 AIR SCW
650
511 A Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 ; Mathura v King-Emperor,

(1945) 24 Pat 671.
512 Navaneethakrishnan v State by Inspector of Police, AIR 2018 SC 2027 .
513 Pulukuri Kottaya v Emperor, (1946) 49 Bom LR 508 : 74 IA 65 : AIR 1947 PC 67 : 1947 Cr LJ

533 . See also, Udai Bhan v State of UP, AIR 1962 SC 1116 : (1962) 2 Cr LJ 251 and Prabhoo v
State of UP, AIR 1963 SC 1113 : 1963 Cr LJ 341 ; Joseph, (1951) TC 417 ; Kuruvila Joseph, (1952)
TC 261 ; Raghava Nadar Reghu v State of Kerala, 1988 Cr LJ 1364 (Ker).
514 State of Rajasthan v Mangal Singh, AIR 2017 Raj 68 : 2017 (1) RLW 716 (Raj).
515 State of Bombay v Kathi Kalu, AIR 1961 SC 1808 : 64 Bom LR 240 : (1961) 2 Cr LJ 856 .
516 State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 .
517 Ibid
518 Ibid
519 Krishna Mochi v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 2645 (SC).
520 Musheer Khan v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 .
521

Natarajan v UT of Pondicherry, 2003 Cr LJ 2372 (Mad), following the Supreme Court

decision in State of Rajasthan v Teja Ram, 1999 Cr LJ 2588 (SC). The contrary opinion expressed
in 1998 Cr LJ 2479 (Kant) and (2002) 1 Mad LW (Cri) 145 is no longer good law. A statement
leading to recoveries becomes an informative statement.
522 For a full discussion of the law relating to confession contained in sections 24 to 30, see, A

Nagesia v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 119 : 1966 Cr LJ 100 .
523 Narayan, (1953) Hyd 32.
524 Nga Shwe Tat v Queen-Empress, (1897) 1 UBR (1897-1901) 152.Murugan v State of TN, AIR

2008 SC 2876 : (2008) 11 SCC 610 , shopkeeper's servant killed his wife after closing the shop
from inside, runaway after opening and seeing owner arrived, blood-stained clothes recovered at
his instance, relevant.
525 State (NCT) of Delhi v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 .
526 Sukhan v Crown, (1929) 10 Lah 283, 293 FB; King-Emperor v Ramanujam, (1934) 58 Mad

642 FB Vinod Kumar Vaidh v State, 1992 Cr LJ 3674 (Del), disclosure statement must lead to
discovery. Anter Singh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC 4197 : (2004) 7 SCC 779 , the
expression "fact discovered" explained, and also the various requirements of the section
restated in point form. The concept of statement which distinctly relates to discovery also
explained. Dead body was recovered from an open place after 25 days, a pistol was recovered
from near about the same place. The whole evidence was regarded as a doubtful.
527 Amin v State of UP, AIR 1958 All 293 . Thus, where the accused spoke nothing but only

showed the way to the place from where a few personal articles of the deceased were
recovered, section 8 was held to apply and not this section. Amar Layek v State of West Bengal,
1988 Cr LJ 1293 (Cal). Sambhu Bora v State of Assam, 1987 Cr LJ 1027 (Gau), where the
statement which was supposed to have brought about the discovery was not cited, hence
evidence rejected. Dadasaheb Patalu Misal v State of Maharashtra, 1987 Cr LJ 1512 (Bom),

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
nothing to connect the thing recovered with the crime in question. Where the disclosure
statement did not bear the signatures or thumb impression of the accused and the punch
witnesses were also not examined at trial to testify its authenticity, the statement could not be
relied upon, Jackaran Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1995 SC 2345 : 1995 Cr LJ 3992 .
528 HP Administration v Om Prakash, AIR 1972 SC 975 : 1972 Cr LJ 606 ; Dhananjay Chatterjee v

State of WB, (1994) 2 SCC 220 , fact discovered includes the discovery of the object found, the
place from which it is produced and the knowledge of the accused as to its existence. Suresh
Chandra Bahri v State of Bihar, AIR 1994 SC 2420 : 1994 Cr LJ 3271 , articles used in wrapping
the dead body and pieces of saree belonging to the deceased were seized from a place of
hiding at the instance of the accused. Discovery was made soon after the arrest of the accused.
The articles were identiﬁed by the witnesses. No public witness was produced. The IO also did
not record the disclosure statements. Even so, the evidence was held to be good. Mohibur
Rahman v State of Assam, 2000 Cr LJ 4725 (Gau) recovery of dead body and wearing apparels
at the instance of the accused.
529 Emperor v Bhikha Gober, (1943) 45 Bom LR 884 : (1944) Bom 25.
530 Chinnaswamy v State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1962 SC 1788 : (1963) Cr LJ 1 .
531 Suresh v State of Haryana, AIR 2015 SC 518 (para 8) : 2015 Cr LJ 661 .
532 Sadhu Singh v State, AIR 1967 P&H. 14; Amin v State of UP, AIR 1958 All 293 . See also,

Mohd. Inayatullah v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1976 SC 461 : (1977) 1 SCC 669 , discovery from
an open platform; SV Chalke v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3364 , article discovered from an
open place. Articles recovered on information of the accused from open place, not in his
occupation, held, section 27 not attracted, Kabul v State of Rajasthan, 1992 Cr LJ 1491 (Raj),
Ganpat Kisan v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 792 (Bom), weapon recovered from open space
on footpath. But the Ghuraiyha v State of MP, 1990 Cr LJ 1129 (MP), recovery of articles
connected with rape from a place of concealment on information given by the accused held
relevant: Pandru Khadia v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 762 (Ori), discovery of the instrument from
place known only to the accused, relevant; following Pohalya Motya Vlavi v State of Maharashtra,
AIR 1979 SC 1949 : 1979 Cr LJ 1310 , authorship of concealment is the important fact
discovered. Aftab Ahmad Ansari v State of Uttaranchal, AIR 2010 SC 773 : (2010) 2 SCC 583 , the
accused stated that he was ready to disclose the place where he had concealed the clothes of
the deceased, the same were recovered from that very place, held admissible evidence.
533 Dudh Nath Pandey v State of UP, AIR 1981 SC 911 : (1981) 2 SCC 166 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 379 :

1981 Cr LJ 618 : (1981) 2 SCR 711 : 1981 All LJ 328.
534 Abdul Sattar v UT, Chandigarh, AIR 1986 SC 1438 : 1986 Cr LJ 1072 : 1985 Supp SCC 599 :

1985 SCC (Cri) 505 , See further, Balkar Singh v State of UP, 1990 Cr LJ 77 , articles recovered
which cannot be identiﬁed as those belonging to the accused, not relevant. The court also
pointed out that stage-managed recoveries would serve no purpose.
535 Makhan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1988 SC 1705 : 1988 Supp SCC 526 : 1988 SCC (Cri)

916 . See also Kora Ghasi v State of Orissa, AIR 1983 SC 360 ; 1983 Cr LJ 69 (2) : (1983) 2 SCC
251 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 387 , recovery from an open place does not carry much weight; State of
Rajasthan v Sukhpal Singh, (1983) 1 SCC 393 : 1983 Cr LJ 1923 : AIR 1984 SC 207 : 1983 SCC
(Cri) 213 , recovery of heavy stolen object abandoned on chase. Jit Singh v State of Punjab, 1988
Cr LJ 39 (P&H), recovery of earrings about which there was no proof that they were on the
person of the deceased at the material time. As against this in Santosh v State of Kerala, 1991 Cr
LJ 570 (Ker), where proof was available that the ornaments discovered at the instance of the
accused were on the person of the deceased at the material time, the discovery was relevant
under the section.
536 Thimmareddy v State of Karnataka, (2014) 13 SCC 408 (para 14) : 2014 Cr LJ 2495 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
537 Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 341 : 1993 Cr LJ 183 .
538 Dharam Pal v State of HP, 2015 Cr LJ 4598 , para 20 (HP) (DB).
539 Aladdin v State of Rajasthan, 2016 Cr LJ 3173 , para 30 (Raj).
540 Pawan Kumar v State of UP, (2015) 7 SCC 148 para 30.
541 Asar Mohammad v State of UP, AIR 2018 SC 5264 ; Charandas Swami v State of Gujarat, AIR

2017 SC 1761 .
542 Prakash v State of Karnataka, (2014) 12 SCC 133 (paras 38 to 45).
543 Indra Dalal v State of Haryana, AIR 2015 SC (Supp) 1428: (2015) 11 SCC 31 , para 33.
544 Deonandan Dusadh v King-Emperor, (1928) 7 Pat 411; Sarabjit Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ

2231 (P & H), recovery made in consequence of disclosure statement made at a time when the
maker of the statement was neither accused of any offence nor under arrest, the statement and
recovery were held to be not admissible.
545 State of UP v Deoman, AIR 1960 SC 1125 : 1960 Cr LJ 1504 .
546 Chandran v State of TN, AIR 1978 SC 1574 : 1978 Cr LJ 1693 .
547 Bahadul v State of Orissa, 1979 Cr LJ 1075 : AIR 1979 SC 1262 . Recovery by itself cannot

sustain conviction. The accused produced the weapon of offence and handed it over to the
police but said nothing, evidence excluded. State of Punjab v Gurnam Singh, AIR 1984 SC 1799
(1) : 1984 Supp SCC 502 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 616 . Kheraj Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1995 Cr LJ 3113
(Raj), Bhagat Bahadur v State, 1996 Cr LJ 2201 (Del) statement that the blood stain belonged to
himself and the co-accused, not admissible. Where incriminating articles were alleged to have
been recovered from the house of the accused at his instance 10 to 12 days after his statement
whereas those articles were not recovered in the two searches made previously, the recoveries
did not inspire conﬁdence. Jackaran Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1995 SC 2345 : 1995 Cr LJ
3992 . Absence of the signature and the thumb impression of the accused on the disclosure
statement and non-examination of the panch witnesses, would render the statement unreliable.
State of Haryana v Sher Singh, AIR 1981 SC 1021 : 1981 Cr LJ 714 : (1981) 2 SCC 307 , mere
failure on the part of police to interrogate the accused person at whose instance the weapon
was recovered was not regarded as a justiﬁcation for concluding that the recovery was fake.
548 Vikram Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2010 SC 1007 : (2010) 3 SCC 56 .
549 Wirsa Singh, (1953) Patiala 711; Ashish Batham v State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 3206 : 2002 Cr

LJ 4676 , recovery of blood-stained knife and clothes alleged to be recovered on disclosure
made by the accused person, but because the recovery was delayed and was made only after
the second remand, doubtful evidentiary value.
550 Masang Kishti v State of Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 1633 (Ori).
551 Rattan Chand v State of HP, 2002 Cr LJ 1598 (HP).
552 State of UP v Arun Kumar Gupta, 2003 Cr LJ 894 : AIR 2003 SC 801 . Lakhwinder Singh v

State of Punjab, AIR 2003 2577, the supposed independent witness to recovery and seizure not
examined, the police inspector's presence was also disproved, recoveries doubtful. Salim Akhtar
v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 2302 (SC), recovery of arms and ammunition, place of recovery very
near to a locality, no witness was summoned from the locality, recovery witnessed by a
photographer who was a frequent visitor to the police station and was also under police
obligations, recovery became doubtful.
553 Rammi v State of MP, AIR 1999 SC 3544 : (1999) 8 SCC 649 : 1999 Cr LJ 4561 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 28] Confession made after removal of impression caused by inducement,
threat or promise, relevant.—
If such a confession as is referred to in section 24 is made after the impression
caused by any such inducement, threat or promise has, in the opinion of the Court,
been fully removed it is relevant.

COMMENT
[s 28.1] Principle.—
A confession is admissible after the impression caused by an inducement, threat, or
promise, has been fully removed because it becomes free and voluntary. The
impression caused by inducement, promise, or threat, should have been fully removed
before the confession is admissible by lapse of time or by caution given by a person
holding an authority superior to that of person holding out the inducement, or by any
intervening act. In determining whether an inducement has ceased to operate, the
nature of such inducement, the time and circumstances under which it was made, the
situation of the person making it, will be taken into consideration by the court.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 29] Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of
promise of secrecy, etc.—
If such a confession is otherwise relevant it does not become irrelevant merely
because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception
practised on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was
drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have
answered, whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was
not warned that he was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it
might be given against him.

COMMENT
[s 29.1] Principle.—
A relevant confession does not become irrelevant because it was made—
(1) under a promise of secrecy; or
(2) in consequence of a deception practised on the accused; or
(3) when the accused was drunk; or
(4) in answer to questions which the accused need not have answered; or
(5) in consequence of the accused not receiving a warning that he was not bound to
make it and that it might be used against him.
This section applies to criminal cases and is to be read along with section 24.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 30] Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and
others jointly under trial for same offence.—
When more persons than one are being tried jointly [s 30.3] for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such
persons [s 30.4] is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession [s
30.5] as against such other person as well as against the person who makes such

confession.
554[Explanation.—"Offence", as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or

attempt to commit, the offence.]
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said—"B and I

murdered C". The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was

murdered by A and B, and that B said—"A and I murdered C".
This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court against A, as B
is not being jointly tried.

COMMENT
[s 30.1] Object and evidentiary value.—
The object of this section is that where an accused person unreservedly confesses his
own guilt, and at the same time implicates another person who is jointly tried with him
for the same offence, his confession may be taken into consideration against such
other person as well as against himself, because the admission of his own guilt
operates as a sort of sanction, which, to some extent, takes the place of the sanction of
an oath and so affords some guarantee that the whole statement is a true one.555
"The confession may be considered by the court, but the section does not say that the
confession is to amount to proof; clearly there must be other evidence. The confession
is only one element in the consideration of all the facts proved in the case; it can be put
into the scale and weighed with the other evidence." The Supreme Court accepted this
observation about the effect of the section. The case before the court was Kashmira
Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh.556

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Bose J emphasised this aspect: "In our opinion, the matter was put succinctly by Sir
Lawrence Jenkins in Emperor v Lalit Mohan,557 where he said that such a confession
can only be used "to lend assurance to other evidence against an accused," or to put it
in another way as Reilly J did in Periyaswami Moopan558 the proviso goes no further
than this—where there is evidence against the co-accused suﬃcient, if believed, to
support his conviction, then the kind of confession described in section 30 may be
thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that evidence."
Translating these observations into concrete terms, Bose J continued: "They come to
this: "The proper way to approach a case of this kind is, ﬁrst to marshal the evidence
against the accused excluding the confession altogether from consideration and see
whether, if it is believed, conviction could safely be based on it. If it is capable of belief
independently of the confession, then of course it is necessary to call the confession in
aid. But cases may arise where the judge is not prepared to act on the other evidence
as it stands even though, if believed, it would be suﬃcient to sustain a conviction. In
such an event the Judge may call in aid the confession and use it to lend assurance to
the other evidence and thus satisfy himself in believing that which without the aid of
the confession he would not be prepared to accept."

[s 30.2] Principle.—
Where more persons than one are jointly tried for the same offence, the confession
made by one of them, if admissible in evidence at all, should be taken into
consideration against all the accused, and not against the person alone who made
it.559 This section is an exception to the rule that the confession of one person is
entirely inadmissible against another. The policy of the law in allowing a confession by
one accused to be considered against another who is being jointly tried for the same
offence, seems to rest on the recognition of the palpable fact that such a confession
cannot fail to make an impression on the Judge's mind, which it was therefore better to
control within limits than to ignore altogether.560 Where confessions were made by the
accused and also by his co-accused, but the High Court rejected the confession made
by the co-accused and acquitted him, which acquittal remained undisturbed for other
reasons also, the Supreme Court held that no part of the confession of the co-accused
could be used for the purpose of corroborating the confession of the accused.561
The Supreme Court has observed that the confession of a co-accused cannot be
elevated to the status of substantive evidence which can form the basis of conviction
of co-accused.562
Under this section a confession by one person may be taken into consideration against
another—
(1) if both of them are tried jointly;
(2) if they are tried for the same offence; and
(3) if the confession is legally proved.563

[s 30.3] "Tried jointly".—
There should be a joint trial of the accused. The joint trial should be legal. If from any
cause the accused who made the confession cannot be legally tried with the accused

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
against whom the confession is to be used, the court should not attach any value to the
confession.

[s 30.4] "Confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some
other of such persons".—
The Supreme Court has held that a confession must implicate the maker substantially
to the same extent as the other accused person against whom it is sought to be taken
into consideration.564 Thus the test is that the confessing accused must tar himself
and the person or persons he implicates with one and the same brush.565

[s 30.5] "The Court may take into consideration such confession".—
The section provides that the court may take the confession into consideration and
thereby make it evidence on which the court may act, but it does not say that the
confession is to amount to proof. There must clearly be other evidence. The confession
is only one element in the consideration of all the facts proved in the case; it can be put
into the scale and weighed with the other evidence. The confession of a co-accused
can be used only in support of other evidence and cannot be made the foundation of a
conviction.566
The confession of a co-accused cannot be treated as a substantive evidence to convict
other than the person who made the confession on the evidentiary value of it. It is,
however, well established and reiterated in several decisions of the Supreme Court that
based on the consideration of the other evidence on record and if such evidence
suﬃciently supports the case of the prosecution and if requires further support, the
confession of a co-accused can be pressed into service and reliance can be placed
upon it. In other words, if there are suﬃcient materials to reasonably believe that there
was concert and connection between the persons charged with the commission of an
offence based on a conspiracy, it is immaterial even if they were strangers to each
other and were ignorant of the actual role played by them of such acts, which they
committed by their joint efforts. In terms of section 30 of the Evidence Act, 1972, when
more than one person are being tried jointly for the same offence and a confession
made by one of such persons is found to affect the maker as well as the co-accused
and it stands suﬃciently proved, the court can take into consideration such confession
as against other persons and also against the person who made such a confession.567

[s 30.6] Retracted confession.—
The rules regarding a confession, which is subsequently retracted, are: (1) that a
confession is not to be regarded as involuntary merely because it is retracted;568 (2) as
against the maker of the confession the retracted confession may form the basis of a
conviction if it is believed to be true and voluntarily made;569 (3) as against the coaccused, both prudence and caution require the court not to rely on a retracted
confessional without independent corroborative evidence.570 (4) retraction should not
be ambiguous vague or imaginary.571 The corroboration should not only conﬁrm the
general story of the alleged crime, but must also connect the accused with it.572 The
Supreme Court observed.573

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
As, however, the confession was a retracted one it could be acted upon only if
substantially corroborated by independent circumstances. It is not necessary that
retracted confession should be corroborated in each material particular, it is suﬃcient
that there is a general corroboration of the important incidents mentioned in the
confession.
The Supreme Court has held that there can be no absolute rule that a retracted
confession cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated materially. But as a matter
of prudence and caution which has sanctiﬁed itself into a rule of law, a retracted
confession cannot be made solely the basis of conviction unless it is corroborated. It is
not necessary that each and every circumstance mentioned in the confession
regarding the complicity of the accused should be separately and independently
corroborated nor is it essential that the corroboration must come from facts and
circumstances discovered after the confession was made. It would be suﬃcient if the
general trend of the confession is substantiated by some evidence which would tally
with what is contained in the confession.574 It has also held that a voluntary and true
confession made by an accused, though it was subsequently retracted by him, can be
taken into consideration against a co-accused, but as a matter of prudence and
practice the court should not act upon it to sustain a conviction of the co-accused
without full and strong corroboration in material particulars both as to the crime and as
to his connection with that crime. The amount of credibility to be attached to a
retracted confession would depend upon the circumstances of each particular case.575
However, such retracted confession cannot be used to support the evidence of the
other accomplices.576 It has further held that a retracted confession must be looked
upon with greater concern unless the reasons given for having made in the ﬁrst
instance (not for retraction as erroneously stated in some cases) are on the face of
them false. Once the confession is proved satisfactorily any admission made therein
must be satisfactorily withdrawn or the making of it explained as having proceeded
from fear, duress, promise or the like from someone in authority.577

554 Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, section 4.
555 Queen-Empress v Jagrup, (1885) 7 All 646 , 648.
556 Kashmira Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1952 SC 159 : 1952 Cr LJ 839 .
557 38 Cal 559 at p 588.
558 54 Mad 75 at p 77.
559 Empress v Rama Birapa, (1878) 3 Bom 12.
560 Re Ganganmull, (1924) 20 LW 202 , 205; Pradeep Kumar Jain v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 682

(All), where no other evidence could be collected than that of the confession of the co-accused,
it was held that any further continuation of the proceedings on the basis of such evidence only
would be an abuse of the process of the court.
561 State of Tamil Nadu v Kutty, 2001 Cr LJ 4168 : AIR 2001 SC 2778 .
562 State (NCT of Delhi) v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 , in the content

of retracted confession.
563 Mohan Singh Patel v State of MP, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 145 (MP) : (2001) 4 Crimes 357 ,

hearsay evidence of a witness cannot be relied upon in proof of a confession of co-accused.
564 Balbir Singh v Punjab State, AIR 1957 SC 216 : 1957 Cr LJ 481 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
565 Empress of India v Ganraj, (1879) 2 All 444 , 446; Gul Hassan v The King-Emperor of India,

(1910) PR No. 24 of 1910 (Cr); Jai Nand v Rex, (1947) All 658 ; Ammini v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr
LJ 481 : AIR 1998 SC 260 , confession by one of the accused persons. There was reasonable
ground to believe that the accused persons had conspired together for committing murder. The
confession could be used against the other accused also.
566 Bhubani Sahu v. The King, (1949) 51 Bom LR 955 : 76 IA 147.
567 Mohd Jamiludin Nasir v State of WB, (2014) 7 SCC 443 (para 144).
568 Phatik Chandra Gagoi v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 24 (Gau).
569 Shrishail Nageshi Pare v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1985 SC 866 ; 1985 Cr LJ 1173 : (1985) 2

SCC 341 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 235 .
570 Ibid. Also see, Vinayak v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1793 : (1984) 4 SCC 441 : 1984

SCC (Cri) 605 , where the accused persons were not typically co-accused, being charged under
one common and one different section and the confession was also retracted.
571 Taj Md Khan v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2312 (Kant). Sube Kireem v Asst. Collector of Customs,

1998 Cr LJ 3052 (Bom), confession under section 108 of the Custom Act was retracted after
nearly 5 years on the ground that it was made because of torture by Customs Authorities. But
there was no satisfactory explanation of belated retraction. This was held to be not a genuine
retraction.
572 Emperor v Bhagwandas Bisesar, (1940) 42 Bom LR 938 : (1941) Bom 27.
573 State of UP v Boota Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1770 at p 1775 : (1979) 1 SCC 31 .
574 Subramania Goundan v The State of Madras, (1958) SCR 428 : 1958 Cr LJ 238 : AIR 1958 SC

1958 ; Pyare Lal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1094 : (1963) 2 Cr LJ 178 ; Abdul Ghani v State
of UP, AIR 1973 SC 264 : 1973 Cr LJ 280 ; Kehar Singh v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1988 SC 1883 ;
1989 Cr LJ 1 : (1988) 3 SCC 609 : 1988 SCC Cri 711 . where at p 44 RAY J surveyed some cases
so as to come to the same conclusion which has all along been accepted as the right notion as
to the evidentiary value of retracted confessions. But, see, Puran v State of Punjab (I), AIR 1953
SC 459 : 1953 Cr LJ 1925 , at p 462, where it is stated: "It is a settled rule of evidence that unless
a retracted confession is corroborated in material particulars, it is not prudent to base a
conviction in a criminal case on its strength alone." Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, 1994 Cr LJ
3139 , conviction can be founded on a voluntary confession and also on a retracted confession
if it is corroborated generally. Shankar v State of TN, 1994 Cr LJ 3071 : (1994) 2 Crimes 1 :
(1994) 2 Andh LT (Cri) 429 , dead body discovered at the instance of the accused, even if not
relevant under section 27, the fact could be used to corroborate the retracted confession of the
accused.
575 Ram Prakash v The State of Punjab, (1959) SCR 1219 .
576 Hussain Umar v Dalipsinghji, AIR 1970 SC 45 : 1970 Cr LJ 9 .
577 Haroom Haji v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 832 : 1968 Cr LJ 1017 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

ADMISSIONS
[s 31] Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.—
Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted, but they may operate as
estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.

COMMENT
[s 31.1] Admission may operate as estoppel.—
This section declares that admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters
admitted, but that they may operate as estoppels. "Admission" is deﬁned in section 17,
supra; "estoppel", in section 115, infra. Unless admissions are contractual or unless they
constitute an estoppel they are not conclusive, but are open to rebuttal or explanation.
Admissions being declarations against an interest are good evidence but they are not
conclusive and a party is always at liberty to withdraw admissions by proving that they
are either mistaken or untrue. But estoppel creates an absolute bar.578 Admissions,
whether written or oral, which do not operate by way of estoppel, constitute a kind of
evidence, which may be rebutted, against their makers and those claiming under them,
as between them and others. A party is not bound by his own representations, where
they have not been acted upon by the opposite party. If treated as admission not acted
upon, the party who made them may prove that they were not true or were mistaken. A
mere admission is conclusive only where it has been acted on by the party to whom it
was made. An estoppel, i.e., a representation acted on by the other party, by creating a
substantive right, does oblige the estopped party to make good his representation, in
other words, it is conclusive. A heavy burden of proof lies on the party who wants to get
rid of his admissions.579
Admissions operating as estoppels are not the only kind of admissions that will either
be relevant to or conclude the matter in issue. Two other kinds of admissions equally, if
not more, effective, are
(1) admissions contained in the pleadings in a case which would circumscribe the
issues and avoid the necessity for proof, and
(2) admissions made by the parties to a suit on earlier occasions either in prior
proceedings in a court of law, or in statements made out of court. What a party himself
admits to be true may reasonably be presumed to be so.580
An estoppel differs from an admission, for it cannot generally be taken advantage of by
strangers. It binds only parties and privies. An estoppel is generally said to be only a
rule of evidence, for an action cannot be founded upon it. As a defence it has been held
to have the effect of rule of substantive law. Where the question was as to the
existence of an arbitration agreement, the court said that the matter was to be decided

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
by ascertaining the parties' intention from the language used by them and not on the
basis of admissions of one of the parties.581
The section says that an admission is not conclusive proof; it does not say that an
admission is not suﬃcient proof without corroboration. It deals with the effect as to
conclusiveness of an admission. The express admissions of a party to the suit, or
admissions implied from his conduct, are strong evidence against him.582
The expression "conclusive proof" is deﬁned in section 4, and when a fact is declared to
be conclusive proof of another, a court cannot allow evidence to be given for the
purpose of disproving the fact conclusively proved. All that this section provides is that
an admission, unless it operates as an estoppel, is not conclusive. What a party himself
admits to be true may reasonably be presumed to be so. The person against whom it is
proved is at liberty to show that it was mistaken or untrue. An admission does not
estop the party who makes it; he is still at liberty to disprove it by evidence so far as
regards his own interest. The rule that admissions are not conclusive is applicable to
mistakes in respect of legal liability as well as to those in respect of fact. A plaintiff is
not bound by an admission on a point of law, nor precluded from asserting the contrary
in order to obtain the relief to which, upon a true construction of the law, he may appear
to be entitled.583 But, if the admission is duly proved and if the person against whom it
is proved does not satisfy the court that it was mistaken or untrue, there is nothing in
this Act, and there is no general principle or rule of law to prevent the court from
deciding the case in accordance with it.584
The provisions of this section are not restricted to admissions made at any particular
time or place, but are wide enough to include admissions made in pleadings. Where an
admission was made by the predecessor in title and the successor in interest
conﬁrmed it, he became bound by it.585

[s 31.2] Facts admitted need not be proved.—
Section 58 declares that the facts admitted need not be produced. The effect is that
facts admitted are presumed to be true. The Supreme Court has therefore declared the
law to be that unless the presumption created by an admission is rebutted, the facts
admitted must be taken to be established. A person, who ﬁrst admits a fact and then
goes back upon it, has to disprove his admission with the help of evidence of clinching
nature. It was accordingly held that the Consumer Forum should not have allowed a
party to resile from his admission without adequate rebuttal.586

578 Chhaganlal Keshwlal Mehta v Patel Narandas Haribhai, AIR 1982 SC 121 : (1982) 1 SCC 223 .
579 Chetak Constructions Ltd v Om Prakash, AIR 2003 MP 145 . In a contract for sale of property

the vendors stated that the possession was handed over at the time of agreement itself and a
big amount was paid to them for vacating the property immediately. The vendors were not
allowed to say subsequently that there was no surrender of possession.
580 Avira v Varkey, (1951) TC 209 .
581 Garg Builders and Engineers v UP Rajkiya Nirman Nigam, AIR 1995 Del 111 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
582 Narayan v Gopal, AIR 1960 SC 100 : (1960) 1 SCR 773 .
583 Juttendromohun Tagore v Ganendromohun Tagore, (1872) LR Sup IA 47; Jagwant Singh v

Silan Singh, (1899) 21 All 285 ; Rani Chandra v Chaudhuri, (1906) 9 Bom LR 267 : 29 All 184 : 34
IA 27; Shri Dolatsinghji Jaswantsinghji v Khachar Mansur Rukhad, (1936) 63 IA 248 : 38 Bom LR
690 : 60 Bom 634. See, Messrs Jetmull Bhojraj v State of Bihar, AIR 1967 Pat 287 .
584 Maung Mya v Ma Tha Ya, (1899) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 377.
585 Avadh Kishore Das v Ram Gopal, AIR 1979 SC 861 : (1979) 4 SCC 790 . Admission made by

a party in a previous suit binds the successors in interest and legal representatives in
subsequent suit, Modgi Krishna v Modgi Krishna Bai, AIR 1994 AP 16 .
586 United India Insurance Co Ltd v Samir Chandra Chaudhury, (2005) 5 SCC 784 : (2005) 3 CPJ

2 SC.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES
[s 32] Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is dead or
cannot be found, etc., is relevant.—
Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts [s 32.10] made by a person who is dead,
or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose
attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under
the circumstances of the case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves
relevant facts in the following cases:—
(1) when it relates to cause of death.—

When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to
any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in
cases in which the cause of that person's death comes into question.
Such statements are relevant whether the person who made them was or was
not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death, and
whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death
comes into question.
(2) or is made in course of business—

When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course of
business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made
by him in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of
professional duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed by him of the
receipt of money, goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a document
used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other
document usually dated, written or signed by him.
(3) or against interest of maker.—

When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the
person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed
him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.
(4) or gives opinion as to a public right or custom, or matters of general interest.—

When the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence
of any public right or custom or matter of public or general interest, of the
existence of which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware, and
when such statement was made before any controversy as to such right,
custom or matter has arisen.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(5) or relates to existence of relationship.—

When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship 587[by blood,
marriage or adoption] the person making the statement had special means of
knowledge, and when the statement was made before the question in dispute
was raised.
(6) or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs.—

When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship 588[by blood,
marriage or adoption] between persons deceased, and is made in any will or
deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person
belonged, or in any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or
other thing on which such statements are usually made, and when such
statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(7) or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause (a).—

When the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which
relates to any such transaction as is mentioned in section 13, clause (a).
(8) or is made by several persons and expresses feelings relevant to matter in

question.—
When the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed
feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or

A dies of injuries received in a transaction in the course of which she was
ravished. The question, is whether she was ravished by B; or
The question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that
a suit would lie against B by A's widow.
Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring
respectively to the murder, the rape and the actionable wrong under
consideration are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A's birth.

An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in the course
of business, stating that on a given day he attended A's mother and
delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Calcutta on a given day.

A statement in the diary of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the
course of business, that on a given day the solicitor attended A at a place
mentioned, in Calcutta, for the purpose of conferring with him upon
speciﬁed business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Bombay harbour on a given

day.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's ﬁrm, by which she
was chartered to their correspondents in London, to whom the cargo was
consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given day from Bombay
harbour, is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land.

A letter from A's deceased agent to A saying that he had received the rent
on A's account and held it at A's orders, is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married.

The statement of a deceased clergyman that he married them under such
circumstances that the celebration would be a crime, is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter

on a certain day. The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day
is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship.

A protest made by the captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is
a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way.

A statement by A, a deceased headman of the village, that the road was
public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a

particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased banya in the ordinary
course of his business, is a relevant fact.
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B. A statement

by A that B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A.

A letter from A's deceased father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on
a given day, is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married.

An entry in a memorandum book by C, the deceased father of B, of his
daughter's marriage with A on a given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop

window. The question is as to the similarity of the caricature and its
libellous character. The remarks of a crowd of spectators on these points
may be proved.

COMMENT
This and the following section are exceptions to the general rule that hearsay evidence
is not admissible. Hearsay evidence is excluded on the ground that it is always
desirable in the interest of justice to get the person, whose statement is relied upon,
into court for his examination in the regular way in order that many possible sources of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
inaccuracy and untrustworthiness can be best brought to light and exposed, if they
exist, by the test of cross-examination. Section 60 lays down that oral evidence must
be direct.
The exceptions to the hearsay evidence have been directed by necessity. This rule
excluding the hearsay evidence is relaxed so far as the statements contained in
sections 32 and 33 are concerned. The general ground of admissibility of the evidence
referred to in these sections is that no better evidence could be produced. The phrase
"hearsay evidence" is not used in the Act; because it is inaccurate and vague. Before
such evidence is let in, the court must arrive at a ﬁnding on evidence formally and
regularly taken and recorded that one or other of the grounds speciﬁed in the section
exists. The admission of such deposition in evidence without such ﬁnding is illegal.589

[s 32.1] Principle.—
Under this section written or verbal statements of relevant facts made by a person—
(a) who is dead;
(b) who cannot be found;
(c) who has become incapable of giving evidence; or
(d) whose attendance cannot be procured without unreasonable delay or expense;

are relevant under the following circumstances:—
(1) When it relates to the cause of his death.
(2) When it is made in the course of business, such as, entry in books, or
acknowledgment or the receipt of any property, or date of a document.
(3) When it is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making it or
when it would have exposed him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.
(4) When it gives opinion as to a public right or custom or matters of general interest
and it was made before any controversy as to such right or custom has arisen.
(5) When it relates to the existence of any relationship between persons as to whose
relationship the maker had special means of knowledge and was made before the
question in dispute arose.
(6) When it relates to the existence of any relationship between persons deceased and
is made in any will or deed or family pedigree, or upon any tomb-stone on family
portrait, and was made before the question in dispute arose.
(7) When it is contained in any deed, will, or other document.
(8) When it is made by a number of persons and expresses feelings relevant to the
matter in question.
Section 30 does not limit the operation of this section, but section 118 does.
The words "dying declaration" mean a statement written or verbal of relevant facts
made by a person who is dead.590 A dying declaration is not complete unless the full
names and addresses of the persons involved are given in it. Therefore, only because
the deceased in his dying declaration uttered ﬁrst names similar to that of the accused,
it was not proper to accept the prosecution version based on such incomplete dying
declaration.591 Evidence of dying declaration is admissible not only against the person

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
actually causing death but also against other persons participating in causing
death.592
Dying declaration is an exception to the general rule against hearsay. The grounds of
admission are ﬁrstly, the victim is generally the only principal eye-witness to the crime;
secondly, sense of impending death creates a sanction which is equal to obligation of
an oath. A man would not like to meet his maker with a lie in his mouth. The
requirements of oath and cross-examination are dispensed with.593 Though a dying
declaration is not recorded in the court and nor is it put to strict proof of crossexamination by the accused, still it is admissible in evidence against the general rule
that hearsay evidence is not admissible in evidence.594

[s 32.2] Relevancy of a dying declaration.—
A statement by a person made before his death to be relevant, the following ingredients
are to be satisﬁed:
(i) The statement is made by a person who is conscious and believes or

apprehends that death is imminent.
(ii) The statement must pertain to what the person believes to be the cause or

circumstances of his/her death.
(iii) What is recorded must be a statement made by the person concerned, since it

is an exception to the rule of hearsay evidence.
(iv) The statement must be conﬁdence bearing, truthful and credible.595

In Mallella Shyamsunder v State of AP,596 the Supreme Court added two more
ingredients as under:
(v) the statement should not be one made on tutoring or prompting.
(vi) The court may also scan the statement to see whether the same is prompted by

any motive of vengeance.597

[s 32.3] Form or procedure for recording dying declaration.—
There is no particular form or procedure prescribed for recording a dying declaration
nor is it required to be recorded only by a Magistrate. As a general rule, it is advisable to
get the evidence of the declarant certiﬁed from a doctor. In appropriate cases, the
satisfaction of the person recording the statement regarding the state of mind of the
deceased would also be suﬃcient to hold that the deceased was in a position to make
a statement. It is settled law that if the prosecution solely depends on the dying
declaration, the normal rule is that the courts must exercise due care and caution to
ensure genuineness of the dying declaration, keeping in mind that the accused had no
opportunity to test the veracity of the statement of the deceased by cross-examination.
The law does not insist upon the corroboration of dying declaration before it can be
accepted. The insistence of corroboration to a dying declaration is only a rule of
prudence. When the court is satisﬁed that the dying declaration is voluntary, not tainted
by tutoring or animosity, and is not a product of the imagination of the declarant, in that
event, there is no impediment in convicting the accused on the basis of such dying
declaration.598

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 32.4] Dying declaration recorded by Magistrate.—
The dying declaration was recorded by Special Executive Magistrate who deposed that
he had satisﬁed himself that the deceased was in a perfectly ﬁt condition to make
statement which was supported by the Police Oﬃcer. The statement was not vitiated
by interpolations or apparent inconsistencies and was consistent with two earlier dying
declarations. It was held that the dying declaration could be relied on and accepted
even in absence of the certiﬁcate from the doctor that the deceased was in a ﬁt
condition to make statements.599 Where the dying declaration was recorded by the
Special Magistrate who was not entrusted with the duty of recording it, it was held that
it could not be discarded as all precautions were taken before recording it and it
inspired conﬁdence.600 Where the dying declaration was recorded by the Magistrate
which was neither signed by the deceased, nor contained date and time of its recording
and the prosecution failed to give any explanation that the deceased was not in a
position to sign it, it was held that such dying declaration which was impregnant with
so many suspicious circumstances which created doubt about its genuineness and it
was not safe to base conviction on it.601
There is no requirement of law that a dying declaration must necessarily be made to a
Magistrate.602 What evidentiary value or weight has to be attached to such statement,
must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each particular case. In a
proper case, it may be permissible to convict a person only on the basis of a dying
declaration in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case.
In this case the dying declaration was properly proved; no question was put during
cross-examination regarding the condition of the victim at the relevant time; medical
evidence was not adverse and statement was corroborated. Hence conviction based
on such dying declaration could not be said to be improper.603

[s 32.5] Form of dying declaration.— Question-answer form.—
The mere fact that a dying declaration is not in a question-answer form does not
destroy its value.604 Merely because the dying declaration is not in a question-answer
form, the sanctity attached to it, as it comes from the mouth of a dying person, cannot
be brushed aside and its reliability cannot be doubted.605 A dying declaration cannot
be discarded only on the ground that it was not recorded in question-answer form. A
statement recorded in a narrative form may be more natural and may give a true
version of the incident as perceived by the injured person.606
A dying declaration was recorded by the magistrate in narrative form in his own
language and not in question-answer form. This was held to be not a ground for
discarding it. The maker of the statement was in ﬁt condition. The magistrate had no
reason to record a false statement. Failure to mention time was not material. Presence
of relatives at the time of recording did not have the effect of tutoring. The deceased
also had no enmity with the accused so as falsely implicate him. The dying declaration
was accepted as good piece of evidence.607
The witness who recorded the dying declaration categorically stated that the deceased
gave replies to questions. But the declaration produced was not in question—answer
from. The court said that such fact was not material.608
A dying declaration should be short concise and to the point. It is not desirable to have
a dying declaration in a cyclostyled form.609

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 32.6] Oral dying declaration.—
An oral dying declaration means a statement which was not recorded and is
reproduced by the witnesses out of memory. The Supreme Court has laid down that the
exact words of such statement must be reproduced. Any variance in statements of the
witnesses with regard to the exact words would materially affect the value of the oral
dying declaration. Even though an oral dying declaration can form basis of conviction in
a given case, but such a dying declaration has to be trustworthy and free from every
blemish and inspire conﬁdence. The reproduction of the exact words of the oral
declaration in such cases is very important. The difference in the exact words of the
declaration in the present case detracted materially from the value of the oral dying
declaration.610
It is well settled that an oral dying declaration can form the basis of conviction, if the
deponent is in a ﬁt condition to make the declaration and if it is found to be truthful.
The courts as a matter of prudence look for corroboration to an oral dying declaration.
In the instant case the dying declaration did not inspire the conﬁdence of the court.611

[s 32.7] Fitness of declarant.—
The court should be satisﬁed that the deceased was in a ﬁt state of mind and capable
of making a statement at the time when it was recorded.612 Where the parents of the
deceased woman stated that she was not mentally sound, it was held that this fact
should not have been ignored by the court.613
Certiﬁcate from the doctor and endorsement from him that the victim was not only
conscious but also in a ﬁt condition to make statements is a must. In the absence of
such a certiﬁcate the declaration may be rendered heavily suspect.614 The Supreme
Court has also laid down that the absence of the medical certiﬁcate of ﬁtness does not
render a dying declaration to be unacceptable. What is essentially required is that the
person who records it must be satisﬁed that the injured person was in a ﬁt state of
mind. The medical certiﬁcate is a rule of caution. Truthful dying declaration can be
assured even otherwise.615

[s 32.7.1] Dying declaration and medical certiﬁcate of ﬁtness.—
Overruling some earlier cases to the contrary effect a Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court in Laxman v State of Maharashtra,616 speaking through PATTANAIK J
adopted the view that the absence of the certiﬁcate of the doctor as to ﬁtness of mind
of the injured person would not render his dying declaration to be unacceptable. The
court said that what is essentially required is that the person who records the
statement must be satisﬁed that the injured person was in a ﬁt state of mind.
Certiﬁcation by the doctor is only a rule of caution. But voluntary and truthful nature of
the statement can be established otherwise.

[s 32.8] More than one dying declarations.—
When there are more than one dying declarations of the same person, they have to be
read as one and the same statement for proper appreciation of the value and, if they
differ from each other on material aspects. effort should be made to see if they could
be reconciled. If no assumption could explain the difference, the statements might
become unworthy of credit but if one is possible, the position may be different. If there

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was a reasonable explanation for the difference, the statement may be taken at par
with an omission covered by explanation to section 161, CrPC and be considered as a
matter of fact in each case on its own strength.617 The Supreme Court has suggested
that the ﬁrst statement in point of time made by the injured person must be preferred to
any of his subsequent statements.618 A mere omission on the part of the prosecutrix
to state the entire factual details of the incident in her very ﬁrst statement does not
make her subsequent statements unworthy, especially when her statements are duly
corroborated by other prosecution witnesses including the medical evidence.619 The
Supreme Court has also observed that the fact there are more than one and apparently
consistent dying declarations is not in itself suﬃcient to persuade the court to act
thereon.620 Consistency is a very relevant factor. Where contradictory and inconsistent
stand is taken by the deceased, the Supreme Court said that corroboration from other
sources would become necessary. If it is then found to be true and voluntary,
conviction can be based on it.621

[s 32.9] Whether a conviction can be based on the sole basis of a dying
declaration.—
The law on the issue of dying declaration can be summarised to the effect that in case
the court comes to the conclusion that if the dying declaration is true and reliable, has
been recorded by a person at a time when the deceased was physically and mentally ﬁt
to make the declaration and it has not been made under any
tutoring/duress/prompting; it can be the sole basis for recording conviction. In such an
eventuality no corroboration is required. In case there are multiple dying declarations
and there are inconsistencies between them, generally, the dying declaration recorded
by the higher oﬃcer like a Magistrate can be relied upon, provided that there is no
circumstance giving rise to any suspicion about its truthfulness. In case there are
circumstances wherein the declaration had been made, not voluntarily and even
otherwise, it is not supported by the other evidence, the court has to scrutinise the
facts of an individual case very carefully and take a decision as to which of the
declarations is worth reliance.622 In the absence of any kind of inﬁrmity or inherent
contradiction or inconsistency or any facet that would create a serious doubt on the
dying declaration, it cannot be discarded. Conviction indisputably can be based on
dying declaration, if it is found totally reliable.623

[s 32.9.1] Admissibility/relevancy of a dying declaration as to cause of death of
other person.—
The dying declaration is admissible about the cause of death or the circumstances of
the transaction which resulted in the death of the person making it. However, when two
deaths have taken place in the same transaction and circumstances of the transaction
resulting in one death are closely inter-connected with the other death, the situation is
different; such a statement may not by itself be admissible to determine the cause of
death of anyone other than the person making the statement. However, when the
circumstances of the transaction which resulted in the death of the person making the
statement as well as death of any other person are part of the same transaction, the
same will be relevant also about the cause of death of such other person. Thus, a dying
declaration relating to circumstances of the transaction which resulted in the death of
a person making the declaration are integral part of the circumstances resulting in
death of any other person, such a dying declaration has relevance for the death of such
other person also.624

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 32.10] "Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts".—
"Verbal" means by words. It is not necessary that the words should be spoken. The
words of another person may be adopted by a witness by a nod or shake of the
head.625 If the signiﬁcance of the signs made by a deceased person in response to
questions put to her shortly before her death is established satisfactorily to the mind of
the court, then such questions, taken with her assent or dissent to them, clearly proved,
constitute a verbal statement as to the cause of her death.626 In a trial upon a charge
of murder, it appeared that the deceased shortly before her death was questioned by
various persons as to the circumstances in which the injuries had been inﬂicted on her;
that she was at that time unable to speak, but was conscious and able to make signs.
Evidence was offered by the prosecution, and admitted by the Sessions Judge, to prove
the questions put to the deceased, and the signs made by her in answer to such
questions. It was held that the questions and the signs taken together might properly
be regarded as "verbal statements" made by the person as to the cause of her death
within the meaning of this section, and were, therefore, admissible in evidence under
this section.627 Statement of the deceased to a police oﬃcer on the basis of which
investigation was commenced was described by the Supreme Court as capable of
serving as a dying declaration.628
The questions put to the injured person who is unable to speak and the signs made by
him in reply taken together amount to "verbal statements" within the meaning of this
section.629
Where the deceased stated in her dying declarations that the accused molested her
and she immolated herself after such incident, it was held that the dying declaration
was a relevant fact and was admissible in evidence and to hold it otherwise would be
negation of justice and clear misrepresentation of the provisions of section 32(1).630

[s 32.11] Cause of death [Clause 1].—
The word "death" appearing in section 32 is inclusive of suicidal or homicidal death.631
Statement by a person as to the cause of his death becomes relevant when the cause
of his death comes into question even if the person was not under expectation of death
at the time of making the statement.632 The statement must be as to the cause of the
declarant's death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in
his death, that is the cause and circumstances of the death;633 but such details which
fall outside the ambit of this are not strictly within the permissible limits laid down by
this sub-section.634 The statement is admissible although it is made before the cause
of death has arisen, or before the deceased has any reason to anticipate being killed.
The circumstances must be circumstances of the transaction: general expressions
indicating fear or suspicion whether of a particular individual or otherwise and not
directly related to the occasion of the death are not admissible.635 An information
lodged by a person who died subsequently, relating to the cause of his death, is
admissible in evidence under this clause.636 It is not necessary that there should be a
direct nexus between the "Circumstances" and death. Where the victim uttered before
her death that the accused was standing before her with a gun, this was held to be a
part of the circumstances which resulted in her death and, therefore, admissible under
sub-section (1).637 The statement may be oral or written. It is relevant whatever may be
the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of the death of the person who made
the statement comes into question. A complaint in writing made by a person who dies
sometime thereafter, expressing apprehension of death at the hands of a person is
admissible in evidence under this clause, when the person whose conduct is the source

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the apprehension is charged with the offence of murder of the person making the
complaint. The deceased had submitted a written complaint against her husband, to
the Commissioner of Police, which stated that she was afraid she would be killed by
her husband. It was held that the statement showing apprehension of death on account
of the conduct of the husband was admissible under this clause.638 A woman was
injured by her husband. Her statements were recorded while she was in hospital. She
died two months after the incident and 21 days after her discharge from the hospital,
from what cause, not known. Her statements in the hospital were not admitted as
dying declaration.639
A statement made by a person since deceased, as to the cause of the death of another,
is inadmissible in evidence. The statement of one dead person is not a relevant fact
with respect to the question about the death of another person.640
The section is not conﬁned to any particular kind of death, e.g. homicide. It includes
suicidal death also. The circumstances which may be relevant to prove a case of
suicide would be equally relevant under the section.641

[s 32.12] "Circumstances of the transaction".—
This phrase conveys some limitations. It is not as broad as the analogous use in
"circumstantial evidence" which includes evidence of all relevant facts. It is narrower
than res gestae. Circumstances must have some proximate relation to the actual
occurrence and must be of the transaction which resulted in the death of the declarant.
The condition of the admissibility of the evidence is that the cause of the declarant's
death comes into question. It is not necessary that the statement must be made after
the transaction has taken place or that the person making it must be near death or that
the "circumstances" can only include the acts done when and where the death was
caused.642
The Supreme Court has emphasised the need for effort by courts, as far as possible, to
include a statement within the scope of the section 32(1). Hence, statements as to any
of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in the death should be
included.643
The Supreme Court644 examined the scope of the words "statement as to any of the
circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death" and said that these
words expand the scope of admissibility on the facts of the case.
In order to test the reliability of a dying declaration, the court has to keep in view, the
circumstances like the opportunity of the dying man for observation, (e.g.), whether
there was suﬃcient light if the crime was committed at night; whether the capacity of
the man to remember the facts stated had not been impaired at the time of making the
statement; that the statement has been consistent throughout if he had several
opportunities of making a dying declaration apart from the oﬃcial record of it; and that
the statement had been made at the earliest opportunity and was not the result of
tutoring by interested parties.645
A brief statement ("save me, a person has stabbed me") made to relatives half an hour
before death was followed by a detailed version in the presence of the medical oﬃcer,
the Supreme Court attached value to the statement.646
This court, a decade later in Munnu Raja v State of Madhya Pradesh,647 stated the law
to the effect that though the dying declaration must be approached with caution for the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
reason that the maker of the statement cannot be subjected to cross examination,
there is neither a rule of law nor a rule of prudence which has hardened into a rule of
law that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated. This court
went up to observe that the court must not look out for corroboration unless it comes
to the conclusion that a dying declaration suffered from any inﬁrmity.

[s 32.13] Proximity between time of statement and that of Death.—
The problem of proximity was for the ﬁrst time raised before the Supreme Court in
Sharad v State of Maharashtra.648 The court held that the statements were not so
remote in time as to lose their proximity with the cause of death. Fazal Ali J conducted
a vast survey of authorities and picked up the following propositions: 1. A declaration
will be relevant whether death is homicide or suicide, provided it relates to the cause of
death or exhibits circumstances leading to death. 2. The test of proximity cannot be
literally pursued and practically reduced to a cut and dried formula of universal
application. Distance of time would depend on or vary with the circumstances of each
case. For example, where death is a logical consequence of a continuous drama long in
process and in a way a ﬁnale to the story, the statement regarding each step directly
connected with the end of the drama would be admissible because the entire
statement would have to be read as an organic whole and not torn from the context.
Where death takes place within short time of the marriage or the distance of time is not
spread over more than three to four months, the statement may be admissible under
section 32.649 Where the ﬁnding of the court was that dying declaration were
acceptable, it was held that the declarations would not lose their value on the ground
that the maker died long after making the statements. This question has to be
considered on the facts of each case.650
The Supreme Court stated in a case: "The prosecution had not examined the doctor
who made the endorsement on the dying declaration that "the patient was in a ﬁt state
of mind to depose". No other witness was examined to prove the certiﬁcate of the
doctor either. The non-production of the doctor to prove his certiﬁcate and subject
himself to be cross-examined by the appellants, when considered in the light of the
testimony of the mother of the deceased, who speciﬁcally stated that the condition of
the patient was "not good and that she was not in a ﬁt condition", created a doubt as to
whether the patient was actually in a proper mental condition to make a consciously
truthful statement. This inﬁrmity rendered it unsafe to rely on the dying declaration."651
When a dying declaration is recorded voluntarily, pursuant to a ﬁtness report of a
certiﬁed doctor, nothing much remains to be questioned unless, it is proved that the
dying declaration was tainted with animosity and a result of tutoring.652
The, Supreme Court653 summed up the legal principles governing a dying declaration
as follows:
(i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis of conviction if it inspires the full

conﬁdence of the court.
(ii) The court should be satisﬁed that the deceased was in a ﬁt state of mind at the

time of making the statement and that it was not the result of tutoring,
prompting or imagination.
(iii) Where the court is satisﬁed that the declaration is true and voluntary, it can

base its conviction without any further corroboration.
(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that the dying declaration

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated. The rule
requiring corroboration is merely a rule of prudence.
(v) Where the dying declaration is suspicious, it should not be acted upon without

corroborative evidence.
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from inﬁrmity such as the deceased was

unconscious and could never make any statement cannot form the basis of
conviction.
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain all the details as to the

occurrence, it is not to be rejected.
(viii) Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to be discarded.
(ix) When the eyewitness aﬃrms that the deceased was not in a ﬁt and conscious

state to make the dying declaration, medical opinion cannot prevail.
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is satisﬁed that it is true and free from any

effort to induce the deceased to make a false statement and if it is coherent and
consistent, there shall be no legal impediment to make it the basis of conviction,
even if there is no corroboration.

[s 32.14] Where the declarant survives.—
The statement of a person as to the cause of his injuries becomes a dying declaration
relevant under section 32 if he subsequently dies. Should he survive his injuries, his
statement cannot be proved under section 32. It may become relevant under section
21(1) or under section 157.654 Such statement is not a declaration under section 32. It
becomes a statement under section 164, CrPC. It can be used under section 157 for
the purpose of corroboration and under section 155 for the purpose of
contradiction.655 Such statement has to be taken as of a superior quality and of a
higher value than that recorded under section 161, CrPC. It can also be used under
section 157 as the former statement of witnesses for corroboration purposes.656

[s 32.15] Statements in course of business [Clause 2].—
This clause contemplates a statement by a person whose duty it was to make such a
statement or whose business was such that statements of the kind were to be
expected in the ordinary course of things.657 "The considerations which have induced
the courts to recognize this exception appear to be principally that, in the absence of all
suspicion of sinister motives, a fair presumption arises that entries made in the
ordinary routine of business are correct, since the process of invention implying
trouble, it is easier to state what is true than what is false; that such entries usually
form a link in a chain of circumstances, which mutually corroborate each other: that
false entries would be likely to bring clerks into disgrace with their employers: that, as
most entries made in the course of business are subject to the inspection of several
persons, an error would be exposed to speedy discovery; and that, as the facts to which
they relate are generally known but to few persons, a relaxation of the strict rules of
evidence in favour of such entries may often prove convenient, if not necessary, for the
due investigation of truth".658
Clause (2) provides that a written statement of a relevant fact made by a person who is
dead is itself a relevant fact, when the statement was made by such person in "the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
ordinary course of business". The expression "course of business" occurs in more than
one place in the Act. See sections 16, 34, 47, 114.
The phrase "in the ordinary course of business" is apparently used to indicate the
current routine of business which was usually followed by the person whose
declaration it is sought to introduce. The rule laid down in this clause extends only to
statements made during the course, not of any particular transaction of an exceptional
kind such as the execution of a deed of mortgage, but of business or professional
employment in which the declarant was ordinarily or habitually engaged. The
particulars set out in this clause, though not exhaustive, may fairly be taken as
indicating the nature of the statements made in the course of business. The expression
"in the ordinary course of business" must mean in the ordinary course of a professional
avocation.659 The business referred to may be of a temporary character.660 See
Illustrations (b), (c), (d), and (g).
The entries should have been made by the deceased person himself. Entries made by
another person at his instance are not admissible under this section.661 Entries in
registers prepared by an Amin who is dead are admissible for proving the nature of the
tenancy.662

[s 32.15.1] Account books.—
Entries in account books should, in order to be relevant, be regularly kept in the course
of business.663 Where accounts are kept in loose sheets of paper they do not have the
probative force of a book of accounts regularly kept in the course of business.664
A book of accounts may be said to be regularly kept although the book is not entered
up from day to day or from hour to hour as the transactions take place.665

[s 32.15.2] Difference between section 32, clause (2), and section 34.—
The plaintiff relied on entries in the handwriting of her deceased husband kept in the
ordinary course of his business. It was held that entries in accounts relevant only under
section 34 are not alone suﬃcient to charge any person with liability, corroboration is
required. But where accounts are relevant also under this clause, they are in law
suﬃcient evidence in themselves, and the law does not, as in the case of accounts
admissible only under section 34, require corroboration. Entries in accounts may in the
same suit be relevant under both sections, and where this is so, the necessity of
corroboration prescribed by section 34 does not arise. Though accounts which are
relevant under this clause do not as a matter of law require corroboration, the Judge is
not bound to act on them without corroboration; that is a matter on which he must
exercise his own judicial discretion as a judge of fact.666 Clause (2) does not make the
account books conclusive proof of the facts stated therein. Under section 34, liability
cannot be fastened on any person merely because in the account books of the
opposite party, there are certain entries adverse to him. Taking section 32(2) and
section 34 together, it is clear that even if the account books may be treated as relevant
it is discretionary for the court to require additional proof of any particular entry.667 The
material difference as between an entry relevant under section 34 and one relevant
under section 32(2) is that in the former case the person who made the entry may be
available as a witness while in the latter case he is not.

[s 32.15.3] CASES

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 32.15.3.1] Samadaskat book.—
Entries of payments made by a creditor in the ledger (samadaskat book) belonging to a
debtor fall within this clause, and although they are admissions in his own favour they
are not excluded by section 21.668

[s 32.15.4] Record of identiﬁcation parade.—
Such record by a Magistrate cannot be regarded as a statement made by a Magistrate
in the ordinary course of business. It cannot be admitted under clause (2). Proceedings
of parades can only be proved by the oral deposition of the Magistrate who held them
and who could then be subjected to cross-examination.669

[s 32.15.5] Registered letter returned.—
An endorsement on the cover of a letter by a postal peon that the cover tendered to the
addressee on a certain date was refused, is at best a record of a statement by the peon
and must be proved by calling him as a witness.670

[s 32.15.6] Balance-sheet.—
Facts stated in the balance-sheet of a company have to be proved like any other
fact.671

[s 32.15.7] Bahi (logbook) of Panda of Temple.—
A panda of a temple was maintaining a bahi incorporating the list of persons who
visited the temple. This was held to be admissible in evidence. The page in question
was signed by the visitor and for that reason the court said that it was immaterial
whether the bahi was maintained in the course of business or whether the entries were
regularly made.672

[s 32.16] "Statement against interest of maker" [Clause 3].—
A statement of a deceased person in order to be admissible under this clause must be
a statement of a relevant fact and must be against the proprietary or pecuniary interest
of the person making it.673 This clause makes declarations against interest admissible
in evidence. The principle upon which such statements are regarded as admissible in
evidence is that in the ordinary course of affairs a person is not likely to make a
statement to his own detriment unless it is true.674 The clause is based upon
knowledge of human nature. Self-interest induces a man to be cautious in saying
anything against himself. When one makes a declaration in disparagement of one's
own rights or interests, it is generally true, and because it is so, the law has deemed it
safe to admit evidence of such a declaration. Illustrations (e) and (f) apply to this
clause.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Before a statement can be admissible under this clause it must be shown that the
person making it knew that it was against his pecuniary or proprietary interest. In most
cases such knowledge would have to be inferred from the surrounding
circumstances.675 A statement by a person having proprietary interest in the suit
property about benami holding which was against his own interest was held to be
provable.676
This clause comprises three classes of declarations against interest: where they affect
the declarant's (1) pecuniary interest; (2) proprietary interest; and (3) personal liberty or
property by tending to charge him with a crime or to subject him to payment of
damages. A statement made by a person, against whom there is, already, in existence
evidence which would lead to his prosecution and conviction, is inadmissible in
evidence under this clause.677
Under this clause, the previous statements of a dead witness (e.g., approver) in a
previous trial implicating not only himself but also an absconding accused, cannot be
admitted for convicting such absconding accused in a subsequent trial. A man cannot
by his statement expose himself to criminal proceedings when such criminal
proceedings have already started. As soon as criminal proceedings have started
against a person making a statement exposing himself to a criminal prosecution, the
words of this clause cease to have application or force as they cannot be stretched or
extended so as to cover statements made after proceedings have been instituted.678
The form of the declaration is immaterial; it may be verbal or written, in a deed or a will,
or any other document.
In Taylor v Witham,679 The question was whether a person (deceased) had lent money
to another. He maintained a book and there was an entry in it saying: "B (the borrower)
paid me three months' interest". A few other entries also referred to the same loan.
"The Court held that the entry was against the interest of the maker and, therefore, all
the entries became admissible although some of them were in his favour" Jeesel, MR
explained the reason in the following passage:
"It is, no doubt, an established rule in the courts of this country that an entry against the
interest of the man who made it is receivable in evidence after his death for all
purposes. Of course, if you can prove aliundi that the man had a particular reason for
making it, and that it was ﬁt for this interest, you may destroy the value of the evidence
altogether, but the question of admissibility is not a question of value. The entry may be
utterly worthless when you get it, if you show any reason to believe that he had a
motive for making it, and that though apparently against his interest, yet really was for
it; but that is a matter for subsequent consideration when you estimate the value of the
testimony."

[s 32.16.1] Declaration exposing the maker to criminal or civil liability.—
Declarations against interest should, to be admissible, have been against interest at the
time they were made, and it is no answer that they might possibly turn out to be so
subsequently.680 The confession of an accused person who is dead implicating
himself and an accomplice in a crime is admissible under this clause and is not
excluded by Illustration (b) to section 30.681 The question of admissibility is not a
question of value.
Clause (3) also declares relevant any statement which would have the effect of
exposing the declarant to a criminal prosecution or a suit for damages. Where a
woman died after telling her lover that she had witnessed a murder, the statement was
held to be relevant because if she were alive she could have been prosecuted for not
informing the police. It is the duty of every person witnessing a crime to inform the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
authorities.682 Such a statement is probably not relevant under English Law. It is
observed in Cockel's Cases and Statutes on Evidence:683
"It should be observed that statements, in order to be admissible must be against
either pecuniary or proprietary interest. It is not suﬃcient for instance, that the
statement was made in circumstances which show that the person making it would be
liable to criminal prosecution. (Sussex Peerage case).684 Although that would seem to
be a case in which he would be liable to a pecuniary penalty, by way of ﬁne, or to
something admittedly worse, i.e., imprisonment."

[s 32.16.2] Admissible against those who derive title from maker of statement.—
Such statements are admissible only against any person who has derived his title from
the maker of the statement.
The declaration of a deceased tenant of the farm to the effect that he was not entitled
to common pasture in respect of the farm, was held to be not admissible against the
landlord.685 Lord Campbell CJ remarked: "You cannot receive in evidence a declaration
of tenant which derogates from the title of the landlord. Such evidence, if receivable,
would be most mischievous, because a tenant might thus destroy a valuable easement
or be enabled to impose a servitude".
A letter from the co-respondent to the petitioner in a divorce suit admitting adultery
with the respondent was held to be admissible in evidence as it would expose the corespondent to a criminal prosecution.686

[s 32.16.3] Inadmissible statements.—
A statement made by a deceased person in his will that he had spent a certain amount
in effecting repairs to his house was held to be not admissible in evidence as it was not
a statement made against his pecuniary or proprietary interest.687
A Hindu widow purported to adopt her brother's grandson, ﬁfty-four years after the
death of her husband, in pursuance of a power to adopt conferred on her by her
husband. The widow obtained mutation of the name of the adopted boy in place of her
own in revenue registers. In her evidence in the mutation proceedings she stated that
she had her husband's authority to adopt in a suit by the reversioners against the
adopted boy to recover the property it was held that the evidence of the widow in the
mutation proceedings was not admissible either under this clause or under section
33.688

[s 32.17] "Opinion … as to … public right or custom" [Clause 4].—
The admissibility of declarations of deceased persons in cases of public right or
custom, or matters of public or general interest, is allowed, as these rights or customs
are generally of ancient and obscure origin, and may be acted upon only at distant
intervals of time; direct proof of their existence is not, therefore, demanded.689
The principle on which the exception of reputation regarding public rights rests in this—
that the reputation can hardly exist without the concurrence of many parties interested

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
to investigate the subject, and such concurrence is presumptive evidence of the
existence of an ancient right, of which direct proof cannot be given in most cases.690
The admissibility of the declarations of deceased persons in such cases is sanctioned,
because in local matters, in which the community are interested, all persons living in
the neighbourhood are likely to be conversant; because, common rights and liabilities
being naturally talked of in public, what is dropped in conversation respecting them
may be presumed to be true; because conﬂicting interests would lead to contradiction
from others if the statements were false; and thus a trustworthy reputation may arise
from the concurrence of many parties unconnected with each other, who are all
interested in investigating the subjects.691

[s 32.17.1] Public and general rights.—
Public rights are those common to all members of the State, e.g., rights of highways or
of ferry or of ﬁshery. General rights are those affecting any considerable section of the
community, e.g., disputes as to the boundaries of a village. The right must have been
one of whose existence the declarant should be aware. If the declaration is made
otherwise than upon the declarant's own knowledge it will be rejected.
This clause is inapplicable to a document purporting to deal with the rights of a private
individual as against the public, in which the interests of the individual form the subject
matter of the statement.692 A map prepared by a person, who is dead, in a previous
case not inter partes, showing the limits of a particular district, is not admissible as it is
not a matter of public right or public or general interest within the meaning of this
clause.693
Illustration (i) exempliﬁes this clause.

[s 32.17.2] Statement before any controversy had arisen.—
The declarations should have been made ante litam motam, i.e., before the beginning of
any controversy and not simply before the commencement of any suit involving the
same subject-matter. The operation of bias is thus excluded.694
To render a statement inadmissible as having been made post litam motam the same
thing must be in controversy both before and after it is made.695
The recitals in the document are admissible under this section. The history dealing with
the founding of a temple is a matter of general interest and when a statement about it
is made by a deceased person at a time when there was no controversy on this
question, that statement would clearly come within the scope of this clause.696

[s 32.18] Statement as to existence of relationship [Clause 5].—
Statements relating to the existence of any relationship between persons alive or dead
as to whose relationship the declarant has special means of knowledge are admissible
if they are made before the question in dispute was raised. Four conditions must be
fulﬁlled for the application of this clause: ﬁrstly, the statements, written or verbal, of
relevant facts must have been made by a person who is dead or cannot be found etc.,
as mentioned in the initial part of the section; secondly, the statements must relate to
the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption; thirdly, the person
making the statement must have special means of knowledge as to the relationship in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
question; and lastly, the statements must have been made before the question in
dispute was raised.697 A special knowledge is to be presumed in the case of members
of the family.698 A Hindu Brahmin has a special means of knowledge of the names and
relationship of the members of his family including collaterals up to at least seventh
degree.699 Statements made by deceased members of a family are admissible in
evidence to prove pedigree if they are made before there was anything to throw doubt
upon them.700
In State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh,701 the Supreme Court explained the approach
to be adopted in evaluating evidence regarding genealogy or pedigree:
In considering the oral evidence regarding a pedigree, a purely mathematical approach
cannot be adopted because where a long line of descent has to be proved spreading
over a century, it is obvious that the witnesses who are examined to depose to the
genealogy would have to depend on their special means of knowledge which might
have come to them through their ancestors. But, at the same time, there is a great risk
and a serious danger involved in relying solely on the evidence of witnesses given from
pure memory because the witnesses who are interested normally have a tendency to
draw more from their imagination or turn and twist the facts which they may have
heard from their ancestors in order to help the parties for whom they are deposing. The
court therefore, must take this safeguard that the evidence of such evidence may not
be accepted as is based purely on imagination or an imaginary or illusory source of
information rather than special means of knowledge as required by law. Oral testimony
of the witnesses on this matter is bound to be hearsay and their evidence is admissible
as an exception to the general rule where hearsay evidence is not admissible. In order
to appreciate the evidence of such witnesses, the principles to be kept in mind are:
(1) The relationship or the connection which the witness bears to the persons

whose pedigree is sought to be deposed by him;
(2) the nature and character of the special means of knowledge through which the

witness has come to know about the pedigree;
(3) the state of interest of the witness concerned;
(4) the precaution which must be taken to rule out any false statement made by the

witness post litem motam or a statement which is derived not by means of any
special knowledge but purely from his imagination; and
(5) the evidence of the witness must be substantially corroborated as far as time

and memory are concerned.
The Act does not contain any express provision making evidence of general reputation
admissible as proof of relationship. It is necessary to put forward evidence of the kind
described in clauses (5), (6) and (7) and section 50 to prove the existence of
relationship between persons deceased whenever the question is in issue.702
A statement of one's age made by a deceased person having special means of
knowledge is admissible under this clause.703 It is not necessary that the statement
should have been made in a judicial proceeding.704 Entries made in books of priests
(pande's bahis) if made by persons who are dead or cannot be found are relevant only
under this clause and clause (6) read with section 90 and are admissible only if all the
requirements laid down therein are proved, and among other things, the identity of the
maker of those statements is established.705 As the question as to the existence of
any relationship also includes the question as to the commencement of that
relationship, declarations of deceased competent declarants are admissible to prove a
person's date of birth, and, consequently, his age, minority or majority or the order in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
which the members of the family are born. Such declarations are also admissible to
prove parentage, names of relations or the date of death of a member of the family as
death implies termination of a relationship, just as birth implies its commencement.706
Where the executant of the deed is dead, a statement therein that the donee is his
legally married wife, is admissible under this section.707 Where the deed of adoption
contained the statement of the adoptive widow that she had taken a person in adoption
and the widow being dead could not be called as a witness, the statement as it related
to the relationship by adoption could be admitted under this clause.708
The statement, as to heirship in the family, of a person who had been the housekeeper
of the family for 24 years was rejected. Explaining the reason, BEST CJ said:709 "Facts
must be spoken of which took place many years before the trial, and of these,
traditional evidence is often the only evidence which can be obtained; but evidence of
that kind must be subject to limitation, otherwise it would be a course of great
uncertainty, and the limitation hitherto pursued, namely, the conﬁning of such evidence
to the declarations of relations of the family, affords a rule at once certain and
intelligible. If the admissibility of such evidence were not so restrained, we should on
every occasion before the testimony could be admitted have to enter upon a long
inquiry as to the degree of intimacy or conﬁdence that subsisted between the party and
the deceased declarant...If we look into the cases we shall ﬁnd that the rule has always
been conﬁned to the declaration of kindred."
Evidence of this kind is relevant only when the relationship is in question and not
merely the date of birth. Where a person refused to pay for the goods supplied to him
on the ground that he was minor, he offered evidence of his late father's declaration in
an aﬃdavit in an earlier case as to the date of his birth, the evidence was rejected.710
BRETT MR said:
It is obvious that in this case the question of family is immaterial, that the question whose
son the defendant was, is immaterial, and so were all such questions as whether he was a
legitimate or a natural son, an elder or a younger son, or as to what relation he occupied
with regard to the rest of the family. There was, therefore, no question which could be called
a question of family the only question is, what was the date of birth…?

[s 32.18.1] "Before the question in dispute was raised".—
These words do not necessarily mean before the dispute was raised in the particular
litigation in which such a statement is sought to be adduced in evidence, that is the
declarations are required to have been made not merely before the commencement of
legal proceedings but before even the existence of any actual controversy concerning
the subject-matter of the declarations.711
Illustration (k) exempliﬁes this clause. See also, Illustration (l).

[s 32.18.2] Marriage.—
Strict proof of marriage is necessary in certain criminal offences, e.g., bigamy, adultery,
enticing away a married woman. This clause had no application in such cases.712
Otherwise general reputation of marriage is admissible. An admission by a plaintiff of
her marriage with a person made before there was any dispute about such marriage
may be proved by or on her behalf under section 21(1) read with this clause.713
Where an entry in a family register maintained in accordance with Rules showed that
the name of the ﬁrst wife of the person in question was deleted on the basis of divorce
deed and the name of the second wife was entered, it was held that the entry in the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
register made at the instance of the husband was very much relevant under section
32(5) to prove that the person mentioned in the entry had married the second time.714
Evidence of competent witnesses as to their having heard the names of the ancestors
recited by members of the plaintiff's family on ceremonial and other occasions was
held to be admissible evidence in support of the pedigree on which the plaintiff based
his claim. Such evidence is not open to criticism merely on the ground that the
witnesses are relatives.715
The oral evidence in a case consisted of statements made by the plaintiffs as to their
descent, the information as to which they had received from their ancestors. Objection
was taken that such of those statements as were made since 1847 were inadmissible
in evidence under clauses (5) and (6) as being post litam. The Privy Council held that
they were admissible, the heirship of the then claimants not being really in dispute at
that time.716
A statement as to the age of a member of a family made by a sister717 or a statement
as to his age made by a testator in his will718 was held admissible after her death.
Statements of the father (since deceased) in his written statement in a maintenance
case ﬁled by the mother of the child, denying the paternity of the child, were not within
this clause or section 33 and were not admissible in evidence as against the child. The
judgment of the Magistrate in the same proceedings, holding that the child was not the
child of that father, was not binding upon the child and was inadmissible in evidence.
Statements by the mother that the child was begotten by a person other than her
husband were inadmissible against the child.719
For the purpose of the decision of a question of limitation, it was necessary to prove
the date of the plaintiff's birth. The plaintiff and one of his witnesses each spoke to
statements made to them by relatives of the plaintiff, who were since deceased,
relating to the date of the plaintiff's birth. It was held that such statements were
admissible in evidence.720 A plaint in a former suit veriﬁed by a deceased member of
the family, and as such having special means of knowledge, was held admissible under
this clause to prove the order in which certain persons were born and their ages.721 In
an action to recover the amount due upon certain mortgages, the defendant pleaded
that he was an infant when he executed them. As evidence in support of this plea there
was tendered at the trial an entry, recording the date of the defendant's birth made by
the defendant's deceased father in a book in which he made similar entries with regard
to his family. It was held under an Ordinance exactly similar to the Evidence Act that
having regard to Illustration (l) to this section the entry was admissible in evidence.722

[s 32.19] Difference between clauses (5) and (6) [Clause 6].—
Clause (5) refers to statements relating to the existence of any relationship between
persons alive or dead, and the statement is to be made by a person who had special
means of knowledge, that is, it imposes the restrictions that the person making the
statement should have special means of knowledge. See Illustration (k). Clause (6)
refers to the existence of relationship between deceased persons only; and it imposes
no such restriction as under clause (5). It is enough if the statement is made in a will or
deed relating to the affairs of the family or in any family pedigree, etc., no matter by
whom it was made.
Clause (6) also refers to pedigree, but differs from clause (5) in this—that in clause (5)
the evidence is the declaration of the person deceased or otherwise unproduceable, in
clause (6) the evidence is that of things, such as genealogical trees, tomb-stones, etc.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The statements in clause (5) may be either written or verbal; the statement in clause
(6) must always be written as the evidence therein is that of things.
In order to be admissible the statement relied on must be made ante litem motam by
persons who are dead i.e. before the commencement of any controversy actual or legal
upon the same point.723

[s 32.19.1] Statement as to relationship in will or deed.—
Under this clause statements relating to the existence of relationship between
deceased persons made before the question in dispute was raised are admissible
when they are contained in a will or a deed or in a family pedigree,724 or upon a tombstone. It is not necessary as in clause (5) that the statements should have been made
by a person who had special means of knowledge, simply because it is not probable
that a person would insert in a will or a solemn deed any matter the truth of which he
did not know. The statement should not have been made in the testator's own interest
or in view of contemplated litigation.725 The statement of testator in his will that the
defendant No. 1 was his adopted son was held to be relevant to show the fact but not
conclusive of it.726
The word "verbal" used in the beginning of this section has no application to this
clause.
Illustrations (l) and (m) exemplify this clause.

[s 32.19.2] CASES.—Horoscope.—
In a suit to recover possession of immoveable property, the plaintiff tendered in
evidence a horoscope which, he said, had been given to him by his mother and had
been seen by members of his family and used on the occasion of his marriage. He was
unable to say by whom the horoscope, or an endorsement on it, which purported to
state what his name was, had been written. It was held that the horoscope was not
admissible.727 This case has been distinguished in a Madras case where the
defendants relied on a horoscope produced by the plaintiff's mother and which had
been a public record from a period ante litam motam and was put in as an admission
under sections 17 and 18.728

[s 32.19.2.1] Pedigree table.—
In a suit for inheritance claimed by the plaintiffs, alleging themselves to be collateral
relations and heirs of the last male owner, through an ancestor common to him and to
them, a pedigree table was put in evidence. The persons from whose statements at no
distant date the pedigree had been drawn up were absent, and it had not been shown
that this had been for any one or other of the reasons contained in this section. It was
held that the pedigree table was inadmissible.729 A family pedigree was sought to be
proved by the books kept by the family chronicler prepared by the chroniclers from time
to time from the information supplied by members of the family. It was held that the
pedigree would be admissible under this clause and also under clause 2.730

[s 32.20] Statements as to Customs or Rights [Clause 7].—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A statement contained in any deed, will, or other document which relates to a
transaction by which a right or custom in question was created, modiﬁed, recognized,
asserted, or denied, is admissible under this clause. A statement in any relevant
document, however recent, and though not more than thirty years old, is admissible.
Statements of facts contained in a will of a deceased person tending to show that the
properties are his self-acquisitions are admissible.731
The word "verbal" used in the beginning of this section naturally does not apply to this
clause as well. This clause does not allow introduction of parole evidence.732
Under this clause the word "right" will include both public and private rights.

[s 32.21] General Remarks [Clause 8].—
When a number of persons assemble together to give vent to one common statement,
which statement expresses the feelings or impressions made in their minds at the time
of making it, that statement may be repeated by the witnesses, and is evidence.733
Thus, where a person was charged with raising a seditious mob, expressions of alarm
by persons in the neighbourhood were admitted in evidence to show the feelings
produced by the gathering;734 evidence that a plaintiff was publicly laughed at in
consequence of a libel was admitted to prove that the libel referred to the plaintiff.735
Illustration (n) is intended to exemplify this clause.

587 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 2.
588 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 2.
589 Satish Chandra Seal v Emperor, (1944) 2 Cal 76 ; P Bikshapathi v State of AP, 1989 Cr LJ

1186 AP, dowry death, the court explaining the rationale of these exceptions.
590 Sant Gopal v State of UP, 1995 Cr LJ 312 (All).
591 Kajal Sarkar v State of Assam, 1993 Cr LJ 3869 (Gau).
592 Sant Gopal v State of UP, 1995 Cr LJ 312 (All); Arjun Kushwah v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 2538

(MP), the maxim of law is that a man will not like to meet his maker with a lie in his mouth. A
dying declaration made by the victim in a ﬁt mental state but on the verge of death has a special
sanctity of the solemn moment.
593 Dashrath v State of MP, AIR 2008 SC 316 : (2007) 12 SCC 487 , can be the sole basis of

conviction, requiring corroboration is merely a rule of prudence.
594 Umakant v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2014 SC 2943 (para 18).
595 Laxman v State of Maharashtra, (2002) 6 SCC 710 .
596 Mallella Shyamsunder v State of Andhra Pradesh, (2015) 2 SCC 486 .
597 Mallella Shyamsunder v State of AP, (2015) 2 SCC 486 .
598 Ashabai v State of Maharashtra, (2013) 2 SCC 224 .
599 Pandian K Nadar v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3883 (Bom); Prem Chand v State of UP,

1993 Supp. 4 SCC 214 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 11 , dying declaration recorded by magistrate, no
discrepancies, consistent with statement of eye-witnesses, reliable. Bolem Bhaskara Rao v State
of AP, 1995 Supp 4 SCC 211 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 49 , magistrate recording the statement veriﬁed

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that he was fully satisﬁed that the injured person was in good mental condition, the declaration
was held to be relevant though no question was put to the injured person about his ﬁtness.
Rafat Mian v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 3039 (All), deceased admitted to hospital in an unconscious
state after two hours of burn injuries of ﬁrst and second degree she regained consciousness
during night and made a statement. Her dying declaration was recorded by a magistrate and the
same was regarded by the court as authentic. Ram Bihari Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC
1850 : 1998 Cr LJ 2515 : (1998) 4 SCC 517 , recorded by magistrate after being satisﬁed as to
the identity of the maker as well as her ﬁtness to make the statement signature of the trainee
nurse was taken because of the non-availability of doctor. Concurrent ﬁndings as to the value of
the declaration upheld. Harjit Kaur v State of Punjab, AIR 1999 SC 2571 : 1999 Cr LJ 4055 :
(1999) 6 SCC 545 , recorded by a sub-Divisional Magistrate, who was an IAS oﬃcer, relatives of
the deceased were not present, agitation by relatives did not make the recording to be under
their pressure. Thumbs were burnt, but medical evidence did not disclose that she could not
have her thumb impression.
600 Amir Jamal Khan v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 1956 (Bom).
601 State of UP v Shishupal Singh, AIR 1994 SC 129 : 1994 Cr LJ 617 : 1992 Supp (3) SCC 60 .

Subhash v State of Haryana, AIR 2011 SC 349 : 2011 (1) Crimes 62 (SC), the magistrate recorded
the statement without trying to know whether the hospital was located within his jurisdiction,
ﬁtness was endorsed by the doctor after recording of the statement, the Supreme Court
regarded the declaration as suspicious.
602 Kulwant Singh v State of Punjab, (2004) 9 SCC 257 : AIR 2004 SC 2875 , not necessary to be

recorded in the presence of a magistrate.
603 Ramawati Devi v State of Bihar, (1983) 1 SCC 211 : AIR 1983 SC 164 : 1983 Cr LJ 221 ;

Surinder Paul v State, 1991 Cr LJ 745 (P&H), the magistrate must record dying declaration in
accordance with prescribed rules. State v Sita Devi, 1997 Cr LJ 2210 (P&H), High Court Rules
required recording by Judicial Magistrate, no explanation as to why recorded by executive
magistrate. Even then he did not record it in his own handwriting. No indication of time of
recording of state of health. Rejected. Raj Kumar v State of Punjab, 2000 Cr LJ 3218 (P&H),
Punjab Police Rules, 1934, dying declaration to be recorded by Judicial Magistrate, if possible. A
dying declaration recorded otherwise was not excluded from consideration.
604 Sant Gopal v State of UP, 1995 Cr LJ 312 (All). A dying declaration not recorded in question

and answer form is not inadmissible on that ground when it is complete, Surjeet Kaur v State of
MP, 1994 Cr LJ 1886 (MP). See also, Ganpat Mahadeo Mane v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1993 SC
1180 : 1993 Cr LJ 298 : 1993 Supp (2) SCC 242 . Rajendra Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1996 Cr LJ
1560 (Raj), distinguishing Rabi Chandra Pradhan v State of Orissa, AIR 1980 SC 1738 : (1980) 1
SCC 240 and referring to Padmaben Shamabhai Patel v State of Gujarat, 1991 CLR (SC) 162 :
(1991) 1 SCC 744 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 275 . State of Karnataka v Shariff, AIR 2003 SC 1074 , a
statement cannot be discarded for the reason that it was not recorded in question-answer form.
A statement in narrative form may be more natural and may give a version of the incident as it
was perceived by the victim.
605 Prem Kumar Gulati v State of Haryana, (2014) 14 SCC 646 (para 16) : 2015 Cr LJ 159 .
606 State of Karnataka v Shariff, 2003 Cr LJ 1254 (SC). Ram Bihari Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR

1998 SC 1850 : 1998 Cr LJ 2515 , should preferably be in question-answer form; the fact that it
consists of a few sentences in the actual words of the maker, not a ground against its reliability.
607 Rajendra Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 2668 (All).
608 Amarsingh Munnasingh Suryawanshi v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2008 SC 479 : 2008 Cr LJ

705 .
609 Adevappa Nagappa Anaglokar v State of Karnataka, 1998 Cr LJ 584 (Kant).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
610 Darshana Devi v State of Punjab, 1995 Supp (4) SCC 126 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 38 . Ramesh

Bhagwan Manjrekar v State, 1997 Cr LJ 796 (Bom), it was highly doubtful whether the injured
person was in state of consciousness at the time of declaration. There were discrepancies in
the FIR and statements in the court. Oral declaration not accepted Subramanian v State, 1997 Cr
LJ 3540 (Mad), oral statement made before the head-constable, thumb impression obtained on
blank paper which was subsequently ﬁlled up with the contents of the statement, held not
reliable. Ram Bihari Yadav v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2515 : AIR 1998 SC 1862 : (1998) 4 SCC 517 ,
recording should be in question answer form. But the fact that the statement was in the form of
a few sentences in the actual words of the maker was held to be not a ground against its
reliability. Recording was by the magistrate after satisfying himself about the identity of the
maker and her ﬁtness. Signature was that of the trainee-nurse because of non-availability of
doctor. Concurrent-ﬁnding about admissibility of the statement was upheld. Paras Yadav v State
of Bihar, 1999 Cr LJ 1122 : AIR 1999 SC 644 , oral statement made by the injured person to the
police and other witnesses at the place where he was lying injured. The statement was taken to
be a dying declaration because of the death of the declarant. The witnesses testiﬁed that the
injured person was in a ﬁt state of health. The statement was corroborated by medical report.
Non-recording in regular form was held to be not material. State v Surya Prasad Verma, 2001 Cr
LJ 2481 (All), immediately prior to his death, the victim said that he and another person were
administered poison by the accused, it was corroborated by other evidence, no positive reason
was found to disbelieve the oral dying declaration, held, conviction on its basis was proper. S
Tripat Patra v State of Orissa, 2003 Cr LJ 1591 (Ori), oral declaration was supposed to have been
made by a poison victim, she could not reach hospital, was brought back home. Circumstances
showed that she was not in position to make any statement. Kishanlal v State of Rajasthan, AIR
1999 SC 3062 , oral declaration made before her father, uncle and grand-mother, mentioning the
names of accused persons. In her second dying declaration made before the Magistrate she did
not name any persons, nor could speak of their identity because of smoke. The court did not act
upon the declaration.
611 Balbir v Vazir, (2014) 12 SCC 670 (para 20).
612 Laxmi v Om Prakash, 2000 Cr LJ 3302 : AIR 2001 SC 2383 . Sabbita Saryavathi v Bandala

Srinivasarao, (2004) 10 SCC 620 : 2004 Cr LJ 3337 , grave injuries in the heart and lungs region,
should have gone unconscious as indicated by medical opinion earlier than two years and,
therefore, the injured could not have made any statement after two years, dying declaration not
reliable.
613 Dandu Lakshmi Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1999 SC 3255 : 1999 Cr LJ 4287 , the court also

noted that there were divergent versions in the statement and the same could not have been
ignored.
614 Vithal Sadashiv Gaikwad v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 2035 (Bom). Amar Singh v State

of MP, 1996 Cr LJ 1582 (MP), without proof of mental or physical ﬁtness, not reliable. Vinay
Kumar v State of MP, AIR 1994 SC 830 : 1994 Cr LJ 942 , dying declaration recorded by doctor
after veriﬁcation that the victim was not tutored, nor assisted by anyone present there and also
that he was in a proper state of mind to make the statement. The declaration was regarded as
good evidence. Panna v State of Rajasthan, 1994 SCC Cri 1140 , head injury, the doctor observed
that generally in such cases, the victim should have died or rendered unconscious from which
he would not recover. The doctor, however, did not rule out the possibility of the victim being
able to speak. His dying declaration was held to be relevant. Sita Ram v State, 1998 Cr LJ 287
(Raj) a dying declaration not bearing the certiﬁcate that the deceased was in a ﬁt state of mind
to make the statement could not make the basis of conviction. Rajendra Singh v State, 1998 Cr
LJ 2126 (Raj), there was no certiﬁcate of the scribe that he had recorded the true statement or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that of the doctor that the injured person was in a ﬁt state to make the statement. No attempt
seemed to have been made to get the statement recorded by a magistrate. The language of the
statement did not seem to be that of the deceased. The manner of recording was also doubtful.
The declaration was rejected. Mange Ram v State (Delhi Admn.) 1998 Cr LJ 2269 (SC), dying
declaration before the investigating oﬃcer and the doctor was found to be consistent and
reliable. Medical certiﬁcate was that the injured person was in full senses when brought to the
hospital and ﬁt for making the statement. The statement of the witness that he was under the
inﬂuence of drink could not be relied upon. Order of conviction was upheld. Jai Karan v State
(NCT) Delhi, AIR 1999 SC 3512 : 1999 Cr LJ 4512 : (1999) 8 SCC 161 , doctor recorded the
statement in hospital, did not read it over to her, nor taken her signature or thumb impression,
not attested by any other person, medical incharge of the ward stated that the injured woman
was not ﬁt enough to make any statement, declaration not relied upon. State of Karnataka v
Shariff, AIR 2003 SC 1074 , the doctor recorded in the accident register of the hospital that the
patient was conscious, her orientation was good and she answered well the questions put to
her. Declaration not to be discarded because the injury report and post-mortem report stated
that she must not have been in a position to make the statement.
615 Laxman v State of Maharashtra, 2002 Cr LJ 4095 (SC).
616 Laxman v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2973 .
617 Radhey Shyam v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 3709 (All); Jose v State of Kerala, 1994 Supp 3 SCC

1 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1659 , dying declaration recorded in the question-answer-form by a doctor in
the presence of another doctor, subsequently another statement recorded by a police oﬃcer in
his own words under section 161, CrPC, this was also corroborated by witnesses. The dying
declaration recorded by the doctor could not be ignored just only on the ground that they were
two declarations with variations. Harijit Kaur v State of Punjab, AIR 1999 SC 2571 : 1999 Cr LJ
4055 : (1999) 6 SCC 545 , endorsement by doctor as to ﬁtness was made not on the dying
declaration but on the application, not rendering the declaration suspicious in any manner
Shashidhar Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2676 (MP), the victim suffered multiple gunshot injuries. A
statement immediately after the incident and the last statement varied in the sense that only
names of the accused persons were given in the last statement and not other details. Such
variation could not be said to be impossible.
618 Gangaram Gehani v State of Maharashtra, (1982) 1 SCC 700 : AIR 1982 SC 839 : 1982 Cr LJ

630 .
619 Mukesh v State for NCT Delhi, AIR 2017 SC 2161 : : (2017) 6 SCC 1 : LNIND 2017 SC 252 .
620 Laxmi v Om Prakash, 2001 Cr LJ 3302 : AIR 2001 SC 2383 .
621 Samadhan Dhudaka Koli v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 1059 : (2008) 12 SCC 705 ;

Rajendra v State of Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 759 : (2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 158 , three dying
declarations were consistent, there could no objection that the second one was not recorded by
a magistrate, there is no law which mandates recording by magistrate. Ravi Kumar v State of TN,
AIR 2006 SC 1448 : (2006) 9 SCC 240 : 2006 Cr LJ 1625 , the dying declaration was in
contradiction with the accident register, held not fatal when it was explained away in the face of
two dying declarations.
622 Lakhan v State of MP, (2010) 8 SCC 514 .
623 Vutukuru Lakshmaiah v State of AP, (2015) 11 SCC 102 , paras 20 and 21.
624 Tejram Patil v State of Maharashtra, (2015) 8 SCC 494 , paras 18 and 21 : 2015 (2) SCJ 710 .
625 Queen-Empress v Abdullah, (1885) 7 All 385 , 397 FB; Chandrasekera v The King, (1937) AC

220 : (1936) 39 Bom LR 359 .
626 Queen-Empress v Abdullah, sup.; Emperor v Sadhu Charan Das, (1921) 49 Cal 600 ; Chandrika

Ram Kahar v King-Emperor, (1922) 1 Pat 401; Ranga v The Crown, (1924) 5 Lah 305; Emperor v

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Motiram Raisingh, (1936) 38 Bom LR 818 : (1937) Bom 68.
627 Queen-Empress v Abdullah, sup.: Chandrasekera v The King, sup. Pandian K Nadar v State of

Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3883 (Bom), the deceased indicated to the accused through gestures,
relied upon.
628 State of Assam v Bhelu Sheikh, AIR 1989 SC 1097 : 1989 Cr LJ 879 : 1989 Supp (2) SCC 1 :

1989 SCC (Cri) 643 ; State of Punjab v Amarjit Singh, AIR 1988 SC 2012 : 1989 Cr LJ 95 : 1988
Supp SCC 709 , statement before FIR recorded by ASI but in the presence of doctor.
629 Sudama v King-Emperor, (1949) Nag 301.
630 Deepak v State of MP, 1994 Cr LJ 767 (MP).
631 Ibid. Kans Raj v State of Punjab, 2000 Cr LJ 2993 : AIR 2000 SC 2324 .
632 Thakur Das v State of HP, 1992 Cr LJ 2415 (HP); Ram Bihari Yadav v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2269

(SC), an explanation about relevancy and admissibility of dying declarations. Ram Kumar v State,
1998 Cr LJ 952 (MP), in a prosecution for abetment of suicide, it was held that letters written by
the deceased wife to her relatives disclosing the circumstances which led to her suicide were
admissible in evidence. State of Haryana v Mange Ram, 2003 Cr LJ 830 (SC), it is not necessary
that the maker of the statement should at the time be under shadow of death or entertain a
belief that his death was imminent. The injured person in this case was fully conscious and
stated the circumstances in detail. Evidence admitted.
633 Venkatasubba Reddi, (1931) 54 Mad 931; MF Rego Mrs v Emperor, (1933) 29 NLR 251.
634 Bakhshish Singh v The State of Punjab, AIR 1957 SC 904 : 1957 Cr LJ 1459 .
635 Pakala Narayana Swami v The King-Emperor, (1939) 66 IA 66 : 41 Bom LR 428 : (1941) Ran

789n : (1939) 18 Pat 234 : AIR 1939 SC 47 .
636 Emperor v Mohammad Shaikh, (1942) 2 Cal 144 . See also, Kulamanji Sandha v State of

Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 599 (Ori), description of injured at the police station, dying subsequently of
infection in injuries, held relevant under the section. The court cited Motisingh v State of UP, AIR
1964 SC 900 : 1963 All LJ 647; Chandrabhan Singh v State, 1971 Cr LJ 94 and Abdul Gani
Bandukchi v Emperor, AIR 1943 Cal 465 : 1945 Cr LJ 71 .
637 Rattan Singh v State of HP, AIR 1997 SC 768 : 1997 Cr LJ 833 .
638 Allijan Munshi, (1959) 61 Bom LR 1620 .
639 Satwa Wakode v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 4028 (Bom).
640 Emperor v Kunwarpal Singh, (1948) All 122 .
641 Sharad Birdichand Sarda v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 .
642 Pakala Narayana Swami v The King-Emperor, (1939) 66 IA 66 : 41 Bom LR 428 : (1941) Ran

789n : (1939) 18 Pat 234. See further, Tellu v State, 1988 Cr LJ 1062 (Del) following Tehal Singh v
State of Punjab, AIR 1979 SC 1347 : 1979 Cr LJ 1031 ; Sharad Birdichand Sarda v State of
Maharashtra, 1984 Cr LJ 1738 : AIR 1984 SC 1622 , at 1630 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 SCC (Cri)
487 ; Rajindra Kumar v State of Punjab, AIR 1960 Punj 310 : 1960 Cr LJ 851 ; State of UP v
Kanchan Singh, AIR 1954 All 153 : 1954 Cr LJ 264 , in all of which it was reemphasised that it is
not necessary that the statement should be made at a time when the person making it was at
the point or in danger of death. Saraswathi Swamigal v State of TN, (2005) 2 SCC 13 : AIR 2005
SC 716 : 2005 Cr LJ 883 , telephonic conversation of the deceased with one of the witnesses
did not refer to the circumstances of death.
643 Patel Hiralal Jottaram v State of Gujarat, AIR 2001 SC 2944 , wife burning, original statement

gave wrong name of the father of the accused, the mistake was rectiﬁed by further questioning,
even this process was held to be a part of the transaction.
644 Patel Hiralal Jottaram v State of Gujarat, AIR 2001 SC 2944 at 2949.
645 Khushal Rao v State of Bombay, (1958) SCR 552 : 1958 Cr LJ 106 : AIR 1958 SC 22 ;

Pompiah v State of Mysore, AIR 1965 SC 939 : (1965) 2 Cr LJ 31 ; Bijoy Kumar Sen v State of WB,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1988 Cr LJ 1818 (Cal). A dying declaration from the very nature of things should be closely
scrutinised :Kishen Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1963 Punj 170 . Jorubha Juzer Singh v State of
Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 358 : 1980 Cr LJ 314 , dying declaration found to be reliable, it was made
ﬁrst to the constable who reached the spot, repeated before Taluk Magistrate and again to the
PSI, doctor's certiﬁcate of conscious state, no tutoring and no motivation against accused. Suraj
Mal v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 559 : 1992 Cr LJ 520 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 639 , dying
declaration found reliable despite different opinion of police oﬃcer. Girdhar Shankar Tawade v
State of Maharashtra, 2002 Cr LJ 2814 : AIR 2002 SC 2078 , corroboration, though not necessary,
if it is there it will strengthen the evidence. Independent witnesses may not be there, but there
should be proper care and caution in accepting the evidence and relying upon it.
See generally, Rawal Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1195 (Del); Batto v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1201 (Del);
Public Prosecutor, High Court of AP, Hyd, v Jangili Nirmala, 1997 Cr LJ 1420 (AP); Baijnath v State,
1997 Cr LJ 1691 (All); Kale Mian v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1848 (Pat); Naguloncha Krishna v State,
1997 Cr LJ 2834 (AP); Virendra Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 3098 (Del); Re Basith, 1997 Cr LJ 3232
(Mad); Kartar Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 4376 (P&H).
646 Habib Usman v State of Gujarat, AIR 1979 SC 1181 : 1979 Cr LJ 711 ; Jayaraj v State of TN,

AIR 1976 SC 1519 .
647 Munnu Raja v State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1976 SC 2199 : 1976 Cr LJ 1718 .
648 Sharad v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1738 . A similar case

Mithailal v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3580 (Bom), death of victim-wife due to starvation,
cruelty and ill-treatment, letters written to her brother, held, admissible. See also, Suresh
Raghunath Kochare v State of Maharashtra, 1992 Cr LJ 2455 (Bom), the court relied on Wazir
Chand v State of Haryana, AIR 1989 SC 378 : 1989 Cr LJ 809 and referred to Sharad Birdhichand
Sarda v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1738 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984
SCC (Cri) 487 .
649 Followed in Padmabai v State of MP, 1987 Cr LJ 1573 (MP), where also letters were written

by the deceased wife to her sisters within a time reasonably close in proximity of time to the
incident in which she lost her life, admissible. Distinguished in Tapan Pal v State of WB, 1992 Cr
LJ 1017 (Cal), where isolated statements made six months before the suicide by the married
woman were held to be not relevant as dying declaration. The court relied upon statements of
law at pp 94-95 of this book, Reprint Edn of 1982.
650 Najjam Faraghi v State of WB, 1998 Cr LJ 866 : AIR 1998 SC 682 ; Kans Raj v State of Punjab,

2000 Cr LJ 2993 AIR 2000 SC 2324 , it is not required that the statement as to death to have
been made in imminent expectation of death.
651 Kanchy Komuramma v State of AP, 1995 Supp (4) SCC 118 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 31 . Goverdhan

Raoji Ghyare v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Supp 4 SCC 316 : 1994 SCC Cri 15 , minor
discrepancies in the two declarations of the injured bride (deceased), but both were similar in
material particulars, one was taken down by a police oﬃcer and the other by the taluka
magistrate, minor discrepancies inconsequential. Satya Narayan v State, 2003 Cr LJ (NOC) 185
(MP) : 2002 CLR (SC & MP) 820, death of wife by burn injuries in oral statements to her parents
and in a letter to them, she complained of cruelty by husband, did not fall within the purview of
section 32 because they did not relate to cause of death the husband was acquitted under
section 306, IPC on the basis of the dying declaration that she sustained burn injuries
accidentally from stove. Acquittal under section 498-A also. Kamalakar Nandram Bhavasar v
State of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC 503 : (2004) 10 SCC 192 , no dying declaration because of
extensive burns.
652 Mukesh v State for NCT Delhi, AIR 2017 SC 2161 : (2017) 6 SCC 1 : LNIND 2017 SC 252 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
653 Atbir v Govt (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 9 SCC 1 .
654 Maqsoodhan v State of UP, AIR 1983 SC 126 : 1983 Cr LJ 218 . Section 21(1) covers cases

in which a person can use his own statement where that would have been relevant in a dispute
between third parties if he had died. Section 157 would permit a former statement of the
witness to be proved in support of his present statement in the court. Ram Prasad v State of
Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 2889 : AIR 1999 SC 1969 , where the person making a dying declaration
survives, his statement cannot be treated as a dying declaration. But it is capable of being used
to corroborate his testimony or to contradict it. Heera Lal (Dr) v State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 2849
(All), the accused committed murder of wife and three children and attempted to kill himself. He
made a statement before the magistrate under section 164, CrPC. It could not be treated as
dying declaration because he survived, nor it was relevant as a confession. Biswanatha Jena v
State, 2002 Cr LJ (NOC) 37 (Ori), victim with multiple injuries, doctor recorded statement, but the
victim survived, the statement not allowed to be used as a substantive evidence. Shrawan
Bhadaji Bhirad v State of Maharashtra, 2003 Cr LJ 398 (SC), unlawful assembly, several injured,
but some survived, statements recorded then and there under fear of death might occur,
conviction on the basis of such statements was not disturbed. Ram Singh v Sonia, AIR 2007 SC
1218 : (2007) 3 SCC 1 , admission into hospital because of suspected poisoning, as against her
dying declaration, it was not allowed to be contended that as the victim survived, no dying
declaration must have been recorded.
655 State of UP v Veer Singh, (2004) 10 SCC 117 : 2004 Cr LJ 3835 .
656 Ranjit Singh v State of MP, AIR 2011 SC 255 : 2010 (4) Crimes 280 (SC).
657

Soney Lal Jha v Darabdeo Narain Singh, (1935) 14 Pat 461 FB, approving Ningawa v

Bharmappa, (1897) 23 Bom 63, on the interpretation of this clause, but differing on the
interpretation of clause 3.
658 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 697, p 446; Lakha Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 3638 (Raj), report of

injuries and postmortem report which were proved to be in the handwriting of the doctor who
prepared them, held to be relevant and could be used in evidence against the accused.
659 Ningawa v Bharmappa, (1897) 23 Bom 63, 67.
660 Sheonandan Singh v Jeonandan Dusadh, (1908) 13 Cal WN 71.
661 Mussamat Naina Koer v Gobardhan Singh, (1916) 2 PLJ 42 .
662 Abinas Chandra Majhi v Pratul Chandra Ghose, (1928) 55 Cal 1070 .
663 Ibid.
664 Ganesh Prasad v Narendra Nath, AIR 1953 SC 431 .
665 Deputy Commissioner ofBara Banki v Munshi Ram Parshad, (1899) 26 IA 254 : 27 Cal 118,

overruling Munchershaw Bezonji v New Dhurumsey S & W Co, (1880) 4 Bom 576; Chandreshwar
Prasad Narain Singh v Bisheshwar Pratap Narain Singh, (1926) 5 Pat 777.
666 Rampyarabai v Balaji Shridhar, (1904) 28 Bom 294: 6 Bom LR 50.
667 Kachrulal v Nandilal, (1955) Nag 618.
668 Jethibai v Putlibai, (1912) 14 Bom LR 1020 .
669 Roshan, (1956) Pun 140.
670 Shreepad v Kanhaiyalal, (1955) MB 352.
671 Petlad Turkey RD Works v Workers' Union, AIR 1960 SC 1006 .
672 Jagdish Parshad v Sarwan Kumar, AIR 2003 P&H. 3, the entry was relevant against the

visitor because it carried a statement that a particular person was not his brother. The visitor
had since died.
673 Soney Lal Jha v Darabdeo Narain Singh, (1935) 14 Pat 461 FB.
674 Dal Bahadur Singh v Bijai Bahadur Singh, (1929) 32 Bom LR 487 : 57 IA 14: 52 All 1.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
675 Ramrati Kuer v Dwarika Prasad, AIR 1967 SC 1134 : (1967) 1 SCR 153 .
676 Bhim Singh v Kan Singh, AIR 1980 SC 727 : 1980 (3) SCC 72 .
677 Achhailall v King-Emperor, (1945-46) 25 Pat 347.
678 Janu Kadir v Crown, (1946) Kar 79 .
679 Taylor v Witham, (1876) 3 Ch D 605 : 45 LJ Ch 798 : 24 WR 877.
680 Ex parte Edwards: Re Tollemache, (1884) 14 QBD 415 .
681 Nga Po Yin v King-Emperor, (1906) UBR (Evi) (1904-06) 3.
682 Ajodhi v Emperor, 56 IC 582.
683 Page 205 (11th Edn 1972).
684 (1844) 11 Ct. f. 85.
685 Pofendick v Bridgwater, (1855) 24 LJ QB 289 : 119 ER 443.
686 Cockman v Cockman, (1933) 56 All 570 .
687 Narhari v Ambabai, (1919) 22 Bom LR 57 : 44 Bom 192.
688 Dal Bahadur Singh v Bijai Bahadur Singh, (1929) 32 Bom LR 487 : 57 IA 14: 52 All 1.
689 Queen v Inhabitants of Bedfordshire, (1855) 4 E&B 535.
690 Wright v Tatham, (1838) 5 clause & F 670.
691 Per Lord Campbell CJ, in The Queen v Inhabitants of Bedfordshire, (1855) 4 E&B 535, 542.
692 Heiniger v Droz, (1900) 3 Bom LR 1 : 25 Bom 433.
693 Kesho Prasad v Bhagjogna Kuer, (1937) 39 Bom LR 731 : 16 Pat 258 PC.
694 Berkeley Peerage Case, (1811) 4 Camp 401, 417; Amina Khatun Musammat v Khalil-ur-

Rahman Khan, (1933) 8 Luck 455 ; State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 :
1983(3) SCC 118 .
695 Kalka Parshad v Mathura Parshad, (1908) 35 IA 166 : 10 Bom LR 1088 : 30 All 510.
696 KCM Harichandan v Commissioner of Endowments, (1961) Cut 109.
697 Dolgobinda v Nimai Charan, AIR 1959 SC 914 : 1959 Supp (2) SCR 814 ; Musammat Biro v

Atma Ram, (1937) 64 IA 92 : 39 Bom LR 726. These requirements were restated by the Supreme
Court in State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : 1983 (3) SCC 118 .
698 Prabhakar v Sarubai, (1943) Nag 779.
699 Gobardhan Mandal v Janaki Nath Mukharjee, (1953) 2 Cal 199 .
700 Abdul Ghafur v Hussain Bibi, (1930) 33 Bom LR 420 : 58 IA 188: 12 Lah 336; Gokhul Pande v

Baldeo Sukul, (1927) 7 Pat 90.
701 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 3 SCC 118 .
702 Shivlal v Jootha, (1952) 2 Raj 231 .
703 Abdul Subhan Khan alias Khalilur-Rahman v Nusrat Ali Khan, (1936) 12 Luck 606 ; Madan

Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1952) 2 Raj 775 . State of Punjab v Mohinder Singh, AIR 2005 SC
1868 : (2005) 3 SCC 702 : (2005) 4 Serv LR 683, for proof of date of birth, horoscope has been
held to be weak kind of evidence, and may be considered on if authenticity is established.
704 Musammat Biro v Atma Ram, (1937) 64 IA 92 : 39 Bom LR 726.
705 Hazura Singh v Mohindar Singh, (1937) 18 Lah 732, disapproving Jahangir v Sheoraj Singh,

(1915) 37 All 600 .
706 Mahadeo Prasad v Ghulam Mohammad, (1946) All 649 .
707 Subarna Bissoiani v Arjuno Bissoi, (1949) Cut 527.
708 Punjabrao Deorao, (1959) 62 Bom LR 726 .
709 Johnson v Lauson, (1824) 2 Bing 86 : 136 ER 257.
710 Haynes v Guthrie, (1884) 13 QBD 818 : 53 LJ QB 521 : 31 LT 645.
711 KV Subbaraju v C. Subbaraju, AIR 1968 SC 947 : 1968 (3) SCR 137 ; Kalka Parshad v Mathura

Parshad, (1908) 35 IA 166 : 10 Bom LR 1088: 30 All 510.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
712 Empress v Pitambur Singh, (1879) 5 Cal 566 FB.
713 Mussammat Bashiran v Mohammad Husain, (1941) 16 Luck 615 .
714 Twarku v Surti, AIR 1997 AP 76 .
715 Debi Pershad Chowdhry v Rani Radha Chowdhrain, (1904) 31 IA 160 : 32 Cal 84.
716 Bahadur Singh v Mohar Singh, (1901) 29 IA 1 : 4 Bom LR 233: 24 All 94.
717 Oriental Government Security Life Assurance Co Ltd v Narasimha Chari, (1901) 25 Mad 183.
718 KV Subbaraju v C. Subbaraju, AIR 1968 SC 947 : 1968 (2) SCR 292 .
719 Karapaya Servai v Mayandi, (1933) 12 Ran 243: 36 Bom LR 394 (PC).
720 Ram Chandra Dutt v Jogeswar Narain Deo, (1893) 20 Cal 758 ; Bipin Behary Daw v Sreedam

Chunder Dey, (1886) 13 Cal 42 may be considered as overruled.
721 Dhanmull v Ram Chunder Ghose, (1890) 24 Cal 265 , 268; Gokhul Pande v Baldeo Sukul,

(1927) 7 Pat 90; Mauladad Khan v Abdul Sattar, (1917) 39 All 426 .
722 Mahomed Syedol Ariﬃn v Yeoh Ooi Gark, (1916) 43 IA 256 : 19 Bom LR 157: (1916) 2 AC

575 .
723 Kalidindi Venkata Subbaraju v Chintalpati Subbaraju, AIR 1968 SC 947 , p 953 : [1968] 2 SCR

292 . See also Om Prakash Sharma v Rajendra Prasad Shewda, (2015) 15 SCC 556 , para 22 :
2016 (2) SCJ 90 .
724 Jang Bahadur Singh Thakur v Arjun Singh Thakur, (1927) 3 Luck 256 .
725 Chandreshwar Prasad Narain Singh v Bisheshwar Pratap Narain Singh, (1926) 5 Pat 777.
726 Banwari Lal v Trilok Chand, AIR 1980 SC 419 : 1980(1) SCC 349 .
727

Ram Narain Kallia v Monee Bibee, (1883) 9 Cal 613 ; Satis Chunder Mukhopadhya v

Mohendro Lal Pathuk, (1890) 17 Cal 849 .
728 Raja Goundan v Raja Goundan, (1893) 17 Mad 134.
729 Surjan v Sardar, (1900) 2 Bom LR 942 : 27 IA 183: 23 All 72.
730 Mohansingh v Dalpatsingh, (1921) 24 Bom LR 289 : 46 Bom 753.
731 Venkataramayya v Seshamma, (1937) Mad 1012; Chandrakant v Sharat Chandra, (1954) MB

123; Kuldeep Sharma v Satyandra Kumar Sharma, AIR 2001 All 366 , in a dispute as to title to
property, there was a recital in a gift deed of 1945 as to the matter of title of that property. The
court did not accept this as evidence of title and, therefore, said that the question of title would
have to be decided on the basis of other evidence.
732 Dwarka Nath v Lalchand, AIR 1965 SC 1549 : 1965(3) SCR 27 .
733 The Queen v Ram Dutt Chowdhry, (1874) 23 WR (Cr) 35, 38.
734 Redford v Birley, (1822) 1 St. Tr NS 1071, 3 Stark 76.
735 Cook v Ward, (1830) 4 M&P 99.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS BY PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES
[s 33] Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the
truth of facts therein stated.—
Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, [s 33.2] or before any person
authorised by law to take it, [s 33.3] is relevant [s 33.4] for the purpose of proving, in a
subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the
truth of the facts which it states, when the witness is dead, [s 33.5] or cannot be found,
[s 33.6] or is incapable of giving evidence, [s 33.7] or is kept out of the way by the

adverse party, [s 33.8] or if his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay
or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers
unreasonable: [s 33.9]
Provided—
that the proceeding was between the same parties [s 33.10] or their representatives in
interest; [s 33.11]
that the adverse party in the ﬁrst proceeding had the right and opportunity to crossexamine; [s 33.12]
that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the ﬁrst as in the second
proceeding. [s 33.13]
Explanation. —A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between
the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.

COMMENT
[s 33.1] Principle.—
Evidence of depositions in former trials is admissible as it forms an exception to the
hearsay rule. Depositions are in general admissible only after proof that the persons
who made them cannot be produced before the court to give evidence. It is only in
cases where the production of the primary evidence is beyond the party's power that
secondary evidence of oral testimony is admissible. Non-compliance with the
provisions of this section is not cured by the fact that counsel for the accused gives his
consent thereto.736
It is an elementary right of an accused person or a litigant in a civil suit that a witness
who is to testify against him should give his evidence before the court trying the case
which then has the opportunity of seeing the witness and observing his demeanour
and can thus form a better opinion as to his reliability than is possible from reading a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
statement or deposition given by that witness in a previous judicial proceeding or in an
early stage of the same judicial proceeding.
Where a statute (e.g., the Evidence Act, 1872), makes provision for exceptional cases
where it is impossible for the witness to be before the court, the court must be careful
to see that the conditions on which the statute permits previous evidence given by the
witness to be read are strictly proved. Previous statement of a witness not appearing in
court should not be taken on record under this section without strict proof of the
conditions justifying it being taken so.737
In a civil case a party can, if he chooses, waive the proof; but in a criminal case strict
proof ought to be given that the witness is incapable of giving evidence, and even the
consent of the accused's counsel cannot do away with the necessity of the court being
satisﬁed by proof of that fact.
It is not necessary in every case where a witness is unable to attend the court on the
ground of physical incapacity that there must be evidence of a medical man. There
may be many cases in which the facts are such that the incapacity can be proved by a
lay witness.738
The section enumerates the cases in which the evidence given by a witness (a) in a
judicial proceeding, or (b) before any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant in a
subsequent judicial proceeding or a later stage of the same proceeding. Such cases
are ﬁve in number, viz.
(a) when the witness is dead;
(b) when he cannot be found;
(c) when he is incapable of giving evidence;
(d) when he is kept out of the way by the adverse party; and
(e) when his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense

which the court considers unreasonable.
The use of such secondary evidence is limited by three provisions. Such evidence will
be only admissible—
(1) if the proceeding was between the same parties, or their representatives in

interest;
(2) if the adverse party in the ﬁrst proceeding had the right and opportunity to

cross-examine; and
(3) if the questions in issue were substantially the same in the ﬁrst as in the second

proceeding.
Evidence given on a different occasion is also admissible to contradict a witness
(section 155) or to corroborate him (section 157).

[s 33.2] "Evidence given... in a judicial proceeding".—
"It must be proved that the witness was duly sworn in some judicial proceeding, to the
authority of which the party, against whom his testimony is offered, was legally bound
to submit, and in which he might have exercised the right of cross-examination".739
Evidence of a witness in a proceeding subsequently pronounced to be coram non judice

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is not admissible if the witness is dead, on a re-trial before a competent court.740 An
aﬃdavit is not "evidence given by a witness" within the meaning of this section and
cannot therefore be admitted in evidence.741

[s 33.3] "Before any person authorised by law to take it".—
A deposition is inadmissible unless it was taken by an oﬃcer or other person
authorised by law.742

[s 33.4] "Is relevant".—
Depositions which satisfy the conditions laid down in this section are relevant for the
purpose of proving the truth of the facts which they state. They are, however, open to all
the objections which might have been raised if the witness himself had been present
during the trial. Leading and other illegal questions are, therefore, not allowed to go in.
The burden of proving that the conditions essential to the admissibility of depositions
under this section have been complied with lies on the person who tenders the
evidence. The depositions of witnesses given in a counter-case may be used as
evidence against them on their trial as accused persons, but such depositions can only
be evidence against the persons making them.743
Objections as to the admissibility of evidence should be raised at the trial and at any
rate in the court of ﬁrst appeal, and will not as a general rule be entertained by the High
Court if raised for the ﬁrst time in second appeal.744

[s 33.5] "When the witness is dead".—
The death of the witness whose evidence is to be admitted should ﬁrst be strictly
proved unless it is admitted on the other side.745 The deposition of a witness taken
before one Magistrate is admissible in evidence at a re-trial before another Magistrate
if the witness was dead at the time of re-trial.746
The deposition of a witness, who was not cross-examined before the committing
Magistrate and who died before the trial, was held admissible because the accused
had the right and opportunity of cross-examining him notwithstanding the omission of
their pleader to avail himself of that right.747 But if a witness under examination by a
court dies before his cross-examination is completed, no part of his evidence can be
made use of.748 The applicant was the beneﬁciary of the will along with his mother
who was given life estate. During the trial of testamentary proceedings the attesting
witness was examined on commission and later he died. His evidence was not taken in
any previous proceedings or at the earlier stage of the same proceedings. Thus, the
provisions of section 33 were not attracted. There was opportunity to cross-examine
but the same was not used. In the absence of cross-examination, the evidence
recorded in-chief became acceptable.749

[s 33.6] "Cannot be found".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Proof of a diligent search is necessary before tendering the evidence of a witness who
cannot be found. A Sessions Judge, ﬁnding that the witnesses, who had been
summoned to give evidence for the prosecution, did not appear on the date ﬁxed,
adjourned the case for eighteen days and ordered fresh summonses to be issued. On
the adjourned date, the witnesses were again absent. Thereupon the Sessions Judge
made use of the evidence, which those witnesses had given before the committing
Magistrate, purporting to do so under this section. It was held that the evidence could
not be so used; the Sessions Judge ought to have directed to issue warrants to enforce
the attendance of the prosecution witnesses and compelled their attendance in
court.750
Section 299 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 supersedes this section to a
certain extent. It provides that if it is proved that an accused person has absconded,
and that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the court competent to try or
commit for trial such person for the offence complained of may, in his absence,
examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the prosecution, and record their
depositions, and that such depositions may be used at the subsequent trial of the
absconder, if the witnesses are dead or otherwise incapable of appearing.

[s 33.7] "Incapable of giving evidence".—
The incapacity contemplated by the section is not necessarily a permanent one and
something short of permanent incapacity might satisfy the words of the section.751
The fact of incapacity must be strictly proved.752
Precise evidence should be given as to the nature of the illness and the incapacity to
attend. When a witness is shown to be insane, his evidence, given in a former judicial
proceeding, is relevant in a subsequent judicial proceeding.

[s 33.8] "Kept out of the way by the adverse party".—
The evidence given by a witness who is kept out of the way by the adverse party is
admissible upon the broad principle of justice which will not permit a party to take
advantage of his own wrong.

[s 33.9] "Presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense,
etc. ".—
It is only in extreme cases of expense or delay that the personal attendance of a
witness is dispensed with, and his evidence given in a former inquiry referred to.753 The
Judge must satisfy himself that the presence of the witness cannot be obtained
without an amount of delay or expense which he considers to be unreasonable. Mere
consent of the prosecutor and the accused's pleader to that effect is not suﬃcient.754
Inconvenience to witnesses or amount of expense is no ground where the entire case
rests on the evidence of those witnesses.755

[s 33.10] "Proceeding...between the same parties".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The two suits must be brought by, or against, the same parties, or their representatives
in interest, at the time when the suits are proceeding and the evidence is given.756 This
proviso is based on the grounds of reciprocity, because the right to use evidence being
co-extensive with the liability to be bound thereby, the adversary in the second suit has
no power to offer evidence in his own favour which, had it been tendered against him,
would have been clearly inadmissible. R charged A with breach of trust, and S gave
evidence in support of the charge. A being acquitted, R was tried for making a false
charge and S for perjury. It was held that the depositions given by witnesses in the ﬁrst
case could be used against R in the second case, but not against S under this
section.757

[s 33.11] "Representatives in interest".—
This proviso requires that the party to the ﬁrst proceeding should have represented in
interest the party to the second proceeding in relation to the question in issue in the
ﬁrst proceeding to which the facts which the evidence states were relevant. It covers
not only cases of privity in estate and succession of title, but also cases where both the
following conditions exist, viz. (1) the interest of the relevant party to the second
proceeding in the subject-matter of the ﬁrst proceeding is consistent with and not
antagonistic to the interest therein of the relevant party to the ﬁrst proceeding, and (2)
the interest of both in the answer to be given to the particular question in issue in the
ﬁrst proceeding is identical. If both the above conditions are fulﬁlled, the relevant party
to the ﬁrst proceeding in fact represented in the ﬁrst proceeding the relevant party to
the second proceeding in regard to his interest in relation to the particular question in
issue in the ﬁrst proceeding, and may rightly be described as a "representative in
interest" of the party to the second proceeding within the wider meaning of those
words as laid down above.758
Partners and joint contractors who are each other's agents for the purpose of making
admissions against each other in relation to partnership transactions or joint contracts
are regarded as privies in estate, and are included in the term "representatives in
interest".759

[s 33.12] "Adverse party…had the right and opportunity to cross-examine".—
The term "adverse party" occurring in the 2nd proviso of section 33 is the party in the
previous proceeding against whom the evidence adduced therein was given against his
interest, thus having right and opportunity to cross-examine. It does not protect the
rights of the party producing a witness.760 The court explained in this case as to what
the section means to lay down as follows: "The section lays down as to when the
evidence of a witness in a previous judicial proceeding is relevant. It consists of two
parts, the main section and the proviso. The main section lays down the conditions
which are required to be satisﬁed for the previous statement of a witness in a judicial
proceeding to be admitted in evidence in the later proceeding. The question of party
having the right and opportunity to cross-examine will arise, if he is an adverse party in
the ﬁrst proceeding. The second proviso, which is an exception to the main part of the
section, operates only if the adverse party in the ﬁrst proceeding did not have the right
and opportunity to cross-examine the witness examined therein. The term "adverse
party" connotes that party which has a right and opportunity to cross-examine in the
ﬁrst proceeding. This proviso, therefore, obviously protects the rights of the adverse
party in the ﬁrst proceeding and not the party who produced the witness. The party
against whom the witness is produced in the previous proceeding is the adverse party
and not the person who produced the witness and had the advantage of having

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
examined the witness. He had the right and opportunity to cross-examine the witness
in the previous proceeding. Take an instance where ex parte proceedings were taken
against the defendant; he had no right and opportunity to cross-examine the witness. If
the same evidence is sought to be used, he is certainly an adverse party in the previous
proceeding and since he had no right and opportunity to cross-examine that witness,
the same evidence cannot be used against the defendant in the subsequent
proceeding. In other words, the proviso lays down the acid test that statement of a
particular witness should have been tested by both parties by examination and crossexamination in order to make it admissible in the later proceeding. Thereby it seeks to
protect the rights against whom the previous proceeding might have gone ex parte who
had no right and opportunity to cross-examine the witness. For the same reason, it
would also protect the co-plaintiffs and co-defendants who may have a right but no
opportunity to cross-examine the witness since it was produced by one of the coplaintiffs or co-defendants on their side but that evidence went against their interest. It
is, therefore, clear that a person who examined the witness should not be permitted, in
the subsequent proceeding between the same parties, to raise the objection that the
statement which was recorded in the previous proceeding on his behalf should not be
admissible because he had no right and opportunity to cross-examine him. It would
also be unfair that the person producing a witness in the previous proceeding should
be able to utilise the evidence recorded in his favour in the previous proceeding as
evidence in the subsequent proceeding, while the adverse party should be denied of the
same right of using the same statement favourable to him which went against the
party producing the witness in the previous proceeding."761
The adverse party must have both the right and the opportunity to cross-examine. The
word "and" cannot be read as "or".762 The word "right" means a legal right.
Consequently, when a witness is not produced for cross-examination after charge in a
warrant case, his evidence should not be taken into consideration, even if the accused
was given the option to cross-examine him before charge, but he did not do so.763
Where a case in respect of adulteration of milk was instituted on a private complaint by
a Food Inspector and conviction was based on his evidence alone, though he was not
cross-examined by the accused and his cross-examination was not possible due to his
accidental death, it was held that the conviction could not be based merely on his
evidence which was recorded before framing the charge and particularly when panch
witnesses did not support his evidence. But the accused could not say that he having
not exercised his right to cross-examine the Food Inspector the uncross-examined
evidence of the Food Inspector could not be relied upon, by referring to section 33.764
This proviso is based on the fundamental principle in the administration of justice that
every man should have an opportunity of cross-examining witnesses whose evidence
is to be used against him. If the adverse party has had liberty to cross-examine and has
not chosen to exercise it, the case is then same in effect as if he had cross-examined. It
is not necessary that the opponent should have exercised his right of cross-examining,
for the depositions will be relevant if he deliberately forbore from, or waived the
absence of, an opportunity for cross-examining.765 Upon the allegation that the
accused had induced the complainant to part with money under false representation,
the complainant started a prosecution against the accused. The complainant was
examined and charge was framed. The complainant thereafter died before he could be
cross-examined. It was held that the complainant's deposition before charge was
inadmissible in evidence.766
The Allahabad High Court has held that the evidence of a witness, who has been
examined in open court, is not inadmissible in the course of the same judicial
proceeding merely because it is impossible to cross-examine him on account of his
having died between his examination-in-chief and his cross-examination, but the weight
to be attached to his testimony depends on the circumstances of each case.767

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 33.13] "The questions in issue were substantially the same in the ﬁrst as in
the second proceeding".—
It is not necessary that all the questions in issue in the two proceedings should be
substantially the same, it is suﬃcient if the principal question in issue in both the
proceedings is identical.768 The principle involved in requiring identity of the matter in
issue is to secure that in the former proceeding the parties were not without the
opportunity of examining and cross-examining to the very point upon which their
evidence is adduced in the subsequent proceeding. And though separate proceedings
may involve issues, of which some only are common to both, the evidence to those
common issues given in the former proceeding may be given in the subsequent
proceedings. Thus, "if in a dispute respecting lands, any fact comes directly in issue,
the testimony given to that fact is admissible to prove the same point in another action
between the same parties or their privies though the last suit relates to other lands".769
Whether the questions at issue are substantially the same, depends upon whether the
same evidence is applicable, although different consequences may follow from the
same fact.770 Where the same question is substantially in issue in both the
proceedings, it does not matter that they relate to different transactions or
properties.771 A prosecution was instituted by S against N at the instance and on
behalf of F for criminal trespass in respect of a certain house, and on his own behalf
for assault and insult. S gave evidence at the trial in support of those charges. F
subsequently brought a civil suit against N for possession of the same house under
section 9 of the Speciﬁc Relief Act. S died before the institution of the civil suit. At the
trial of the civil suit, the deposition of S in the criminal court was tendered by F as
evidence on the issue of possession. It was held that S being dead and the
proceedings being between the same parties and the issues being substantially the
same, the deposition of S was admissible.772

[s 33.14] Criminal trial or inquiry, deemed proceeding—
[Explanation].—The Explanation is intended to do away with the objection that, in
criminal cases, the State is the prosecutor.773 The effect of the Explanation is that the
deposition taken in criminal proceedings may be used in a civil suit, and vice versa.
The deposition of a witness taken in the course of an enquiry before the Coroner
cannot, in the event of death of the witness, be taken in evidence at the trial of the case
in the High Court, because the enquiry before the Coroner is not a proceeding between
the prosecutor and the accused.774
The introduction and use of depositions taken in criminal cases in bulk in a subsequent
civil suit for the purpose of either contradicting or discounting the evidence of
witnesses given in the suit, are illegitimate, unless the particular matter or point had
been placed before the witness as one for explanation in view of its discrepancy with
the evidence then being tendered.775

[s 33.15] Expression of opinion on oral evidence.—
Where an opinion was expressed on oral evidence even before it was analysed and
assessed by the criminal court, the court said that such opinion amounted to an
inference in the functioning of the court inasmuch as it was likely to cause prejudice to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the judicial mind. There was also no case yet that the witness was not available within
the meaning of section 33.776

736 Ghulam Haidar v The Crown, (1929) 10 Lah 837.
737 Hari Prasad v State of UP, (1955) 1 All 749 .
738 Chainchal Singh v Emperor, (1945) 48 Bom LR 284 : 72 IA 270.
739 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 465, p 320.
740 Rami Reddi, (1881) 3 Mad 48, 51; Buta Singh v The Crown, (1926) 7 Lah 396; Sankappa Rai v

Koraga Pujary, (1930) 54 Mad 561.
741 Malik Jaindkhan v Province of Sind, (1947) Kar 273 .
742 K Venkatappa v Uday Shanker, AIR 1981 AP 34 .
743 Queen-Empress v Ganu Sonba, (1888) 12 Bom 440.
744 Radha Kishan v Kedar Nath, (1924) 46 All 815 .
745 Sajan Singh v The Crown, (1925) 6 Lah 437.
746 Lekal v The Crown, (1927) 8 Lah 570; Nirmal Singh v State of Haryana, 2000 Cr LJ 1803 : AIR

2000 SC 1416 , evidence was recorded in the absence of the accused, there was suﬃcient
material to show that the accused was absconding, summons had come back unserved, in the
meantime time the witnesses died, the court said that the requirements of the section were
satisﬁed, the deposition of the witnesses could be used to convict the accused.
747 Queen-Emp. v Baswanta, (1900) 2 Bom LR 761 : 25 Bom 168.
748 Narsingh Das v Gokul Prasad, (1927) 50 All 113 ; Nirmal Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2000

SC 1416 , the witnesses deposed in the absence of the accused who remained absconding,
subsequently the witnesses also died, conviction could be recorded on the basis of the evidence
of deceased witnesses.
749 Shyamal Kumar Chatterjee v Rabindra Narayan Banerjee, AIR 2007 NOC 1430 (Cal-DB).
750 Emperor v Dost Muhammad, (1905) 28 All 98 .
751 In the matter of the Petition of Asgur Hossein, (1881) 6 Cal. 774 .
752 Chainchal Singh v Emperor, (1945) 48 Bom LR 284 : 72 IA 270.
753 Empress of India v Mulu, (1880) 2 All 646 .
754 Re Annavi Muthiriyan, (1915) 39 Mad 449; Emperor v Savlimiya Miyabhai, (1944) 46 Bom LR

589 ; Emperor v Gajendra Mohan Kar, (1943) 1 Cal 405 .
755 Queen-Empress v T Burke, (1884) 6 All 224 .
756 Sitanath Dass v Mohesh Chunder Chuckerbati, (1886) 12 Cal 627 .
757 Rami Reddi, (1881) 3 Mad 48, 51. See, Emperor v Kadhe Mal, (1919) 42 All 24 . See, Phool

Chand v Amrit Lal, AIR 1980 P&H 122, where the earlier proceeding was ex parte and, therefore,
not between the same parties.
758 Krishnayya Rao v Venkata Kumara Mahipati, (1933) 35 Bom LR 1076 : 60 IA 336: 57 Mad 1.
759 Chandreshwar Prasad Narain Singh v Bisheshwar Pratap Narain Singh, (1926) 5 Pat 777.
760 VM Mathew v VS Sharma, AIR 1996 SC 109 : 1995(6) SCC 122 : (1995) 6 SCC 122 .
761 VM Mathew v VS Sharma, (1995) 6 SCC 122 : AIR 1996 SC 109 . Sasdi Jena v Khadal Swain,

AIR 2004 SC 1492 : (2004) 4 SCC 236 : 2004 Cr LJ 1394 , the accused had no right and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
opportunity to cross-examine any prosecution witness at the stage of enquiry under section
202, CrPC, held such statement would not be relevant and admissible under section 33 at a later
stage of the proceedings at which conviction was recorded.
762 Dal Bahadur Singh v Bijai Bahadur Singh, (1929) 32 Bom LR 487 : 57 IA 14: 52 All 1.
763 SC Mitter v State, (1951) 1 Cal 480 . See, however, State v Baldev Kishan, (1952) Patiala 543.
764 Nandram Khemraj v State of MP, 1995 Cr LJ 1270 (MP). Turner Morrison & Co, Bombay v KN

Tapuria, 1993 Cr LJ 3384 (Bom), witness examined before the framing of charge, not available
for cross-examination after framing the charge, cautious approach required.
765 M'Combie v Anton, (1843) 6 M&G 27; Gurudin v Emperor, (1934) 31 NLR 276; Queen-Empress

v Ramchandra Govind Harshe, (1895) 19 Bom 749; Sadu v The Empress, (1885) PR No. 26 of
1885 (Cr); State v Hazura Singh, (1952) Patiala 48; Mulkh Raj v Delhi Admn., AIR 1974 SC 1723 :
1974 Cr LJ 1171 , where opportunity of cross-examination was not made use of. VM Mathew v
VS Saramma, 1996 AIHC (Ker), dissenting from Poonamchand v Motilal, AIR 1955 Raj 179 ,
where the plaintiff had no right or opportunity to cross-examine.
766 Brahmachari Ajitananda v Ananth Bandhu Dutt, (1955) 2 Cal 19 ; State v Hazura Singh, (1952)

Patiala 48.
767 Ahmad Ali v Joti Prasad, (1944) All 241 .
768 Krishnayya Rao v Venkata Kumara Mahipati, (1933) 35 Bom LR 1076 : 60 IA 336: 57 Mad 1.
769 Rami Reddi, (1881) 3 Mad 48, 52; Taylor, 12th Edn, para 467, p 321.
770 In the matter of the Petition of Rochia Mohato, (1881) 7 Cal 42 .
771 Llanover v Homfray: Phillip v Llanover, (1881) 19 Ch D 224 .
772 Foolkissory Dasee v Nobin Chunder Bhujno, (1895) 23 Cal 441 .
773 Soojan Bibee v Achmut Ali, (1874) 14 Beng LR (Appx.) 3.
774 Emperor v Mohomed Yusuf, (1932) 35 Bom LR 1020 .
775 Bal Gangadhar Tilak v Shri Shrinivas Pandit, (1915) 17 Bom LR 527 : 42 IA 135: 39 Bom 441.
776 DP Anand v State, 1998 Cr LJ 724 (Mad).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
[s 34] 777[Entries in books of account including those maintained in an
electronic form] when relevant.—
777 [Entries in the books of account, including those maintained in an electronic form],

regularly kept in the course of business, are relevant whenever they refer to a matter
into which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be suﬃcient
evidence to charge any person with liability.
ILLUSTRATION
A sues B for Rs. 1,000, and shows entries in his account books showing B to be
indebted to him to this amount. The entries are relevant, but are not suﬃcient, without
other evidence, to prove the debt.

COMMENT
[s 34.1] Principle.—
This section is based upon the principle that entries made regularly in the course of
business are sure to be accurate. In all such entries the writer has full knowledge, no
motive to falsehood, and there is the strongest improbability of untruth.
This section provides (1) that entries in books of account regularly kept in the course of
business are relevant and therefore admissible whenever they refer to a matter into
which the court has to enquire; and (2) that such entries though admissible are not
alone suﬃcient to charge a person with liability unless corroborated by other
evidence.778Account books are admissible in evidence without any formal proof that
they were regularly kept in the course of business.779
The entries in books of account, regularly kept in the course of business, are relevant in
all proceedings in a court of law but these entries are not by themselves suﬃcient to
charge any person with liability.780 Even correct and authentic entries cannot ﬁx liability
upon any person in the absence of some independent evidence of their
trustworthiness.781 In a suit for eviction on the ground of non-payment of rents, the
tenants produced his books which showed payment. It was held that such entries
would neither create liability nor discharge anybody's liability.782 In a suit for recovery
of money advanced by way of a loan, entries in the register of the lender were held not
suﬃcient to charge the alleged borrower.783 A book of account should be foolproof. A
bundle of sheets detachable and replaceable at pleasure cannot be characterised as a
book of account. Spiral pads, and spiral notebooks have been held to be books within
the meaning of section 34. The court also said that loose sheets of papers contained in
ﬁles would not be in the category of books.784A ledger by itself is also not a proof.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
There must be supporting evidence.785 The general ledger entries cannot be the basis
for accepting that cash transactions mentioned therein are correct, unless there is
authentic supporting material.786 Where the question was whether money had been
entrusted, it was held that an entry in books of account could not be given much
weight. The court has to examine the whole state of accounts at the material time.787
Such books may be admissible under section 32(2) as statements made by a person in
the ordinary course of business or entries made by him in books kept in the ordinary
course of business. Such books are also relevant under section 159 to refresh the
memory of the writer.788
In account books regularly kept in due course of business usually the pages are
interconnected, and particularly in daily accounts, the balance of one day or one page
is carried over to the other day or the other page so that interpolation or replacement of
a particular page becomes very diﬃcult and sanctity is to be attached to such books.
Where the credit register is not a bound book but a stitched one, the pages can be
replaced or interpolated. No importance can be attached to the entries made in such a
register and they cannot be taken to be accounts regularly kept in the course of
business.789

[s 34.2] "Regularly kept in the course of business".—
The Privy Council has laid down that the admissibility of books of account regularly
kept in the course of business is not restricted to books in which entries have been
made from day to day, or from hour to hour, as transactions have taken place. The time
of making the entries may affect the value of them but should not, if they have been
made regularly in the course of business afterwards made them irrelevant.790 The Privy
Council has also held that books of account professing to record facts relating only to
the particular transaction in question are less reliable than a book in which the same is
recorded in common with other transactions in the ordinary course of business.791 The
prima facie evidentiary value is attached to a banker's books under the Bankers' Books
Evidence Act. Such evidence is admissible under section 16 as well as under this
section. It has been held that paid cheques and paying-in-slips which are retained by a
bank after the conclusion of a banking transaction to which they relate are not
"bankers' books" and accordingly cannot be the subject of an inspection order.792
Where the question was whether records of meetings constituted bankers books for the
purposes of disclosure, the court said that on the true construction of section 9(2) of
the 1879 Act [English] the words "other records" were not apt to cover records kept by a
bank of conversation between its employees, however senior, and its customers.
Rather, they covered records of the same kind as ledgers, day books, cash books and
account books, which were the means by which a bank recorded day-to-day ﬁnancial
transactions. In the instant case, the records sought were essentially records of
meetings. As such, they could not be properly regarded as entries in books kept by a
bank for the purpose of its ordinary business within the deﬁnition in section 9(2).
Accordingly, the registrar was not entitled to order disclosure of those classes of
documents under the 1879 Act.793
Account books containing entries not made by, nor at the dictation of, a person who
had a personal knowledge of the truth of the facts stated, if regularly kept in the course
of business, are admissible as evidence under this section.794
The books of accounts maintained in the regular course of business should not be
rejected without any kind of rebuttal or discarded without any reason.795

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
However, entries in an account book which is not regularly kept in the course of
business are not admissible in evidence under this section.796
Trip sheets were produced by a taxi driver showing movements of the vehicle, distance
covered, consumption of fuel, etc. They were in loose sheet form and not in a bound
book. They were held to be not relevant under the section.797
In the absence of evidence that the books produced were account books regularly kept
in the ordinary course of business, the account books should not be admitted. In such
a case, however, it is essential that objection should be taken as soon as the books of
account are sought to be admitted in evidence. However, even if no objection could be
taken in appeal to the admissibility of the evidence, their reliability and weight to be
given to the account books have still to be considered.798 It is not necessary that an
entry in a book of account should have been made at or at about the same time as the
transaction concerned took place so as to pass the test of "a book regularly kept".799
The words "regularly kept" do not necessarily mean kept in a technically correct
manner. No particular set of rules or system of keeping accounts is prescribed under
this section. Even the roughest memoranda of accounts kept by petty shop-keepers are
admissible if they are authentic. The crucial question for consideration is whether the
entries are honest or whether there are any conscious attempts at falsiﬁcation.
Account books will be discredited if some of the entries therein are proved to be bogus
by independent evidence which precludes the possibility of error or accident.800
The word "business" for this purpose has been taken to mean activities carried on
continuously in an organised manner with a set purpose (be it illegal) to augment one's
own resources.801

[s 34.3] Hotel Register.—
A hotel register kept at its counter was not taken to be a book of account for the
purposes of this section. It could have been so regarded if it were shown that the
register also pertained to pecuniary transactions relating to customers.802

[s 34.4] "Such statements shall not alone be suﬃcient evidence".—
Entries in accounts relevant only under this section are not by themselves alone
suﬃcient to charge any person with liability. Corroboration is required. The section
does not mean that there should be independent evidence to prove each and every
transaction entered in a book of account. What is necessary to be seen in each case is
whether besides the entries in a book of account, there is any evidence to prove that
the transactions referred to in those entries actually took place. Such corroboration will
be best afforded by the evidence of the person who wrote the books of account and in
whose presence the transactions took place.803 Corroborated entries in the bank's
books of account are suﬃcient proof of loan transaction, more so when the loanee had
admitted the loan.804 Where there was no evidence to prove the receipt of goods by the
purchaser, liability for the payment of those goods could not be fastened on him solely
on the basis of entries in the books of account, though regularly maintained.805 There
has to be evidence to prove payment of the money which may appear in the books of
account in order that the person may be charged with liability thereunder, except where
the person to be charged accepts the correctness of the books of account and does
not challenge them.806 Where accounts are relevant also under section 32(2), they are

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
in law suﬃcient evidence in themselves, and the law does not, as in the case of
accounts admissible only under this section, require corroboration. Entries in account
may, in the same suit, be relevant under both the sections; and in that case the
necessity for corroboration does not arise.807 In a suit for breach of contract relating to
a sales transaction, it was held that entries in account books were not suﬃcient in
themselves to charge any person with liability. Some independent evidence would have
to be produced showing the genesis of the entries reﬂecting the transaction which
brought about the entries.808
One party, by merely producing his own books of account, cannot bind the other.809 But
the plaintiff's own testimony on oath in support of the entries in his books could be
suﬃcient to ﬁx the defendant with liability.810 For the purpose of showing whether the
amount referred to in the regularly maintained books of account was actually paid by
the party, a clerk keeping the accounts or somebody competent to speak about the
facts should be called so that he may testify to the fact that the books were regularly
kept and that their entries were accurate.811
There should be some corroborative evidence in support of the record. The section
does not prescribe any particular kind of corroboration. Such evidence may be oral or
documentary. In this case, the court said that the plaintiff's (seller) own testimony on
oath in support of the entries in his books of account could be treated as suﬃcient
corroboration to charge the defendant with liability.812

[s 34.5] Books of account in electronic form.—
Books of account maintained in electronic form have also become relevant under the
section by reason of the addition of these words to the section under the amendments
introduced by the Information Technology Act, 2000. The Act has introduced similar
changes in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891. The amendment was necessary to
accommodate the present practice of keeping only computerised accounts.

777 Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–4, for "Entries in the books of account"

(w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
778 Gopeswar Sen v Bejoy Chand Mahatab, (1928) 55 Cal 1167 .
779 Emperor v Narbada Prasad, (1929) 51 All 864 .
780 State of Andhra Pradesh v Ganeswara Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1850 : 1963(2) Cr LJ 671 . See also

Chandrakantaben v VB Modi, AIR 1989 SC 1269 : 1989(2) SCC 630 , mere entries in Khatabandis,
(Ledger A/c) without support of the evidence of any witness or of cash book, were held to be
not reliable. Rukmanand Ajitsaria v Usha Sales Pvt Ltd, AIR 1991 NOC 108 Gau, such entries are
not suﬃcient to charge any person with liability. Certiﬁed copy of ledger account maintained in
the regular course of business, admissible, State Bank of India v Ramayanapu Krishna Rao, AIR
1995 Ori 244 . Guru Amarjit Singh v Rattan Chand, AIR 1994 SC 227 : 1993(4) SCC 349 , entries in
Jamabandi are not proof of title and the parties have to establish their title to the property.
781 CBI v VC Shukla, 1998 Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
782 Suresh Kumar v Mewa Ram, AIR 1991 P&H 254.
783 Ajit Chandra Bagchi v Harishpur Tea Co P Ltd, AIR 1991 Gau 92 .
784 CBI v VC Shukla, 1998 Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 . The spiral notebook in this case

recorded monetary transactions, i.e., entries of receipt of money from certain persons on left
side of the page and payment to certain persons on the right page, the entries were totalled and
balances taken.
785 Zenna Sorabji v Mirabe, AIR 1981 Bom 446 ; Mohan Lal v Dwarkanath, AIR 1985 J&K 86.

Dharam Chand Joshi v Satya Narayana Bazaz, AIR 1993 Gau 35 , a book of account is only a
corroborative evidence.
786 Subrata Roy Sahara v UOI, (2014) 8 SCC 470 (para 150) : 2014 (8) SCJ 240 .
787 Dadarao v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1974 SC 389 : 1974 Cr LJ 447 .
788 Bhoy Hong v Ramnathan, (1902) 4 Bom LR 378 : 29 IA 43: 29 Cal 34.
789 Hira v Birbal, (1957) Cut 437. Dharam Chand Joshi v Satya Narayan Bazaz, AIR 1993 Gau 35 ,

unbound sheets, interpolations and overwriting, no credibility. R. v Sunders (Gurmit Singh), 1998
CLY 314 (892) (CA), insurance claim forms have been held to be no such documents as are
required for an accounting purpose.
790 The Deputy Commissioner of Bara Banki v Ram Parshad, (1899) 27 Cal 118 : 26 IA 254,

overruling Munchershaw Bezonji v The New Dhurumsey S&W Co, (1880) 4 Bom 576; Emperor v
Narbada Prasad, (1929) 51 All 864 ; Gulab Chand Lala v Manni Lal Lala, (1940) 16 Luck 302 ;
Pannalal v Labhchand, (1954) MB 237. See, however, Balmukund v Jagan Nath, AIR 1963 Raj 212
.
791 Bhoy Hong Kong v RMMSP Ramanathan Chetty, (1902) 6 Cal WN 401.
792 Williams v Williams, (1987) 3 All ER 257 CA Canara Bank v Eastern Mechanical Works, AIR

2008 Bom 188 , recovery on the basis of documents made from banker's books under the
Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891.
793 Re Howglen Ltd, (2001) 1 All ER 376 : (2001) BCC 245 : (2001) 2 BCLC 695 . The court

applied the principle laid down in Williams v Williams; Tucker v Williams, (1987) 3 All ER 257 .
794 Reg v Hanmanta, (1877) 1 Bom 610.
795 Gian Chand and Bros. v Rattan Lal, (2013) 2 SCC 606 .
796 Vithu v Thakurdas, (1949) Nag 307.
797 State of Kerala v Thomas, (1986) 2 SCC 411 , 413 : 1986 SCC (Cri) 176 . See also Common

Cause (A Registered Society) v UOI, AIR 2017 SC 540 , para 20 : 2017 (1) Scale 573 .
798 Ramaji v Manohar, AIR 1967 Bom 169 : 62 Bom LR 329; Kulamani Mohanty v Industrial

Development Corpn. of Orissa Ltd, AIR 2002 Ori. 38 , entries in books of account were proved by
oﬃcial staff. There were no objections, nor any evidence to doubt correctness of the entries,
held to be admissible in evidence.
799 CBI v VC Shukla, 1998 Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 .
800 Thomas v Govinda Gurukkal, (1960) Kerala 51 . An exercise book produced, contained some

slips of paper, pages not numbered and entries were not proved by any witness, the book was
held to be not admissible; its production without objection would not prevent the court from
examining its evidentiary value, State of Meghalaya v JN Giri, AIR 1995 Gau 23 .
801 CBI v VC Shukla, 1998 Cr LJ 1905 : AIR 1998 SC 1406 .
802 Manish Dixit v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2001 SC 93 : (2001) Cr LJ 133 . The court said that

even otherwise an entry in the register would not have been suﬃcient to charge anybody with
liability.
803 Ramgobind Prasad v Gulab Chand Sahu, (1940) 20 Pat 273; Dwarka Doss v Baboo Jankee

Doss, (1855) 6 Moo Ind App 88 , 98; Lachmi Narain v Musaddi Lall, (1941) 17 Luck 327 ; Himmat

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Mal v Shah Magaji Khubaji, (1953) 3 Raj 815 ; Laxmi Sahu v Ganeshi Sahu, AIR 1990 Pat 201 ,
"jamabandi" records, held not suﬃcient to bind anybody by themselves.
804 State Bank of India v Yumnam Gouramani Singh, AIR 1994 SC 1644 : 1993(3) SCC 631 .
805 Hada Steel Products Ltd v Engineering Enterprises, AIR 1995 P&H 327. Vaiyapuri Mudaliar &

Sons v Arunodhaya Textiles, Erode, AIR 1996 Mad 19 , regularly maintained accounts of a ﬁrm.
806 Chandradhar v Gauhati Bank, AIR 1967 SC 1058 : 1967(1) SCR 898 .
807 Rampyarabai v Balaji, (1904) 6 Bom LR 50 : 28 Bom 294.
808 Mettur Beardsell Ltd v Salem Textiles Ltd, AIR 2001 Mad 466 .
809 Hira Bhagat v Gobind Ram (1897) PR No. 63 of 1897 (Civil); Abdul Ali v Puran Mal, (1914) PR

No. 82 of 1914 (Civil); Bichha Lal v Jai Pershad, (1899) PR No. 45 of 1899 (Civil); Gopeswar Sen v
Bejoy Chand Mahatab, (1928) 55 Cal 1167 ; Radha Agencies v Vijaya Bank, AIR 2002 AP 91 , in a
suit for recovery of bank loan, the court said that mere entries in books of account were not
suﬃcient to prove the fact of loan. Some independent evidence would be necessary to prove the
transaction of loan and actual disbursement of the loan amount. In this case the borrower
admitted the loan and, therefore, the account was relevant. Advani LK v CBI, 1997 Cr LJ 2559
(Delhi), entries in the diary of the accused showing receipt of money, neither mentioning date of
payment nor purpose, they were held to be not akin to books of account, such diary or loose
sheets were held to be not relevant.
810 Kaka Ram v Firm Thakar Das Mathura Das, AIR 1962 Punj 27 .
811 Arakkan Narayanan v Indian Handloom Tenders, AIR 1999 Ker 279 .
812 Fateh Lal v Bhagwati Lal, AIR 2008 NOC 725 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
[s 35] Relevancy of entry in public 813[record or an electronic record] made in
performance of duty.—
An entry in any public or other oﬃcial book, register [s 35.3] or 813 [record or an
electronic record] stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant
in the discharge of his oﬃcial duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty
specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or 813 [record
or an electronic record] is kept, is itself a relevant fact.

COMMENT
[s 35.1] Principle.—
This section is based upon the circumstance that in the case of public documents
entries are made in discharge of public duty by an oﬃcer who is an authorized and
accredited agent appointed for the purpose. The law reposes such a conﬁdence in
public oﬃcers that it presumes they will discharge their several trusts with accuracy
and ﬁdelity.
The section is applicable to entries in public records of a former Indian State or a
foreign country.814

[s 35.2] Scope.—
In a case the Calcutta High Court held that the section is conﬁned to that class of
cases where a public oﬃcer has to enter in a register or other books some actual fact
which is known to him.815 But this case has not been approved of in a subsequent
case in which it is held that certiﬁed copies of entries in a register kept by a public
servant under a statute are admissible in evidence.816 However, the privilege given to
public record under this section does not extend to entries which the public oﬃcer is
not expected to, and is not permitted to, make.817
To render a document admissible under this section three conditions are necessary:—
(1) the entry that is relied upon must be one in any public or other oﬃcial book,

register or record;
(2) it must be an entry stating a fact in issue or a relevant fact; and,
(3) it must be made by a public servant in the discharge of his oﬃcial duty, or by any

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
other person in the performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law.818
In a subsequent decision the Supreme Court added one more point to these
requirements, namely that "all persons concerned indisputably must have an access to
the public record or register."819

[s 35.3] "Public or other oﬃcial book, register or record".—
Age, birth, death.— Section 74 speciﬁes what public documents are. Statements in
public documents are receivable to prove the facts stated on the general grounds that
they were made by the authorised agents of the public in the course of oﬃcial duty and
respecting facts which were of public interest or required to be recorded for the beneﬁt
of the community.820 A register of births and deaths kept by village oﬃcials under the
orders of a Board of Revenue is a public document within the meaning of this section,
and an entry in such register recording the death of a person is evidence of the actual
date of his death.821 In a case of alleged kidnapping, birth register extract from the
Municipality was held to be a valuable piece of evidence as regards the age of the
victim.822 Where the victim's date of birth was entered in the birth register but there
was no evidence as to who was the author when the entry was made and the copy of
the birth entry was obtained after six months of the occurrence, it was held that in
these suspicious circumstances, entry of birth cannot be relied upon.823 Where the
employer was retiring an employee on the basis his date of birth unsupported by any
document, the date of birth given in school leaving certiﬁcate adduced by the employee
was relied upon.824 A birth certiﬁcate of a respectable person is not relevant because
he is under no statutory duty.825 A certiﬁcate of guardianship is not a public or other
oﬃcial book, register or record within the meaning of this section, and an entry therein
relating to the age of the minor is not in itself admissible in evidence to prove the
age.826 An entry in a School Admission Register with regard to the age of a pupil is
admissible in evidence to prove the age of the person concerned.827 Where for the
proof of age, school leaving certiﬁcate was produced but in the said certiﬁcate the
name of the original school from which the student was transferred was not
mentioned, it was held that such school certiﬁcate could not be relied upon for proving
the age of the accused.828 The Supreme Court observed that the admissibility of an
evidence and its probative value are two different things. An entry in a school leaving
certiﬁcate would have to be proved in the same manner as required in civil and criminal
matters.829 For the purposes of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000, the age of the accused
as shown by school admission register which was corroborated by medical opinion
was given effect to.830 Entry in school register has evidentiary value, though it may not
be conclusive. The entry was supported by the parents. The court said that the father's
statement as to her age should not have been rejected.831 To determine the age of a
person, in the ﬁrst place, what will have to be seen is the primary document such as a
birth certiﬁcate or a school admission register. That will be credible evidence. For in
law, there is presumption about the correctness of those documents, unless rebutted. It
was held that it was a manifest error to rely merely on the medical certiﬁcate.832 Where
an employee failed to mention the alleged correct date of birth in the option forms and
while ﬁling the provident fund withdrawal form and made representation for correction
three decades after joining the service, he was not entitled to relief due to unexplained
and inordinate delay in making representation and the proof adduced being also
unreliable.833 Entertainment by High Courts of writ applications made by employees of
Government or its instrumentalities for correction of date of birth at the fag end of their
services has been viewed as unwarranted.834 A Matriculation certiﬁcate is also
admissible in evidence.835 An entry made by a teacher in a private school in his

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
admission register or transfer certiﬁcate cannot come within the scope of this
section.836 The Rangoon High Court held that if the school is not a Government School
such entry has but little probative value.837 Thus in a service matter the Supreme Court
held that in the absence of the material on the basis of which the school register was
prepared, the entry in it as to the age of the person in question was not of much
evidentiary value.838 Where the mother who is otherwise the best person to testify to
her child's age, failed to tell her son's date of birth and the elder brother said that the
entry in the school register was not correct, the court said that it would be very diﬃcult
to accept age of minority on the basis of such school certiﬁcate.839
It has been held that an entry in the voter's list carries more evidentiary value than an
entry in a school admission register.840 There is a presumption that age certiﬁed by the
High School Certiﬁcate is correct. The burden lies on the other side to prove it to be
otherwise.841 Where the age of prosecutrix had to be determined in a charge of rape
and the age shown in the school register was different from that shown in birth register,
the court rejected the contention that both entries should be discarded. The birth entry
in the High School Certiﬁcate or school record was held to prevail being the conclusive
evidence.842 The court had to determine age for the purposes of Juvenile Justice Act,
2000. The court said that medical board's opinion based on radiological examination is
a useful guiding factor. But the opinion is not per se a conclusive proof of age. The
matriculation certiﬁcate was not ﬁled. The entry in the voters' list could not be taken
mechanically. Its probative value has to be examined. The medical board's reports
showed the age to be 17-18 years. No member of the board was examined. The
Juvenile Board on the basis of physical appearance placed him to be of 18 years. The
court did not approve it and set aside the order based on such determination of age.843
Where the doctor certiﬁed the age of the accused to be admittedly more than 20 years
and less than 25, the court said that the statement of the doctor was no more than an
opinion. The court has to base its conclusions upon all the facts and circumstances
disclosed on the examination of the physical features of the person whose age is in
question in conjunction with such oral testimony as may be available. An X-ray
ossiﬁcation test may provide a surer basis for determination of age than the opinion of
a medical expert but it can by no means be so infallible and accurate test as to indicate
the exact date of birth of the person concerned. Too much reliance cannot be placed
upon text books on medical jurisprudence and toxicology while determining the age of
an accused person. In this vast country with varied latitude, heights, environments,
vegetation and nutrition, the height and weight cannot be expected to be uniform.844
Entry in a municipal register of deaths845 or Land Record Register846 is admissible.
Entries in village crime notebook are admissible in evidence.847 The register of births
and deaths is a public document. Though it can be admitted into evidence without
formal report, entry in it must be proved. No presumption as to correctness could be
drawn.848 A statement in a decree that a certain pedigree was ﬁled by the parties
thereto, and reciting the full pedigree, is admissible.849 An Indian Court's written
judgment and decree are public records within the meaning of this section. Oﬃcial
record evidencing public affairs like the Gazetteer is admissible in evidence.
Statements contained in it can be taken into account to discover historical material.
Facts stated are evidence under section 45.850 Letters forming part of a chain of
correspondence and oﬃcial record were tendered in evidence without objection from
the opposite party, documents were taken to be proved and their contents could be
read in evidence.851

[s 35.4] Correction of age.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The petitioner claimed that the entry of his age in the school record was wrong. He
produced the hospital and municipal records to show his correct date of birth. The
school authorities corrected the age accordingly. The correction of the age by the
Board of Education was nothing but removal of a typographical error. A mandamus was
issued to the CBSE to issue a new certiﬁcate with corrected age.852

[s 35.5] Revenue Record.—
Entries in revenue record as to possession are presumed to be true. A ﬁnding of fact
without taking them into account can be interfered with.853 But they are not taken to be
proof of an ownership or title by themselves.854 In a case before the Gauhati High
Court,855 there was a suit for a declaration that the property in question dedicated by
the Maharani to the deity and that the plaintiff was successor to the line of shebiats.
There was no proof of the fact of dedication or of shebiatship. There were only entries
in revenue records. It was held that reliance could not be placed on such entries for
proof of title. The court further said that by virtue of the provisions of section 101
relating to burden of proof, advantage could not be taken of the weakness of the
defendant's title for proving the plaintiff's title.
Explaining the reason why entries in revenue records are not taken to be evidence of
ownership, the Supreme Court said:856 "Entries in revenue records are the paradise of
the Patwari. The tiller of the soil is rarely concerned with the same. So long as his
possession and enjoyment are not interdicted by the due process and course of law, he
is least concerned with entries. It is common knowledge in rural India that a raiyat
always regards the lands he ploughs as his dominion and generally obeys with moral
ﬁbre, the commands of the intermediary so long as his possession is not disturbed.
Therefore, the creation of records may be a camouﬂage to defeat the just and legal
right or claim and interests of the riyat, the tiller of the soil on whom the Act confers
title to the land he tills."
An entry in revenue record creates a presumption in favour of the person whose name
is entered. Burden lies on the party who challenges the entry to establish by
unimpeachable evidence that the entry in question was erroneous. A concurrent ﬁnding
by courts below that the party challenging the entry had signally failed to lead any
credible evidence to destroy the presumption, could not be interfered with.857
Cultivation register showing cultivation of land by different persons can be proved by
producing copies.858 Entries in the record of rights are presumed to be correct unless it
is shown by evidence that they are not correct.859 Khasra is a record of right. Its entries
are presumed to be true. The court should not have discarded them on the basis of
statements in the plaint.860 Khasra entries do not convey any title. They are relevant for
the purposes of paying land revenue and have nothing to do with ownership.861 Where
the details of the manner, mode, time etc. of the Khasra entry of sub-tenancy made by
the Patwari was not shown and the Patwari was not examined to prove that entry, the
entry was not admissible.862
The dismissal of a suit challenging deletion of a person's name from revenue records
has been held to be not an act conferring title on anybody in respect of the property in
question.863

[s 35.6] Land record.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
An entry in Government Land Register of the Cantonment Board that the disputed land
area as Mohammadan Graveyard was regarded as conclusive proof of the plaintiff's
claim that it was Wakf property. The land in question was declared to be the graveyard
of Muslims.864
A map prepared by a person, who is dead, in a previous case not inter partes, showing
the limits of a particular district is not admissible as it cannot be called a public map
offered generally for public sale or made under the authority of Government.865
Entries made by a police oﬃcer in site inspection map and site inspection of a memo
of a motor vehicle accident were held to be record made in discharge of his oﬃcial
duties. They were relevant under the section. They were also in the category of public
documents.866

[s 35.7] Register of marriages, etc.—
As far as the entries in the register of births or deaths or marriages are concerned,
evidence must be produced to connect the entries with the persons whose births or
deaths or marriages have to be established.867 Entries in Death Register maintained by
Gram Panchayat under the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, 1948 are admissible in proof of a
person's date of death.868 Certiﬁed extracts from electoral rolls and the family register
of a village, which are public documents, are admissible.869 The Bombay High Court
did not rely upon the extract from the register of marriages maintained by the Gram
Panchayat without the informant or Gram Sewak being produced.870

[s 35.8] Gazette.—
The Gazette of The Bombay Presidency, Vol III published in 1879, being oﬃcial record
evidencing public affairs, is admissible under section 35 read with section 81 of the
Evidence Act and the court may presume their contents as genuine. The statement
therein can be taken into account to discover the historical material contained therein
and the facts stated therein are evidence under section 35. Though not conclusive, the
court may consider such evidence in conjunction with other evidence.871 Electoral roll
being a public document is admissible in evidence and the person preparing it need not
be examined.872

[s 35.9] Mutation not evidence of title.—
Mutation of names in the revenue record are not evidence of title.873 Where mutation
was done in compliance to the orders of the SDO without placing and proving the said
order, the mutation entry could not be relied upon.874 Mutation of a land in the revenue
records does not create or extinguish the title over such land nor it has any
presumptive value on the title. It only enables the person in whose favour mutation is
ordered to pay the land revenue in question.875 Entries in revenue records do not create
or extinguish title. A widow got the lands mutated in favour of her adopted son. The
Supreme Court held that neither the adopted sons acquired any title nor the widow's
title in the property was extinguished thereby. Since no title could pass under the
alleged mutation gift, the widow's right in the property became enlarged on the coming

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
into force of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. Alienation made by her by way of gift
could not be said to be without authority.876
Mutation is not a proof of title. the guiding principle in recording mutation is
possession. A suit based on title was held to be not adversely affected by mutation of
the suit property in favour of the defendant. The plaintiff's failure to ﬁle objections to
mutation proceedings was considered to be of no consequence.877 Where the
mutation of water rights from a well was surreptitiously changed behind the back of
the owner, the question of raising objections could not arise at all in such
circumstances. Such a change could not confer any right even after a long lapse of
time.878

[s 35.10] Electronic Record.—
The scope of the word "record" has been expanded by the Information Technology Act,
2000 by inserted into section 35 the words "electronic records". Thus, paperless
material would also be regarded as a record. The material produced before the court
would, of course, be in the shape of a paper print out.

[s 35.11] Oﬃcial Reports.—
The reports of public oﬃcials made in the discharge of their oﬃcial duties are
admissible under this section with reference to statements therein of relevant facts or
facts in issue. But a distinction has to be made between the statements contained
therein relating to relevant facts and the opinions expressed therein as to such relevant
facts. So far as mere opinions are concerned while they are admissible, the value to be
attached to them is comparatively less. No such broad proposition can be laid down
that the report of a public oﬃcial which has been merely submitted to the higher
authorities for the latter's information or guidance and which itself does not bear the
stamp of ﬁnality on it, or a report made in compliance with the order of the higher
authorities and submitted to them is not admissible in evidence.879 BHAGWATI J (later
CJ) observed in Kanwar Lal v Amarnath:880 "There can be no doubt that these reports
(election meetings) were made by public servants in discharge of their oﬃcial duty and
they were relevant under the ﬁrst part of section 35, since they contained statements
showing what were the public meetings held by the ﬁrst respondent.881 It is diﬃcult to
see how, barring any observations or notings made by oﬃcers by way of comment or
opinion, the rest of the reports containing factual bio-data could possibly be regarded
as privileged". An oﬃcial report on Bihar blindings by police prepared at the behest of
the State was relevant to the cases arising out of the blindings and, therefore, the State
Government was not allowed to keep back the report.882
Facts in the communication between the RBI and Capital Issues Controller about the
sterling value of a company's assets are relevant without producing the author. But it is
generally a weak evidence. On author being produced, it becomes strong. Hearsay rule
has no place in reference to public documents.883
Entries in the Record of Rights regarding the factum of partition, maintained in the
oﬃcial course of business is a relevant piece of documentary evidence.884
In State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh,885 the document in question was a report
written by a Serishetedar in due discharge of his oﬃcial duty for ascertaining the actual
possession of lands by various landlords. Its recitals and the fact that it was kept in a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
purely Government department, viz., the Collectorate, from where it was produced
before the trial court, clearly and conclusively proved that the report was made by an
oﬃcial Serishetedar appointed by a very high governmental authority. Since the report
mentioned a number of persons through whom the plaintiffs claimed their title it
related to a relevant fact. Thus all the conditions of section 35 were fully satisﬁed and
the document was admissible in evidence. However, admissibility of a document and
its probative value are two distinct and separate aspects and cannot be combined
together. A document may be admissible and yet may not have any probative value.
Where a report is given by a responsible oﬃcer, which is based on evidence of
witnesses and documents and has a statutory ﬂavour in that it is given not merely by
an administrative oﬃcer but under the authority of a statute, its probative value would
indeed be very high so as to be entitled to great weight. The probative value of a
document, however ancient it may be, is reduced to the minimum where there is no
evidence to disclose the nature of the instructions given to the author of the document
tendered in evidence, or the source or knowledge or information on which the report is
based or has achieved suﬃcient notoriety. Though a document may be admissible
because its author was no longer alive, much value cannot be attached to it if it
contains information which is based on hearsay. In the present case the report had no
probative value at all. It did not disclose the source from which the facts or materials
mentioned therein were gathered. Nor did it show that the author of the report
consulted either contemporary or previous records or entries there in order to satisfy
himself regarding the correctness or various statements made pertaining to the
genealogy of landlords who were in possession of the lands, as stated in the report.
The author of the report had to depend on some unknown persons, who were not even
mentioned in the document, to gather his facts. There was no evidence to indicate as
to what happened after the author had submitted his report to the Government and
whether or not any follow-up action was taken on the basis of his report or it was just
ﬁled and kept on the record lying lifeless and mute. There was no evidence to
corroborate the recitals in the document by any contemporary or subsequent
Government record. No proper veriﬁcation was made by the author of the report
regarding the facts stated in his report from any source and it did not form part of a
revenue entry or record which was ever referred to by any Executive, Judicial or
statutory authority subsequent to the ﬁling of the report. The report, after it was
submitted, was shrouded in mystery and was obliviated until the present suit was ﬁled,
when a person from the Collectorate merely produced the document but he had no
knowledge about its contents or about its being acted upon. Moreover, even if the
document was taken into consideration it, being a report regarding possession of the
properties, was not any evidence of title with which the present litigations were mainly
concerned. If there was no probative value of the report, it could not be corroborated by
any other document which would have to be judged and examined on its own
merits.886 The report prepared by the process server in due discharge of his oﬃcial
duties may safely be admitted in evidence even without examining the process
server.887
The survey record was prepared after the passing of the decree in the partition suit.
The report was held to be subject to the decree passed in the suit. Unless the decree is
set aside or declared as a nullity, no one can look into that document purporting to be a
partition by ignoring the decree.888

[s 35.12] Post-oﬃce delivery stamp.—
In a case before the Supreme Court the petitioner was selected for admission to MBBS
course. A letter dated 19 July 1990 was sent asking him to join by 25 July 1990. The
letter reached him on 4 August 1990. He could not join in time. He was denied
admission. The petitioner produced the letter before the Supreme Court. It was found

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that the date of delivery was missing and same was ﬁlled in hand within the postal
seal. Declaring this to be an improper procedure, the court said: "The petitioner would
have been well-advised to ﬁle envelope in the condition it was received by him and
should have produced a certiﬁcate from the post oﬃce about actual date of delivery.
This was not done. The petitioner did not even explain the circumstances in which the
dates were supplied later by hand within the postal seal. The places meant for
indicating the month appear to have originally contained some marks. He may be right
that originally it was not possible to read the date and month but in view of attempt to
supply the same in hand without disclosing as to how and in what situation that was
done, no reliance could be placed on it."889

[s 35.13] Income tax return.—
In a motor vehicle accident claim case, to determine the annual income of the claimant,
a self-employed person, the income tax return ﬁled by him was relied upon.890

[s 35.14] Copy of average sale of land for one year.—
The District Judge awarded compensation for the acquired land by relying on the copy
of average sale of land for one year, which was proved as per the testimony of the
Patwari and was prepared by a public oﬃcial in discharge of his oﬃcial duty. The said
document was admissible under section 35. Besides, no evidence was produced in
rebuttal of the same.891

813 Subs. by the Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–5, for "record" (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
814 Maharaj Bhanudas v Krishnabai, (1926) 28 Bom LR 1225 : 50 Bom 716.
815 Saraswati Dasi v Dhanpat Singh, (1882) 9 Cal 431 .
816 Shoshi Bhooshun Bose v Girish Chunder Mitter, (1893) 20 Cal 940 ; Raj Dirgaj Deo v Beni

Mahto, (1917) 20 Bom LR 712 PC. Also see, Anita v Atal Bihari, 1993 Cr LJ 549 (MP).
817 Ali Nasir Khan v Manik Chand, (1902) 25 All 90 FB.
818 Samar Dasadh v Juggul Kishore Singh, (1895) 23 Cal. 366 . Restated by the Supreme Court

in State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : 1984 Cr LJ 613 ; State v Kamruddin,
(1956) Nag 282; Birad Mal Singhvi v Anand Purohit, AIR 1988 SC 1796 : 1988 Supp SCC 604 .
819 Ravinder Singh Gorkhi v State of UP, AIR 2006 SC 2157 : (2006) 5 SCC 584 .
820 Ghulam Rasul Khan v Secretary of State, (1925) 6 Lah 269: 52 IA 201; Secretary of State v

Chimanlal Jamnadas, (1941) 44 Bom LR 295 : (1942) Bom 357; Barikrao v Crown, (1943) Nag
358; Chitru Devi v Ram Dei, AIR 2002 HP 59 , entry in Birth and Death Register maintained under
Birth and Death Registration Act, 1969, by competent authority showing birth of a male child,
admissible to prove parentage and date of birth. Voters' list was also held to be admissible for
the same purpose. Such list is prepared by competent oﬃcers in Election Deptt. in discharge of
their oﬃcial duty. See generally, Bishnudas Behera v State, 1997 Cr LJ 2207 (Ori).
821 Ramalinga Reddi v Kotayya, (1917) 41 Mad 26.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
822 Goverdhan v State of MP, 1995 Cr LJ 632 (MP). Kanji Bibi v Md. Siddique, 1996 AIHC 3912

(Cal) entry in birth register, supported by other evidence, not to be ignored. Fulmatia v Sub
Divisional Oﬃcer, AIR 2008 NOC 1136 (All), entry of birth or death in the Parivar register is not
conclusive proof, it is merely a piece of evidence.
823 State of HP v Dharam Dass, 1992 Cr LJ 1758 (HP).
824 Mahendra Prasad Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1995 Pat 162 .
825 Raj Rani v Chief Settlement Commr., AIR 1984 SC 1236 : (1984) 3 SCC 619 . See, further, Raj

Rani v Chief Settlement Commr, Delhi, AIR 1984 SC 1234 , where a certiﬁcate of death
authenticated by certain respectable persons of the locality where the accused resided was
held to be not relevant. They were neither under a duty to prepare a public record, nor they
testiﬁed to the place of death from personal knowledge.
826 Said-un-nissa Bibi v Ruqaiya Bibi, (1930) 53 All 428 ; Manikrao v Deorao, (1954) Nag 709. But,

see Contra, Rajkumar v Vijaya Kumar, AIR 1969 All 162 .
827 Manikchand v Krishna, (1931) 28 NLR 127; Mohd. Ikram Hussain v State of UP, AIR 1964 SC

1625 : 1964(2) Cr LJ 590 ; Bhim Mandal v Magaram, AIR 1961 Pat 21 ; Sahib Singh v State, 1991
Cr LJ 687 (Del), medical evidence and primary school certiﬁcate, suﬃcient evidence of age.
828 Jagtar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 2448 : 1993 Cr LJ 2886 : 1994 Supp (1) SCC 65

. Kedar Nath Singh v State, 1995 Cr LJ 4121 (Del), evidence from school admission register
accepted for proving age of the victim of rape. Raghunath Behera v Balaram Behera, AIR 1996 Ori
38 , relying on L Debi Prasad (dead) by LRs. v Smt. Tribeni Devi, AIR 1970 SC 1286 : (1970) 1 SCC
677 . Entry in admission register is a very important piece of evidence.
829 Madan Mohan Singh v Rajni Kant, AIR 2010 SC 2933 : (2010) 9 SCC 209 . Birth certiﬁcate

preferred to school leaving certiﬁcate, Iswarlal Mohanlal Thakkar v Paschim Gujarat Vij Co Ltd,
(2014) 6 SCC 434 (para 19) : 2014 (5) Scale 285 . See also Satish Kumar Jayanti Lal Dabgar v
State of Gujarat, (2015) 7 SCC 359 , para 11 : 2015 (5) SCJ 135 .
830 Ram Suresh Singh v Prabhat Singh, AIR 2009 SC 2005 : (2009) 4 SCC 504 . Date of birth

shown in school certiﬁcate accepted as correct to disentitle candidate to contest election,
Dimpal v Rajesh Baluni, AIR 2016 Uttr 17 , para 9 : 2016 132 RD 47.
831 State of Chhatisgarh v Lekhram, AIR 2006 SC 1746 : (2006) 5 SCC 736 , rape case.
832 Neeta Jain v State of MP, AIR 2016 MP 81 , paras 7 and 8.
833 UOI v Kantilal Hematram Pandya, AIR 1995 SC 1349 : 1995 (3) SCC 17 , following UOI v

Harnam Singh, (1993) 2 SCC 162 : 1993 AIR SCW 1241 : AIR 1993 SC 1367 .
834 Burn Standard Co Ltd v Dinabandhu Majumdar, AIR 1995 SC 1499 : 1995(4) SCC 172 ,

overruling Pramath Nath Choudhury v State of West Bengal, (1981) 1 Serv LR 570 (Cal).
835 Vaidyanath v Rambadan, AIR 1966 Pat 383 .
836 Rajappan, (1960) Kerala 481 .
837 Hoak Saing v Moung E Hla, (1940) Ran 481.
838 Birad Mal Singhvi v Anand Purohit, AIR 1988 SC 1796 : 1988 Supp SCC 604 . In a rape case,

the father of the prosecutrix made an admission that she was the eldest of his three children
and his son had completed 18 years, the school certiﬁcate showing her minor was held to be
suspicious and unreliable, Annakodi v State, 1995 Cr LJ 3387 (Mad).
839 Shubhendra Nath Bakshi v Sekhar nath Bakshi, AIR 2007 NOC 1714 (Cal—DB).
840 Nazir Hossain Halder v State, 1998 Cr LJ 1720 (Cal).
841 Mayank Rajput v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2979 (All). Sumitra Bai v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 2541

(MP), entry in school register regarding age of child is a relevant and admissible piece of
evidence. The girl in question was induced and taken away by the accused.
842 Mohandas Suryavanshi v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 3451 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
843 Babloo Pasi v State of Jharkhand, AIR 2009 SC 314 : (2008) 13 SCC 133 ; Ravinder Singh

Gorkhi v State of UP, AIR 2006 SC 2157 : (2006) 5 SCC 584 : (2006) 4 All LJ 269 : 2006 Cr LJ
2791 , school certiﬁcate for proving age of the accused, copy of the certiﬁcate 26 years after he
left school, head-master had no personal knowledge, there was no register of the school was
produced, not accept in proof of age. The standard of proof under the section in civil and
criminal cases same, not different. Entry should be authentic in nature. It should not be of
mechanical nature so as to be merely a piece of evidence.
844 Ram Deo Chauhan v State of Assam, 2001 Cr LJ 2902 : AIR 2001 SC 2230 at pp 2919-2920 :

Dhobedhar Naik v State, 2002 Cr LJ 113 (Ori) : (2001) 1 Ori LR 122 , birth register is a conclusive
evidence, but in its absence, the court has to base its decision upon physical features and other
oral evidence, ossiﬁcation test invariably needs to be carried out whenever possible and it is a
sure test for ascertaining age.
845 Anis-ul-Rehman Khan v Beni Ram, (1901) PR No. 59 of 1901 (Civil).
846 Po Gaung v Ma Shwe Bwin, (1908) 4 LBR 231; Gangabai v Fakirgowda, (1929) 57 IA 61 : 32

Bom LR 368: 54 Bom 336; State of Punjab v Subhash Chander, AIR 1991 P&H 134, entries in
record of right maintained under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 not showing that brick-earth
would vest in the State, presumption that it vested in the owner. Maniyamkandi Kunhiraman v
Machil Parambath, AIR 1998 Ker 24 , minor members of a family challenged the alienation of
family property. Original copy of the school admission register was produced in proof of age.
The evidence of age was held to be proper.
847 Amdumiyan v Crown, (1937) Nag 315; Shrikisan v Jagoba, (1937) Nag 382.
848 Ranjan Acharya v Arjun Rout, AIR 2010 Ori 76 .
849 Collector of Gorakhpur v Ram Sunder, (1934) 36 Bom LR 867 : 61 IA 286: 56 All 468.

Seethapati Rao Dora v Venkanna Dora, (1922) 45 Mad 332 FB, not correct in view of this decision.
Tara Devi v Sudesh Chaudhary, AIR 1998 Raj 59 , in an election petition, the lower court called
upon the elected candidate to prove her age and was also relying upon her school record for
proof of age without trying to ascertain its probative value, the court said that it was an error
apparent on the face of the award. As to the school record the court said that entries are
circumstantial evidence. It is necessary to consider their probative value. A failure to prove that
the entry is correct does not increase its evidentiary value.
850 Pattakal Cheriyakoya v Aliyathammuda B Muthukoya, AIR 2008 NOC 1421 (Ker—DB).
851 Food Corpn. of India v Assam State Co-op Marketing & Consumer Federation Ltd, (2004) 12

SCC 360 .
852 Rajesh Kumar Jain v Secretary, CBSE, AIR 1999 Delhi 395 .
853 Sant Ram v Faquiroo, AIR 1985 HP 10 ; Gurcharan Singh v Prithi Singh, AIR 1974 SC 223 :

1974 (1) SCC 138 ; Avadh Kishore Das v Ram Gopal, AIR 1979 SC 861 : 1979(4) SCC 790 about
Wajibulzar paper, a village admn. paper, Vishwa Vijay v F Hasan, AIR 1976 SC 1485 : 1976(3) SCC
642 , bogus entries.
854 Gurunath Manohar Pavaskar v Nagesh Siddappa Navalgund, AIR 2008 SC 901 : (2007) 13

SCC 565 , revenue record is not a document of title, it merely raises a presumption of
possession.
855 RK Madhuryyajit Singh v Takhellamban Abung Singh, AIR 2001 Gau 181 .
856 Baleshwar Tewari v Sheo Jatan Tewari, AIR 1997 SC 2889 at p 2094 : (1997) 5 SCC 112 .
857 Anwar Hussain Sheikh v Santi Kumar Mondal, AIR 1997 Cal 120 .
858 Puran Singh v Ram Lok, AIR 1983 P&H 162; Tahzibunissa v SA Rehman, AIR 1980 Pat 89 ;

Musa Jena v PC Naik, AIR 1980 Ori 183 , evidence of public records.
859

Motilal Lakhotia v Mewang Tobgyal Wangehuk Tenzing Namgyal, AIR 1994 Sikkim 6 ,

following Prem Chden Bhutiani v Richen Dorjee, AIR 1986 Sikkim 22 and Sita Ram v Ramchandra,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
AIR 1977 SC 1712 (para 20) : 1977(2) SCC 49 . Entries in Bandobast Missal and Khasra taken to
be true, Jayaprakash v State of Maharashtra, 1996 AIHC 1328 (Bom).
860 Shikharchand v DJP Karini Sabha, AIR 1974 SC 1178 : 1974(1) SCC 675 . Such entries have

been held to be of very little probative value for the purpose of proving genealogy. State of Bihar
v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : 1983(3) SCC 118 . Digambar Adhar Patil v Davram
Girdhar Patil, AIR 1995 SC 1728 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 428 , entries in record of rights regarding
factum of partition, a relevant piece of evidence.
861 Municipal Corp, Gwalior v Puran Singh, AIR 2014 SC 2665 (para 30) : 2015 (5) SCJ 673 .
862 Sitaram v Ram Charan, AIR 1995 MP 134 ; Jattu Ram v Hakam Sing, (1993) 4 SCC 403 ,

Jamabandi entries are not evidence of title. Major Pakhar Singh Atwal v State of Punjab, AIR 1995
SC 2185 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 401 , mutation entries, not relevant evidence for the purpose of
showing the neighbouring land value for the purposes of acquisition. Shivraya v Bakkappa, 1995
Supp. 3 SCC 400. Panchayat register entries could not be exclusively relied on to determine title
to land. Jagdeshwar Ramasahay Ahir v Parmeshwar Ramprasad Yadav, AIR 2000 MP 223 , Khasra
entries in remarks column, no presumption arises as to rights, possession.
863 E Parashuraman v V Duraiswamy, (2006) 1 SCC 658 : AIR 2006 SC 376 .
864 All Muslim Residents at Ranikhet Cantonment v Mathura Nath, AIR 2008 NOC 182 (Utr).
865 Kesho Prasad v Bhagjogna Kuer, (1937) 39 Bom LR 731 : 16 Pat 258 (PC).
866 Rajasthan State Road Transport Cropn. v Nand Kishore, AIR 2001 Raj 334 .
867 Paryanibai v Bajirao, (1961) 64 Bom LR 86 ; Brij Lal v Board of Revenue, (1993) 2 SCC 544 :

AIR 1994 SC 1128 , rejection of school certiﬁcate as well as medical certiﬁcate in proof of age
of majority for purposes of allotment of land was held to be improper. The onus was on the
authorities to show that the applicant was misrepresenting his age which they failed to
discharge. Their decision was not tenable.
868 Manni Devi v Ramayan Singh, AIR 1985 Pat 35 . For an entry as to birth in an oﬃcial record,

see, Harpal Singh v HP, AIR 1981 HP 361 .
869 Aina Devi v Bachan Singh, AIR 1980 All 174 , at 177.
870 Baby v Jayant, AIR 1981 Bom 283 .
871 Bala Shankar Maha Shankar Bhattjee v Charity Commissioner, Gujarat, AIR 1995 SC 167 :

1995 Supp (1) SCC 485 : (1995) 1 (Cri) LR 711. Kerala Pattika Jathi Samrekshana Samithy v State
of Kerala (FB), AIR 1995 Ker 337 . As an entry of name, date of birth and religion can be
corrected on the ground of wrong entry or subsequent changes, Government direction
permitting to correct a wrong entry of caste, was valid.
872 Raghunath Behera v Balaram Behera, AIR 1996 Ori 38 .
873 Nawalshankar Ishwarlal Dave v State of Gujarat, AIR 1994 SC 1496 : 1994 Cr LJ 2170 ,

following Mohinder Singh v State of Punjab, (1978) 1 SCR 177 : AIR 1977 SC 2012 and
Vatticherukuru Village Panchayat v Nori Venkatarama Deekshithulu, (1991) 2 SCR 531 : 1991 AIR
SCW 1303 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 228.
874 Akshara Nand v State of HP, 1996 AIHC 1894 (HP).
875 Bhimabai Mahadeo Kambekar v Arthur Import and Export Company, AIR 2019 SC 719 ;

Balwant Singh v Daular Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2719 .
876 Balwant Singh v Daular Singh, AIR 1997 SC 2719 : (1997) 7 SCC 137 .
877 Talat Fitima Hasan v His Highness Nawab Syed Murtaza Ali Khan Sahib Bahadur, AIR 1997 All

122 ; Purshottam Das Tandon v Military Estate Oﬃcer, AIR 2000 All 127 , writ court refused to
interfere in mutation matters. Mutation of property does not create or extinguish title, nor it has
a presumptive value of title.
878 Bhoguji Bayaji Pokale v Kantilal Baban Gunjawale, AIR 1998 Bom 114 .
879 Maheshwar Naik v Tikayet Sailendra Narayan, (1949) Cut 312.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
880 Kanwar Lal v Amarnath, AIR 1975 SC 308 : 1975(3) SCC 804 .
881 Citing PC Purushottama Reddiar v S Perumal, (1972) 2 SCR 646 ; AIR 1972 SC 608 .
882 Khatri (IV) v State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 1068 : (1981) 3 SCR 145 : 1981 Cr LJ 597 : (1981) 2

SCC 493 : 1981 Mad LJ (Cri) 456 : (1981) 29 BLJR 425 . A report by a Tahsildar on spot
inspection has been held to be not a public document. Radhey v Board of Revenue, AIR 1990 All
176 .
883 Octavious Steel Co v Endogram Tea Co, AIR 1980 Cal 83 .
884 Digambar Adhar Patil v Devram Girdhar Patil, AIR 1995 SC 1728 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 428 .

Pakhar Singh Atwal v State of Punjab, AIR 1995 SC 2185 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 401 , mutation
entries. Durga Das v Collector, AIR 1996 SC 2786 : 1996 (5) SCC 618 , a person not allowed to
claim compensation under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 merely on the basis of mutation
entries. Sawrni v Inder Kaur, AIR 1996 SC 2823 : 1996 (6) SCC 223 , mere mutation entry in
favour of defendant, not suﬃcient proof of ownership.
885 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : 1983 (3) SCC 118 .
886 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 3 SCC 118 .
887 Sawagat Ali Mullick v Sk. Akbar Ali, AIR 2016 Cal 93 , para 16 : (2016) 4 WBLR (Cal) 607 .
888 Marchai Naw Sharma v State of Bihar, AIR 2007 NOC 335 (Pat—DB).
889 Jasbir Singh Dhanda v Dean, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, 1991 Supp (2)

SCC 528 : AIR 1991 SC 330 .
890 Sanjay Verma v Haryana Roadways, (2014) 3 SCC 210 (para 12) : 2014 (4) SCJ 128 .
891 State of HP v. Roshan Lal, 2015 AIR CC 2174, para 9 (HP).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
[s 36] Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.—
Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts
generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of892
[the Central Government or any State Government], as to matters usually represented
or stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.

COMMENT
This section mentions two kinds of maps or charts, viz., (1) maps or charts generally
offered for public sale; (2) maps or plans made under the authority of Government. The
admissibility of the ﬁrst kind of maps rests upon the ground that they contain the result
of enquiries made under competent authority concerning matters in which the public
are interested. The Supreme Court has held that such private maps offered for public
sale though not irrelevant do not get the beneﬁt of presumption of accuracy under
section 83 of the Act.893 The admissibility of the second class rests on the ground that,
being made and published under the authority of Government, they must be taken to
have been made by, and to be the result of, the study or inquiries of competent
persons.
To render inquisitions, reports, surveys, and other similar documents admissible in
evidence as public documents, it must appear that they were made so that the public
might make use of them and be able to refer to them, for the fact that the public are
interested in the documents, and are in a position to challenge or dispute them, if
inaccurate invests them with a certain amount of authority.894
Neither this section nor section 83 has any application to maps prepared for private
purposes, that is, for the purpose of any particular suit or by any Government oﬃcer for
any special purpose. Thus, a map made by a Deputy Collector for the purpose of the
settlement of land forming the silted bed of a river is not one which is admissible in
evidence under this section and section 83 of the Act; but it is a map the accuracy of
which must be proved before it can be admitted in evidence.895 But maps printed by
Government of different wards of a city are admissible in evidence.896

892 Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "any Government in British India."
893 Ram Kishore v UOI, AIR 1966 SC 644 : 1966 (1) SCR 430 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
894 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1769 A, p 1113. Rahmat Ulla Khan v Secretary of State for India,

(1913) PR No. 63 of 1913 (Civil).
895 Kanto Prashad Hazari v Jagat Chandra Dutta, (1895) 23 Cal 335 .
896 Secretary of State v Chimanlal, (1941) 44 Bom LR 295 : (1942) Bom 357.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
[s 37] Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain
Acts or notiﬁcations.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public
nature, any statement of it made in a recital contained in any Act of Parliament 897[of
the United Kingdom] or in any Central Act, Provincial Act or 898[a State Act] or in a
Government notiﬁcation or notiﬁcation by the Crown Representative appearing in the
Oﬃcial Gazette or in any printed paper purporting to be the London Gazette or the
Government Gazette of any Dominion, colony or possession of His Majesty, is a
relevant fact.
899[***]

COMMENT
Acts of Parliament of the UK or of the Central Government or of Provincial or State
Government are admissible in evidence when the court has to form an opinion as to the
existence of any fact of a public nature stated therein. Under section 81 the court "shall
presume" the genuineness of these documents. These documents, as well as all others
of a public nature, are generally admissible in evidence, although their authenticity be
not conﬁrmed by the usual test of truth, namely, the swearing, and the cross-examining,
of the persons who prepared them. The relevancy factor stated in the section is
fortiﬁed by the presumption of genuineness created by section 81, but neither provision
compels the court to take for granted the truth of the matter stated in the records
enumerated in the section. This is so because the court has to ﬁnd out the relationship
between the facts oﬃcially and those which are in dispute and also whether the fact in
dispute is of public nature. Accordingly, the Supreme Court did not agree to the
proposition that the statement in the Indore State Gazette that some Dhangar families
of Mathura in UP had migrated to Maharashtra and settled in Ahmednagar should be
taken to create a proof that every Dhangar family residing in Ahmednagar is a
migratory family.900 The court cited a passage from Phipson on Evidence901 to the
effect that Government Gazettes...are admissible evidence, (and sometimes
conclusive) evidence of the public, but not of the private matters contained therein. K
Ramaswamy J surveyed some earlier authorities.902 "In Rajah Muttu Ramalinga v
Perianayagum903 the Judicial Committee, while considering the reliability of a report
sent by the District Collector to the Commissioner about the management of a temple,
held that when the reports express opinions on the private rights of parties, such
opinions are not to be regarded as having judicial authority or force. But being the
reports of public oﬃcers made in the course of duty, and under statutory authority, they
are entitled to great consideration so far as they supply information of oﬃcial
proceedings and historical facts, and also insofar as they are relevant to explain the
conduct and acts of the parties in relation to them, and the proceedings of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Government founded on them. Same view was reiterated in Martand Rao v Malhar
Rao,904 on the question of reliability of oﬃcial reports relating to succession to a
zamindari. "Their Lordships consider it necessary at the outset to point out that though
such oﬃcial reports are valuable and in many cases the best evidence of facts stated
therein, opinions therein expressed should not be treated as conclusive in respect of
matters requiring judicial determination, however eminent the authors of such reports
may be."905 In Arunachalam Chetty v Vekatachala-pathi Guruswamigal906 it was held
that while their Lordships do not doubt that such a report (Inam register) would not
displace actual and authentic evidence in individual cases; yet the Board, when such is
not available, cannot fail to attach the utmost importance, as part of the history of the
property, to the information set forth in the Inam register."907

897 Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
898 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951 sec. 3 and Sch., for "an Act of the Legislature of Part A State or a

Part C State".
899 The last para omitted by Act 10 of 1914, sec. 3 and Sch. II. Earlier it was added by Act 5 of

1899, section 2.
900 Vimla Bai v Hiralal Gupta, (1990) 2 SCC 22 at 27 : 1989 Supp (2) SCR 759 . The dispute was

about private temples and the same could also not be regarded as a fact of public nature.
901 510, para 25.07 (13th Ed, Common Law Library).
902 Supra.
903 Rajah Muttu Ramalinga v Perianayagum, (1873-74) IA 238 ; 3 Suther 7.
904 Martand Rao v Malhar Rao, (1927-28) 55 IA 45 at 48; AIR 1928 PC 10 .
905 Italicised by the Supreme Court.
906 Arunachalam Chetty v Vekatachala-pathi Guruswamigal, (1919) 46 IA 204 ; AIR 1919 PC 62
907 Followed by the Supreme Court in Narayan Bhagwantrao Gosavi Balajiwale v Gopal Vinayak

Gosavi (1960) 1 SCR 773 , 788; AIR 1960 SC 100 ; Poohari Fakir Sadavarthy of Bondilipuram v
Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments, (1962) Supp 2 SCR 276; AIR 1963 SC
510 . Both the cases were on Inam register. Mahant Shri Srinivasa Ramanuj Das v Surajnarayan
Dass, (1966) Supp SCR 436 at 447: AIR 1967 SC 256 , where it was held that the statements in
the Gazetteer can be consulted on matters of public history. VS Nagraja Shetty v MN Krishna,
1996 AIHC 2904 (Kant), documentary evidence will prevail over oral evidence.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

STATEMENTS MADE UNDER SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES
[s 38] Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law-books.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement of
such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published under the authority
of the Government of such country and to contain any such law, and any report of a
ruling of the Courts of such country contained in a book purporting to be a report of
such rulings, is relevant.

COMMENT
When it is necessary to form an opinion as to the law of any country, statements of
such law in a book published under the authority of Government of that country and
reports of cases decided by courts of that country and contained in books purporting
to be reports of such rulings, are relevant, that is, may be referred to by the court. A
statement contained in an unauthorized translation of the Code Napoleon as to what
the French law is on a particular matter, is not relevant.908 Statements in books of law
and in law reports are admissible on grounds similar to those stated in sections 35, 36
and 37. The opinion of an expert on foreign law can be received under section 45.
Strictly speaking, under this section the report of a case in a newspaper does not
appear to be relevant, because a newspaper cannot be regarded as a book purporting
to be a report of the rulings of the court.909
Production of a copy of a foreign Government Gazette attested as true copy by a seal
of the court is not the mode approved by this Act for proving a foreign law and the
court cannot take notice of such copy for the purpose.910
No court takes judicial notice of the laws of a foreign country, but they must be proved
as facts.

908 Christien v Delanney, (1899) 26 Cal 931 .
909 State v Sardar Bahadur, AIR 1969 Cal 451 .
910 Raman Lal v Ram Gopal, (1954) 4 Raj 262 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

HOW MUCH OF A STATEMENT IS TO BE PROVED
911[s

39] What evidence to be given when statement forms part of a
conversation, document, electronic record book or series of letters or papers.
—
When any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement, or
of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a document
which forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a
connected series of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more
of the statement, conversation, document, electronic record book or series of letters
or papers as the Court considers necessary in that particular case to the full
understanding of the nature and effect of the statement, and of the circumstances
under which it was made.

COMMENT
[s 39.1] Principle.—
When evidence is given of a statement which forms part of (a) a longer statement or
(b) a conversation, or (c) an isolated document, or (d) a document contained in a book,
or (e) a series of letters of papers, the court has discretion as to how much evidence
should be given of the statement, conversation, document, book, or series of letters or
papers for the full understanding of the nature and effect of the statement and the
circumstances under which it was made. The principle on which this section is based
is that it would not be just to take part of a conversation, letter, etc., as evidence against
a party without giving to the party at the same time the beneﬁt of the entire residue of
what he wrote or said on the same occasion.912 Thus, the rule enacted in this section
will not warrant the reading of distinct entries in an account book, or distinct
paragraphs in a newspaper, unconnected with the particular entry or paragraph relied
on by the opponent.
Statements made in books about ownership of property were held by the Supreme
Court to be something which could not be relied upon unless there were some
contemporaneous records showing or supporting the basis for statements in the
books.913
Amendment.—The section has been totally substituted because of the amendment
introduced under the Information Technology Act, 2000. The recasting of the section
became necessary because a few new words had to be put into the section, such as
"electronic record", "forms part of electronic record."

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

911 Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–6, for section 39 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
912 The Queen's Case, (1820) 2 Br & B 284, 302.
913 Karnataka Wakf Board v State of Karnataka, AIR 2003 SC 2467 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 40] Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.—
The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any Court from
taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is
whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.

COMMENT
Sections 40 to 43 deal with the subject of relevancy of judgments. Judgments qua
judgments or adjudications are admissible as res judicata under this section and as
relating to matters of public nature under section 42. Judgments other than those
mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42 may be relevant under section 43, if their
existence is a fact in issue or is relevant under some other provision.

[s 40.1] Principle.—
Under this section the existence of a judgment, decree, or order, is a relevant fact, if, by
law, it has the effect of preventing any court from taking cognizance of a suit, or
holding a trial. It is intended to include all cases in which a general law relating to res
judicata inter partes applies. The main object of the doctrine of res judicata is to prevent
multiplicity of suits and interminable disputes between litigants. Res judicata means, by
its very words, a thing upon which the court has exercised its judicial mind. Section 11
of the Code of Civil Procedure lays down the law as to res judicata. A resident in a
Council house sued the Council for ill-health caused by disrepair and dampness.
Subsequently, her dependent daughter brought an action for her disability on the same
facts. The suit was held to be maintainable, the earlier suit being not between the same
parties. The court said that she being not a party to the earlier proceedings, the
doctrine of res judicata, even in its widest sense, had no application. The court restated
the general principle to be as follows: The doctrine of res judicata in its wider sense,
which includes a bar on the subsequent litigation not only of all issues resolved in the
earlier proceedings but also of every point which properly belongs to the subject-matter
of the litigation, applies only when the cause of action or issue is or remains between
the same parties or their predecessors in title and does not extend to those not
themselves party to the earlier proceedings. The expression "a party to earlier
proceedings" would not include a disabled and dependent child of one of the
parties.914
Where a proceeding was instituted by a landowner for conversion of his agricultural
land and the same was dismissed by a reasoned order which was conﬁrmed by a
Division Bench on cogent and convincing reasons thus attaining ﬁnality, a writ petition
subsequently ﬁled by a legal heir with the same prayer was held to be barred by res
judicata. The earlier decision was relevant because the same issue was directly and
substantially involved in the earlier proceeding.915

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
This section has nothing to do with questions of evidence beyond the admissibility of
the judgments, because a plea of res judicata is not a plea as a matter of evidence, but
only a plea barring the action as a matter of procedure as distinguished from the rules
of evidence.916
In a judgment inter partes in a suit for title, it was held that recitals made in the
judgment between the predecessors of the plaintiff and those of the defendant
regarding rights in the suit property, were admissible for deciding the title to the
property between the plaintiff and the defendant.917 Referring to authorities the court
said:918 "In Srinivas Krishnarao Kango v Narayan Devji Kango,919 AYYAR J held that a
judgment not inter partes is admissible in evidence under section 13 of the Evidence
Act as evidence of an assertion of a right to property in dispute. A contention that
judgments other than those falling under sections 40 to 44 were not admissible in
evidence was expressly rejected. In Sital Das v Santa Ram,920 it was held that a previous
judgement not inter partes was admissible in evidence under section 13 as a
transaction in which a right to property was asserted and recognised."
The principle of this section applies to criminal courts as well. The plea of autrefois
convict or autrefois acquit, that is, of a previous lawful conviction or lawful acquittal,
has always been held to be a good plea. See section 403, Code of Criminal Procedure.
The judgment of a criminal court that a person did or did not commit an offence, does
not operate as res judicata to prevent a civil court from determining such questions for
purposes of a suit.921 The judgment of acquittal of a co-accused rendered in an earlier
trial arising out of the same transaction was held to be wholly irrelevant in the case of
the present accused who was tried separately. It was not admissible under sections 40
to 44. The case of the co-accused leading to his acquittal was decided on the basis of
evidence produced in that case whereas the case of the present accused was decided
on the basis of evidence adduced in his trial.922 Similarly, the judgment of a civil court
is not admissible in a criminal prosecution to prove the innocence of the accused.923 In
a criminal trial, it is for the court to determine the question of the guilt of the accused
and it must do this upon the evidence before it, independently of decisions in civil
litigation between the same parties. A judgment or a decree is not admissible in
evidence in all cases as a matter of course and, generally speaking, a judgment is only
admissible to show its date and legal consequences.924 A judgment of a civil court
other than one in rem cannot ﬁnally decide a matter subsequently dealt with in a
criminal court even though the facts in dispute in the civil suit govern the only question
that can arise in the criminal proceedings.925 To hold that when a party has been able
to satisfy a civil court as to the justice of his claim and has in the result succeeded in
obtaining a decree which is ﬁnal and binding upon the parties, it would not be open to
criminal courts to go behind the ﬁndings of the civil courts, is to place the civil court,
without any valid reason, in a much higher position than what it actually occupies in the
system of administration in this country and to make it the master not only of cases
which it is called upon to adjudicate but also of cases which it is not called upon to
determine and over which it has really no control.926
Where a civil suit for compensation was ﬁled and at the same time criminal
proceedings were also instituted on the same cause of action and the civil suit was
dismissed, it was held that criminal proceedings were not required to be dropped for
that reason alone.927
It is a well-recognised principle of law that a conviction in a criminal case is no
evidence of the facts on which that conviction was based in a civil case in which those
facts are in issue or form the subject-matter of the suit. But the authorities are clear
that, when the conviction is based on a plea of guilty, that plea is relevant and to prove
in the judgment in the criminal case is admissible in evidence in the subsequent civil

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
suit in which the facts giving rise to the charge are in issue or form the subject-matter
of the suit.928 A judgment in personam which is not inter partes has been held to be not
admissible in evidence.929

914 C (a minor) v Hackney London Borough Council, (1996) 1 All ER 973 (CA), their Lordships

observed that the Judge was not entitled to ﬁnd that the mother's dependants had a suﬃcient
nexus between them so as to be regarded as effectively the same party. Shamlata v
Vishweshwar Tukaram Giripunje, AIR 2008 Bom 155 : (2008) 3 Bom CR 166 , the defendant in the
present suit was not a party to the earlier suit. The judgement in that suit neither fell within the
scope of section 40, nor the doctrine of res judicata as enshrined in section 11, CPC was
attracted.
915 Udit Gopal Beri v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2001 Raj 147 .
916 The Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, (1889) 12 All, 1 44 FB.
917 Raman Pillai v Kumaran Parameswaran, AIR 2000 Ker 133 .
918 Ibid, at p 143.
919 Srinivas Krishnarao Kango v Narayan Devji Kango AIR 1954 SC 379 : (1955) 1 SCR 1 .
920 Sital Das v Santa Ram, AIR 1954 SC 606 (Bench of 4 Judges).
921 Ram Lal v Tula Ram, (1881) 4 All 97 . See Bishen Das v Ram Labhaya, (1915) PR No. 106 of

1915 (Civil). Raja Ram Garg v Chhanga Singh, AIR 1992 All 28 , simultaneous criminal and civil
proceedings in an accident case, neither to be stayed.
922 Rajan Rai v State of Bihar, AIR 2006 SC 433 : (2006) 1 SCC 191 : 2005 Cr LJ 163 .
923 Ramanamma v Appalanarasayya, (1931) 55 Mad 346. In Bombay a judgment of a civil court

dismissing a suit to recover moneys was held relevant in a prosecution for criminal breach of
trust for some of the items covered by the civil suit : Markur, (1914) 41 Bom 1: 18 Bom LR 185.
Narayanan v Mathan Mathai, AIR 1982 Ker 239 . Nawab Deen v Sohan Singh, AIR 2002 HP 143 , a
ﬁnding of fact recorded by a criminal court, is not relevant in a suit before civil court except for
the purpose of showing whether the accused was acquitted or convicted. The civil court has to
reach its own conclusions as to commission or non-commission of the act in question which
gave rise to the claim put forth in the suit.
924 Trailokyanath Das v Emperor, (1931) 59 Cal 136 .
925 Maung Po Nwe v Ma Pwa Chone, (1940) Ran. 163.
926 BN Kashyap v The Crown, (1944) 25 Lah 408 FB : AIR 1945 Lah 231 : 1945 Cr LJ 296 .
927 KG Premshankar v Inspector of Police, 2002 Cr LJ 4343 : AIR 2002 SC 372 .
928 B Meenakshisundaram Cheety v Kuttimalu, (1958) Ker 39 .
929 Nagarathnamma v Halamma, AIR 2010 NOC 1084 (Kar).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 41] Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.—
A ﬁnal judgment, order or decree of a competent Court, [s 41.2] in the exercise of
probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon or
takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to be
entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any speciﬁc thing, not as against
any speciﬁed person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal
character, or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.
Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof—
that any legal character, to which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued
to that person at the time when such judgment, order or decree declares it to have
accrued to that person;
that any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the time
from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it had ceased or should
cease;
and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property of
that person at the time from which such judgment, 930[order or decree] declares that
it had been or should be his property.

COMMENT
[s 41.1] Judgments in rem.—
This section consists of two parts. The ﬁrst part makes the ﬁnal judgment, order or
decree of a competent court in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or
insolvency jurisdiction relevant; the second part makes the judgments conclusive proof
in certain matters.
The section deals with what are usually called judgments in rem, i.e. judgments which
are conclusive not only against the parties to them but also against all the world. "A
judgment in rem has been deﬁned to be "an adjudication pronounced, as its name
indeed denotes, upon the status of some particular subject-matter, by a tribunal having
competent authority for that purpose".931 "This rule appears to rest, partly, upon the
ground that…every one who can possibly be affected by the decision is entitled, if he
thinks ﬁt, to appear and assert his own rights, by becoming an actual party to the
proceedings; partly, upon the ground that judgments in rem not merely declare the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
status of the subject-matter adjudicated upon, but, ipso facto, render it such as they
declare it to be; and, partly, if not principally, upon the broad ground of public policy, it
being essential to the peace of society, that the social relations of every member of the
community should not be left doubtful, but that, after having been clearly deﬁned by
one solemn adjudication, they should conclusively be set at rest".932 The judgments
referred to under section 41 are known as judgments in rem, binding the whole world.
But the judgment of that kind must have done something positive, onwards. This
provision is indicative of the quality of matrimonial jurisdiction.933
Intention in judgment in rem may be to give beneﬁt to all similarly situated persons,
whether they approached the court or not. With such a pronouncement the obligation is
cast upon the authorities to itself extend the beneﬁt thereof to all similarly situated
persons. Such a situation can occur when the subject-matter of the decision touches
upon the policy matters, like scheme of regularisation and the like.934
A judgment in rem can only be impeached if it can be shown—
(1) that the court has no jurisdiction; or
(2) that the judgment was obtained by fraud or collusion; or
(3) that it was not given on the merits; or
(4) that it was not ﬁnal, e.g., interlocutory.

There is no distinction between a judgment in rem and a judgment in personam,
excepting that in the one the point adjudicated upon, which is always as to the status
of the res, is conclusive against all the world as to that status, whereas in the other the
point is only conclusive between parties and privies. The term "privy" means a partaker
who is not a party.935 A judgment in personam is the ordinary judgment between
parties in cases of contract, tort, or crime. It is no proof of the truth either of the
decision or of its grounds as between strangers, or a party and a stranger.
If the judgment of the court is in personam and states expressly its intention or it can
be impliedly found out from the tenor and language of the judgment that the beneﬁt of
the said judgment shall accrue only to the parties before the court, then those who
want to get the beneﬁt of the said judgment extended to them, shall have to satisfy that
their petition does not suffer from laches and delay or acquiescence.936
Once a judgment falls within the section law dispenses with the proof of the legal
character which it confers or declares together with the declarations of property arising
from that legal character.937 A judgment in rem is conclusive only as regards status but
not as regards the ground on which it is based.938
Under this section a judgment, order or decree, given by a competent court in the
exercise of (1) probate, (2) matrimonial, (3) admiralty, or (4) insolvency jurisdiction, will
be conclusive proof as to the legal character conferred on, or taken away from, any
person or to which any person is declared to be entitled.

[s 41.2] "Competent Court".—
The word "Court" is not limited to courts in India. The expression "competent Court"
means the court of any country which is competent to pass such judgment as is
referred to in this section, that is to say, a judgment in rem.939 No court can pronounce
a judgment in rem binding outside the State in which the court exercises jurisdiction

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
unless such judgment affects either a thing situate, or a person domiciled, within such
State. Thus it was held that a judgment of the Supreme Court of His Britannic Majesty
at Alexandria as to the validity or otherwise of a will made by a person domiciled at
Aden would be binding on the parties so far as the properties in Egypt are concerned;
but it had no effect as a judgment in rem in respect of assets outside Egypt.940 A
person married in India and had two children from the marriage. He went abroad for his
studies but settled there. Five years after that his wife ﬁled a suit for maintenance. He
cited in defence, a divorce decree of the court of the place where he was in service. The
Supreme Court following its own decision in R Viswanathan v Ruk-ul-Mulk Syed Abdul
Majid941 held that a judgment of a foreign court to be conclusive must be by a
competent court, as contemplated by section 13, IPC, in an international sense and not
merely by the law of the foreign State. Such judgments can be challenged on the
ground of fraud.942 An Indian couple had gone to Brazil where they obtained judicial
separation from a competent court by mutual consent. On returning to India, they
prayed for conﬁrmation of their consensual divorce and the same was granted as the
grounds of divorce were not opposed to public policy in India and the judgment was
pronounced by the court of competent jurisdiction. It was held that presumptions as to
the conclusiveness of the judgment were available to the parties.943

[s 41.2.1] Probate jurisdiction.—
The grant of probate under the Indian Succession Act (XXXIX of 1925) is conclusive
proof of the title of executors and of the genuineness of the will admitted to probate.
The conclusiveness of the probate rests upon the declared will of the Legislature as
expressed in sections 227 and 273 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925. The grant of
probate is the method which the law specially provides for establishing a will.
The section is not applicable to the judgment of the Probate Court refusing probate.944
A judgment of a Court of Probate is conclusive proof that the person to whom letters or
probate have been granted has been clothed with the powers and the responsibilities of
the deceased and of nothing else and a question of status decided by a Court of
Probate can be raised again.945

[s 41.2.2] Matrimonial jurisdiction.—
This jurisdiction is conferred on courts by the following Acts:—
(a) The Indian Divorce Act (IV of 1869) relating to the divorce of persons professing

the Christian religion.
(b) The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act (III of 1936) relating to marriage and divorce

among the Parsis.
(c) The Native Converts' Marriage Dissolution Act (XXI of 1866).
(d) The Indian Christian Marriage Act (XV of 1872).
(e) The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939.
(f) The Special Marriage Act, 1954.
(g) The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.

A judgment of a Matrimonial Court, decreeing divorce or nullity of marriage is binding
as to the status of the parties concerned. It is conclusive upon all persons that the
parties have been divorced and that they are no longer husband and wife. But a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
judgment in a suit for restitution of conjugal rights is in a purely private suit between
two persons, and such a judgment is not a judgment in rem within the meaning of this
section.946
Execution proceedings were launched for realisation of maintenance. An order was
passed attaching the husband's movable property. His mother objected. The judgment
was held to be a judgment in rem binding on the whole world. But the attachment could
be challenged only by the party and not by the husband's mother.947

[s 41.2.3] Admiralty jurisdiction.—
Admiralty jurisdiction is conferred on several High Courts by Letters Patent. It was also
conferred on mofussil courts by 12 & 13 Vic. c. 88. The decision of a Prize Court is
conclusive upon all the world. A judgment delivered in an ordinary suit in an Admiralty
Court is not a judgment in rem binding strangers. Explaining the effect and purpose of
this jurisdiction the Bombay High Court stated as follows:948
"It is further to be seen here that section 51 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 makes
a speciﬁc provision for recovery of the mortgage money by the mortgagee by sale of
the vessel, which is mortgaged. Perusal of the provisions in Part III of the Rules and
Forms of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay on the Original Side, shows that
when a person has a claim against a vessel, he can bring in an action in rem and there
is a special and effective procedure provided for recovering the claim of the person in
such a suit. It is further to be seen here that the rules provide a special procedure for
sale of a ship or vessel pursuant to its arrest. It provides for determination of various
claims that may be lodged against the vessel and distribution of the sale proceeds
amount the claimants, with the result any person who buys a vessel sold in the
admiralty jurisdiction gets a clear title and he gets the vessel free from all
encumbrances. By virtue of the provisions of section 41 of the Evidence Act, the sale
certiﬁcate issued by this court in favour of the purchaser is a conclusive proof of his
title to the ship and any person who may have a claim against that vessel cannot make
any claim against the purchaser or the vessel in his hand. On the contrary, when a
vessel would be sold in execution of a certiﬁcate issued by the DRT [Debt Recovery
Tribunal] the sale certiﬁcate issued by DRT may not confer a clear title on the
purchaser. It is further to be seen that in admiralty jurisdiction, the plaintiff can proceed
against the vessel itself and can get the vessel arrested in the ﬁrst instance and the
court can proceed to sell the vessel after its arrest immediately unless within a
stipulated time, the owner appears and furnishes security and gets the vessel released.
Thus, in admiralty jurisdiction, the claim of the plaintiff is secured ﬁrstly by arrest of the
ship and secondly, when the ship is released from arrest by the security furnished.
Thus, the procedure that is followed by this court in its admiralty jurisdiction is
eﬃcacious and effective procedure than the procedure provided by the DRT Act. It is
clear from the preamble of that Act that Act has been enacted for providing speedy
recovery of the claims of banks and ﬁnancial institutions. Thus, it cannot be said that in
enacting the DRT Act, it was the intention of the Legislature to deprive banks and
ﬁnancial institutions of an existing more effective and eﬃcacious remedy. Therefore,
requiring banks and ﬁnancial institutions to go to the DRT for recovering of their claims
against the vessels would defeat the purpose for which the DRT Act has been enacted
and, therefore, it cannot be said that the suit of the plaintiffs is not maintainable."
An order in an admiralty suit emphatically stated that all the authorities concerned
would be bound by the order. The order being an order in rem, the court said that a
ﬁnding in such an order was conclusive against the whole world. Disputes in such a
suit could not be referred to arbitration by invoking the arbitration clause in the
insurance cover of the vessel in question.949

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 41.3] CASES
The executors named in a will, executed in the mofussil, applied for probate of the will.
The court refused probate on the ground that the testator was not of a sound disposing
mind at the time of execution. The testator's widow ﬁled a regular suit against the
defendants, as executors de son tort, to recover possession of the testator's property.
The defendants again set up the will and claimed to be invested under it with all the
legal character of executors. It was held that this section was not applicable to the
judgment of the Probate Court, for the ﬁnding of the court that an attempted proof had
failed was not a judgment such as was contemplated in this section. The only kind of
negative judgment which was contemplated was that which expressly took away from
a person the legal character which had up to that time subsisted.950 In order to attract
section 41 it is necessary that the judgment should have been pronounced. The mere
pendency of proceedings whether civil or criminal is not suﬃcient in itself to enable
anyone to seek the beneﬁt of the section.951

[s 41.3.1] Judgment based on compromise.—
A previous judgment passed on a compromise is not a judgment in rem within the
meaning of this section and is therefore no bar to a subsequent suit.952

930 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 3.
931 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1674, p 1050.
932 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1676, p 1054.
933 Chand Dhawan v Jawaharlal Dhawan, (1993) 3 SCC 406 , 416 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 915 : 1993 Cr

LJ 2930 .
934 State of UP v Arvind Kumar Srivastava, (2015) 1 SCC 347 (para 22.3) :(2015)1SCC347.
935 Ashan Hussain v Maina, (1938) Nag 431.
936 State of UP v Arvind Kumar Srivastava, (2015) 1 SCC 347 (para 22.3) :(2015)1SCC347.
937 Viswanathan v Abdul Wajid, AIR 1963 SC 1 .
938 DG Sahasrabudhe v Kilachand Deochand& Co, (1947) Nag 85.
939 Messa v Messa, (1938) 40 Bom LR 571 : (1938) Bom 529.
940 Messa v Messa, ibid.
941 R Viswanathan v Ruk-ul-Mulk Syed Abdul Majid (1963) 3 SCR 22 , 42: AIR 1963 SC 1 , 14
942 Satya v Teja Singh, AIR 1975 SC 105 : 1975 Cr LJ 52 .
943 Roy Andre Sales de Andrade v State of Goa, 1996 AIHC 99 (Bom).
944 Kalyanchand v Sitabai, (1913) 16 Bom LR 5 : 38 Bom 309 FB.
945 Mi Ngwe Zan v Mi Shwe Taik, (1910) 1 UBR (1910-13) 61, 63; Mali Muthu Servay v King

Emperor, (1926) 4 Ran 251.
946 Ma Po Khin v Ma Shin, (1933) 11 Ran 198.
947 Hemalata Sahu v Sugyani Sahu, AIR 2010 Ori 35 (DB) : 2009 (Supp) Ori LR 1117. The fact of

marriage and the right to maintenance whether valid or not, was not to be examined in the
execution proceedings.
948 ICICI Ltd v MFV Shilpa, AIR 2002 Bom 371 at p 381.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
949 Osprey Underwriting Agencies Ltd v Oil & National Gas Corporation Ltd, AIR 1999 Bom 173 .
950 Kalyanchand v Sitabai, (1913) 16 Bom LR 5 : 38 Bom 309 FB
951 Syed Askari Hadi Ali Augustine Imam v State (Delhi Admn), AIR 2009 SC 3232 : (2009) 5 SCC

528 .
952 Rahmat Ali Khan (Pir) v Musammat Babu Zuhra, (1911) PR No. 14 of 1912 (Civil).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 42] Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those
mentioned in section 41.—
Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 41 are relevant if
they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments,
orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.
ILLUSTRATION
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way over
the land, which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by A against C for a
trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is
relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.

COMMENT
[s 42.1] Principle.—
Under this section judgments relating to matters of a public nature are declared
relevant, whether between the same parties or not. It also forms an exception to the
general rule that no one shall be affected or prejudiced by judgments to which he is not
a party or privy. The exception just stated is allowed in favour of verdicts, judgments,
and other adjudications upon subjects of a public nature, such as customs,
prescriptions, tolls, boundaries between parishes, counties, or manors, rights of ferry,
liabilities to repair roads, or sea-walls, moduses, and the like. In all cases of this nature,
as evidence of reputation will be admissible, adjudications—which for this purpose are
regarded as a species of reputation—will also be received, and this, too, whether the
parties in the second suit be those who litigated the ﬁrst, or be utter strangers. The
effect, however, of the adjudication, when admitted, will so far vary that, if the parties
be the same in both suits, they will be bound by the previous judgment but, if the
litigants in the second suit be strangers to the parties in the ﬁrst, the judgment, though
admissible, will not be conclusive.953 Under this section the decrees of competent
courts are good evidence in matters of public interest, such as the existence of a
custom of succession in a particular community,954 or of a custom under which a
tenure is held.955 An appointment to a post in a temple has been held to be a matter of
public importance. A suit was ﬁled for recovery of math property by the Padadayya
(Mathadhipati) by virtue of his appointment as successor. There was a claim that some
other person had been appointed and installed and that appointment was found to be
valid by the Privy Council in an earlier litigation initiated by another person. It was held
by the Supreme Court that the judgement of the Privy Council did not have the effect of
res judicata. It was not binding on the appellant in the present case but it was relevant

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
under section 42.956 A judgment in a criminal case is not a matter of a public nature
and is not admissible in evidence in civil proceedings under this section.957 A Coroner's
inquisition is not relevant under any of the provisions of this Act and is, therefore,
inadmissible in evidence. It is not a judgment, nor can it be treated as an opinion.958
Section 40 admits as evidence all judgments inter partes which would operate as res
judicata in a second suit. Section 41 admits judgments in rem as evidence in all
subsequent suits where the existence of the right is in issue, whether between the
same parties or not. And this section admits all judgments not as res judicata, but as
evidence, although they may not be between the same parties, provided they relate to
matters of public nature relevant to the enquiry.959
Whether judgments, orders or decrees of a court are transactions within the meaning
of section 13 has been much disputed. A court adjudication is obviously not a
transaction, and that part of the written judgment which describes the litigation may be
admissible to prove the transaction under section 35.

953 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1683, p 1058.
954 Bai Baiji v Bai Santok, (1894) 20 Bom 53.
955 Dalglish v Guzuffer Hassain, (1896) 23 Cal 427 .
956 Virupakshayya Shankarayya v Neelakanta Shivacharaya Pattadadevaru, AIR 1995 SC 2187 .
957 Bishen Das v Ram Labhaya, (1915) PR No. 106 of 1915 (Civil).
958 Emperor v Bhagwandas Tulsidas (No. 2), (1945) 47 Bom LR 997 .
959 Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 FB.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 43] Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 40 to 42, when
relevant.—
Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 40, 41 and 42,
are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a fact in issue
or is relevant under some other provision of this Act. [s 43.4]
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reﬂects upon each of them. C in each

case says that the matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances
are such that it is probably true in each case, or in neither.
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the ground that C failed to make
out his justiﬁcation. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A's wife.

B denies that C is A's wife, but the Court convicts B of adultery.
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for the bigamy in marrying B during A's life-time. C
says that she never was A's wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted.

A afterwards sues C for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction.
As between A and C, the judgment against B is irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B's son,

murders A in consequence.
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(e) 960[A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft.

The previous conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A

was convicted and sentenced is relevant under section 8 as showing the motive
for the fact in issue.]

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
[s 43.1] Principle.—
The section declares that judgments, orders and decrees, other than those mentioned
in sections 40, 41 and 42, are of themselves irrelevant, that is, in the sense that they
can have any such effect or operation as mentioned in those recited sections, qua
judgments, orders and decrees but it must not be taken to make them absolutely
inadmissible when they are the best evidence of something that may be proved
aliunde.961 A judgment is generally speaking admissible to show its date and its legal
consequences.962 So far as regards the truth of the matter decided, a judgment is not
admissible evidence against one who is a stranger to the suit.963
What, however, would be admissible is the admission made by a party in a previous
proceeding.964
To have the effect of res judicata, a judgment inter partes alone can be admitted in
evidence, but for other purposes where judgments are sought to be used to show the
conduct of the parties, or show particular instances of the exercise of a right, or
admissions made by ancestors, or how the property was dealt with previously, they
may be used under section 11 or section 13 as exceptions recognised under this
section, as relevant evidence. That is to say, their existence, though not their
correctness, might be proved. Except where they are judgments in rem or where they
relate to public matters, judgments not inter partes have been always held to be not res
judicata, but they cannot be wholly excluded for other purposes in so far as they explain
the nature of possession, or throw light on the motives or conduct of parties or identify
property.965

[s 43.2] Scope.—
This section expressly contemplates cases in which judgments would be admissible
under other sections of the Act, which are not admissible under section 40, 41 or 42.
The cases contemplated by this section are those where a judgment is used not as res
judicata or as evidence more or less binding upon an opponent by reason of the
adjudication which it contains. But the cases referred to in this section are such as the
section itself illustrates, viz., when the fact of any particular judgment having been
given is a matter to be proved in the case. As for instance, if A sued B for slander, in
saying that he had been convicted forgery and B justiﬁed upon the ground that the
alleged slander was true, the conviction of A for forgery would be a fact to be proved by
B like any other fact in the case, and quite irrespective of whether A had been actually
guilty of the forgery or not. This would be one of the many cases alluded to in this
section.966
Explaining the reason for the rule in the Duchees of Kingston's967 case "As a general
principle a transaction between two parties, in judicial proceedings, ought not be
binding upon a third : for it would be unjust to bind any person who could not be
admitted to make a defence, or to examine witness, or to appeal from a judgment he
might think erroneous; and therefore the depositions of witnesses in another cause in
proof of a fact, the verdict, of a jury ﬁnding the fact, and the judgment of the court upon,
the facts found, although evidence against the parties, and all claiming under them, are
not, in general, to be used to the prejudice of strangers."
Explaining further in this case as to why a civil judgment is not relevant in a criminal
trial though both cases arose out of the same set of facts, the court said: "First,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
because the parties are not the same; for the King, in whom the trust for prosecuting
public offences is vested and which is not party to such (civil) proceedings, and cannot
be admitted to defend, examine witnesses, in any manner intervene or appeal;
secondly, such doctrines would tend to give the civil courts, which are not permitted to
exercise any judicial cognizance in matters of crime, an immediate inﬂuence upon
trials for offences."

[s 43.3] Admissibility of judgments in civil and criminal matters.—
A judgment in a criminal case cannot be received in a civil action to establish the truth
of the facts upon which it is rendered.968 The Privy Council observed that the ﬁndings
in a civil proceeding are not binding in a subsequent prosecution founded upon the
same or similar allegations.969 Technically, it is inadmissible as it is not between the
same parties, the parties in the prosecution being the State on the one hand, and the
accused on the other, and in the civil suit the accused and some third party; but the
substantial ground is that the issues in a civil and a criminal proceeding are not
identical and the burden of proof rests in each case on different shoulders.970 Trial and
conviction for murder is not relevant in a succession suit for excluding the convict from
succession though it is relevant for showing the fact of it.971 A previous acquittal can
be cited in a fresh prosecution over the same matter, but it cannot be used to prevent a
new trial.972
The ruling of the Privy Council in Emperor v Khwaja Nazir Ahmad973 has been applied by
the Supreme Court in KG Premshanker v Inspector of Police.974 In this case a civil suit
for damages was also ﬁled against the person accused in a criminal proceeding. The
suit was dismissed. The court observed that criminal proceedings are not required to
be dropped on that ground. The court also felt that it was bound by the decision of the
Constitution Bench in MS Sheriff v State of Madras975 which was to the effect that no
hard and fast rule could be laid down and that the possibility of conﬂicting decisions in
civil and criminal courts was not a relevant consideration. The law envisaged "such an
eventuality when it expressly refrained from making the decision of one court binding
on another court or even relevant except for limited purposes such as sentence or
damages. The court overruled the decision in VM Shah v State of Maharashtra.976 An
opinion was expressed in this case that a ﬁnding recorded by a criminal court becomes
superseded when a ﬁnding is recorded by a civil court in a parallel civil case. In Kharkan
v State of UP,977 it was observed that the "earlier judgment could only be relevant if it
fulﬁls the conditions laid down by the Evidence Act in sections 40 to 43. The earlier
judgment is no doubt admissible to show the parties and the decision but it is not
admissible for the purpose of relying upon the appreciation of evidence."
A decision on a point of law may affect all the pending cases on the same point of law,
for example, a decision that the effect of an amendment of an Act is that a certain kind
of restriction has become lifted with retrospective effect. It would affect all other
proceedings then pending on the same subject.978
In a charge for criminal mis-appropriation, there was a ﬁnding on the point in a
departmental inquiry; the court said that it was irrelevant in the criminal proceeding.
Hence, the ﬁnding could not be used to show that no prima facie case was made out
against the accused.979
An agreement to sell property was executed in favour of two different persons. An FIR
was lodged by one of the purchasers alleging that he was cheated by forged signatures
of the seller. The other purchase had ﬁled a civil suit for speciﬁc performance of the
agreement and the same was pending. It was held that a ﬁnding of fact by the civil

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
court would not have any bearing on the criminal case and vice versa. The FIR was not
to be quashed on the basis of a ﬁnding in the civil suit.980
A settlement in a civil proceeding for recovery of a loan was held to be not of much
relevance in a subsequent criminal proceeding arising out of the same cause. The
court said that a civil and criminal proceedings can proceed simultaneously over the
same cause of action.981
An admission made by a party in a previous criminal proceedings has been held to be
admissible in a subsequent civil proceedings.982
A decision by a criminal court does not bind the civil court but a civil court decision has
a binding effect in a criminal proceeding to the extent of civil aspects. An order passed
by an executive magistrate in proceedings under sections 145/146, CrPC has been held
an order of a criminal court and that two based on a summary enquiry. At the ﬁnal
stage, it would only be a piece of evidence.983 The evidence and the ﬁnding recorded
by the criminal courts in a criminal proceeding cannot be conclusive proof of existence
of any fact, particularly, the existence of agreement to grant a decree for speciﬁc
performance without an independent ﬁnding recorded by the civil court.984

[s 43.4] "Or is relevant under some other provision of this Act".—
These words clearly show that there are other provisions in this Act, under which the
existence of judgments not inter partes are relevant; for instance, under sections 8, 11,
13, 14 and section 54, Explanation (2), judgments not inter partes are relevant.985
Illustrations (d), (e), and (f) explain the meaning of the last words of this section and
are examples of judgments being relevant otherwise than under sections 40, 41, and
42.
A judgment not inter partes is admissible in evidence, quantum valeat, if its existence is
a relevant fact.986 The Supreme Court has laid down that in the matter of valuation of
land under acquisition, a judgment about valuation of land fairly adjoining to the land in
question is relevant. The party against whom such evidence is admitted must be
informed so as to invite his comments.987

[s 43.5] CASES.—
In deciding a suit for damages arising from a malicious prosecution, the Judge treated
the judgment of the Magistrate and evidence given before the Magistrate, in the
prosecution complained of, as evidence in the case. And looking at the judgment of the
Magistrate, as being a record of the facts found, the Judge came to the conclusion that
the plaintiff was not present at the time when the alleged offence was committed; and
decreed the plaintiff's claim. It was held that it was not permissible to the Judge to
utilize the judgment of the Magistrate in the way he did; and that this section or section
13 or section 11 did not apply to the case.988 The court found in this case: "In deciding
a suit for damages arising from a malicious prosecution the judge treated the judgment
of the magistrate and the evidence given before him, as evidence in the civil case for
damages. Looking at that evidence the judge came to the conclusion that the plaintiff
was not present when the offence in question was committed and, therefore, he was
maliciously prosecuted." In respect of the alleged hidden loss to a company in previous
years, the ﬁnding of the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction under Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 was that there was no prior period

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
loss. It was held that the ﬁnding was relevant under section 11 read with section 43,
though it was not conclusive and binding.989
The ﬁndings in a judgment as to legal heirship are relevant in a tenancy-landlord matter
where legal heirs are supposed to become the new landlords.990

960 Ins. by Act 3 of 1891, section 5.
961 The Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakadhari Singh, (1889) 12 All 1 FB. A Munuswami v R

Sethuraman, AIR 1995 Mad 375 , the judgment was not a fact in issue. Also see, Seth Ramdayal
Jat v Laxmi Prasad, (2009) 11 SCC 545 .
962 Trailokyanath Das v Emperor, (1931) 59 Cal 136 ; Raghunath Singh v King-Emperor, (1935) 15

Pat 336.
963 The Natal Land & Colonisation Co v Good, (1868) LR 2 PC 121, 133; Maroti v Jagannathdas,

(1940) Nag 699.
964 Seth Ramdayal Jat v Laxmi Prasad, (2009) 11 SCC 545 .
965 Lakshman v Amrit, (1900) 24 Bom 591 598, 599: 2 Bom LR 386.
966 Gujju Lall v Fatteh Lall, (1880) 6 Cal 171 , 192 FB See Secretary of State v Syed Ahmad

Badsha, (1921) 44 Mad 778 FB; Indar Singh v Fateh Singh, (1920) 1 Lah 540. V Shankarayya v NS
Pattadadevaru, AIR 1995 SC 2187 : AIR 1976 Kant 103 : 1995(3) JT 513 , reversed. An issue
ﬁnally determined by the highest court, could not be re-examined.
967 Duchees of Kingston's, (1776) 20 St Tr 355 at p 357 : 168 ER 175. See generally, Gopal v

State, 1997 Cr LJ 2162 (Raj).
968 Anil Behari v Latika Bala Dasi, AIR 1955 SC 566 : 1955(2) SCR 270 ; Raj Kumari Debi v Bama

Sundari Debi, (1896) 23 Cal 610 , 613; Ram Lal v Tula Ram, (1881) 4 All 97 .
969 Emperor v Khwawaja Nazir Ahmad, AIR 1945 PC 18 .
970 Gogun Chunder Ghose v The Empress, (1880) 6 Cal 247 , 248.
971 Biro v Banta Singh, AIR 1980 P&H 164. An acquittal in a prosecution for rash and negligent

driving was held to be not relevant to a civil suit for compensation arising out of the same
accident. APSRT Corpn. v Sravaji Aruna, AIR 1990 AP 162 .
972 S.PE Madras v KV Sundravelu, AIR 1978 SC 1017 : 1978 Cr LJ 775 ; Brijbasi L Shrivastava v

MP, 1979 Cr LJ 913 .
973 Emperor v Khwaja Nazir Ahmad, AIR 1945 PC 18 : 46 Cr LJ 413.
974 KG Premshanker v Inspector of Police, AIR 2002 SC 3372 .
975 MS Sheriff v State of Madras, AIR 1954 SC 397 : 1954 Cr LJ 1019 .
976 VM Shah v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1996 SC 339 : 1995 SCW 4140 : (1995) 5 SCC 767 .
977 Kharkan v State of UP, (1964) 4 SCR 673 : AIR 1965 SC 83 : 1965 Cr LJ 116 .
978 Karam Chand Ganga Prasad v UOI, AIR 1971 SC 1244 : (1970) 3 SCC 6941 : (1971) Cr LJ

1072 .
979 Jagdhish Chandra Soni v State, 1998 Cr LJ 1902 (Raj).
980 Kishan Singh v Gurpal Singh, AIR 2010 SC 3624 : 2010 Cr LJ 4710 .
981 Rumi Dhar v State of WB, AIR 2009 SC 2195 : (2009) 6 SCC 364 .
982 Seth Ram Dayal Jat v Laxmi Prasad, AIR 2009 SC 2463 : (2009) 11 SCC 545 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
983 Shanti Kumar Panda v Shakuntala Devi, AIR 2004 SC 115 : (2004) 1 SCC 438 .
984 K Nanjappa v RA Hameed, (2016) 1 SCC 762 , para 31 : 2015 (9) SCJ 704 .
985 See Wazir v Queen Empress, (1895) PR No. 7 of 1895 (Cr.); Narayanan v Mathan Mathai, AIR

1982 Ker 239 .
986 Babui Shamsunder Kuer v Ramkhelawan Sah, (1929) 8 Pat 783.
987 City Improvement Trust v H Narayanaiah, AIR 1976 SC 2403 : 1976(4) SCC 9 . To the same

effect, State of Bihar v Mosaﬁr Thakur, AIR 1984 Pat 40 . But the Kerala HC had held that such a
judgment is in personam and not relevant to valuation of adjoining land. Mariam v State, AIR
1980 Ker 176 .
988 Gulabchand v Chunilal, (1907) 9 Bom LR 1134 ; Onkarmal v Banwarilal, AIR 1962 Raj 127 .
989 AK Khosla v TS Venkatesan, 1992 Cr LJ 1448 (Cal).
990 Gopikrishan v Bajrang, 1996 AIHC 4064 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 44] Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of Court, may
be proved.—
Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree
which is relevant under section 40, 41 or 42, and which has been proved by the
adverse party, [s 44.2] was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, [s 44.3] or
was obtained by fraud or collusion. [s 44.4]

COMMENT
[s 44.1] Principle.—
A party to a suit or other proceeding may show that a judgment, order, or decree, which
is relevant under section 40, that is, which would, as a judgment inter partes, operate as
res judicata, or which is relevant under section 41, that is, which is evidence as a
judgment in rem, or which is relevant under section 42, that is, which is evidence as a
judgment relating to a public matter, and which is proved by the adverse party, was
passed by a court, which had no jurisdiction to pass it or was obtained by fraud or
collusion.991 It is not necessary for the party against whom such judgment, order or
decree is sought to be used to bring a separate suit to have it set aside, but it is open to
such party in the same suit in which such judgment, order or decree is sought to be
used against him, to show, if such be the case, that the judgment, order or decree relied
upon by the other side was delivered by a court not competent to deliver it, or was
obtained by fraud or collusion.992
The section lays down not only a rule of law relating to evidence, but also a rule of
procedure. There are many sections of this Act, such as sections 66 to 73, 130, 135,
136 and 150, which relate more or less to matters of procedure.
The right of a party to set aside by a suit a judgment or decree on the ground of fraud,
exists independently of the provisions of this Act.993
The Allahabad High Court has held that this section does not prevent a minor from
adducing evidence of negligence of his guardian, if he has a substantive right to prove
such negligence and thereby to avoid the judgment. It does not enumerate and exhaust
the grounds upon which a decree or order may be attacked.994 Similarly, the Calcutta
High Court has held that a decree against a minor can be set aside in a subsequent suit
by him if the decree was passed against the minor as a result of gross and culpable
negligence of the next friend or guardian-ad-litam.995 The Madras996 and the Patna997
High Courts are of the same view. A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court has held that
gross negligence, apart from fraud or collusion, on the part of the next friend or
guardian-ad-litam, does not afford the basis of a suit to set aside a decree obtained

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
against a minor.998 The Patna High Court has held that a decree passed against a
minor can be avoided by him on attaining majority on the ground of gross negligence
on the part of his next friend or guardian-ad-litam by bringing a subsequent suit even if
he has not succeeded in proving fraud or collusion on the part of such next friend or
guardian.999

[s 44.2] "Which has been proved by the adverse party".—
The judgment or decree which the section allows a party to impeach on the ground of
fraud must be one which has been proved by the adverse party.1000 A party can
impeach a decree even if he was a party to the suit in which the decree was
passed.1001

[s 44.3] "Delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it".—
Every species of judgment will be rendered inadmissible in evidence on proof given that
the court which pronounced it had no jurisdiction.
The "competency" of a court and its "jurisdiction" are synonymous terms. They mean
the right of a court to adjudicate in a given matter. They do not mean, in a case where
that right exists, the coming to a correct conclusion upon any question of law or fact
arising in that matter.1002 The words "not competent" refer to a court acting without
jurisdiction.1003 This section does not apply to cases where a decree is passed by a
court having no territorial jurisdiction but applies only to cases where there is inherent
lack of jurisdiction.1004 Either party or a stranger against whom a previous judgment is
used in a subsequent suit may impeach it on the ground of want of jurisdiction.

[s 44.4] "Obtained by fraud or collusion".—
This section allows a party to prove a fraud or collusion in order to avoid a judgment or
order.1005 The section is not applicable in cases of gross negligence.1006 The fraud
contemplated in this section must be a fraud practised on the court itself. "Fraud" is an
extremely collateral act which vitiates the most solemn proceedings of courts of
Justice.1007 The term "fraud" is deﬁned in section 17 of the Indian Contract Act. There
must be actual or positive fraud, that is, there must be an intention to cheat or deceive
another person to his injury.
"Collusion" means an agreement or contract between two or more persons to do some
act in order to prejudice a third person, or for some improper purpose. It may be of two
kinds: (1) when the facts put forward as the foundation of the sentence of the court do
not exist; (2) when they exist, but have been corruptly preconcerted for the express
purpose of obtaining the sentence.1008
A judgment or decree obtained by fraud upon a court does not bind such court or any
other, and its nullity upon this ground, though it has not been set aside or reversed, may
be alleged in a collateral proceeding.1009 In applying this rule it matters not whether the
impeached judgment has been pronounced by an inferior tribunal or by the highest
court of Judicature in the realm; in all cases alike it is competent for every court,
whether superior or inferior, to treat as a nullity any judgment which can be clearly
shown to have been obtained by manifest fraud.1010 A court of inferior jurisdiction is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
competent to declare a decree of a superior court to be a nullity on the ground of fraud,
if otherwise it has jurisdiction to entertain the suit.1011
It is always competent to any court to vacate any judgment or order, if it be proved that
such judgment or order was obtained by manifest fraud.1012 A distinction exists
between those cases in which the fraud is only attempted but not carried into effect
and those in which it has actually been carried into effect. In the former case a party
attempting to commit fraud is not precluded from maintaining an action to set aside
the fraudulent transaction; but in the latter case he is not allowed to take advantage of
his own wrong and is precluded from maintaining an action to set aside the fraudulent
transaction actually carried into effect.1013
On the slightest of doubt or even prima facie proof of fraud, the matter must be
thoroughly investigated by the court to arrive at the truth. Judicial order must be based
on strong fundamental facts free from any doubt as regards the corrections and
authenticity thereof.1014
Where both parties to a suit practise fraud on court and obtain a collusive decree, it is
not open to either of them to impeach the judgment of the court on the ground that it
was collusively procured.1015 Where an inference of fraud or collusion can be drawn
from the negligence or gross negligence of the next friend of a minor, it would be
permissible for the minor to avoid the judgment or decree passed in the earlier
proceeding by invoking section 44.1016
The Supreme Court said in this case:
The judgement of a competent Court is normally binding on the parties to the proceeding
and it operates as res judicata in a subsequent proceeding between the same parties. An
exception to the said rule is engrafted by s. 44 of the Evidence Act. The effect of the said
provision is that a judgment delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it or a judgement
which is obtained by fraud or collusion does not operate as res judicata and is not binding
on the parties to the said proceedings. A judgment can be avoided in a subsequent
proceeding by a party which is able to show that it was delivered by a Court not competent
to deliver it or it was obtained by fraud or collusion. Since such a judgment does not operate
as res judicata it is not necessary to institute a proceeding for setting it aside. A party to a
proceeding against whom a judgment in an earlier suit is relied can successfully avoid the
said judgment if he can establish in the subsequent proceeding that the said judgment was
delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it or that it was obtained by fraud or collusion.

No doubt, if a fraud is alleged and proved, it can be suﬃcient to get rid of most solemn
of proceedings including court proceedings. But in case of an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, this must be done only by throwing a direct challenge to the
proceedings by instituting a suit for that purpose or through any appropriate legal
proceedings, which may permit such direct challenge. Judgment of courts cannot be
ignored by another court in a collateral proceeding and that also on mere suspicion of
fraud or collusion, as was done in the instant case.1017 So far as the alleged decree
obtained by fraud or collusion is concerned, the principle of public policy requires that
the court will not lend its aid to a man, who founded his cause of action upon an
immoral or illegal act. It is well known that no polluted hand shall touch the pure
fountain of justice.1018
"It is permissible for a minor to ﬁle a separate suit for setting aside a decree, in an
earlier suit in which he was a party, on ground of gross negligence on the part of his
next friend. Apart from that it is also permissible for a minor to avoid a decree, if relied
upon in a subsequent proceeding, on the ground that the said decree was obtained on
account of gross negligence on the part of his next friend in the previous suit. This
would be permissible only if section 44 of the Evidence Act can be invoked. The court
cannot treat negligence, or gross negligence, as fraud or collusion, unless fraud or
collusion is the proper inference from the facts. In cases where an inference of fraud or
collusion can be drawn from the negligence or gross negligence of the next friend it

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
would be permissible for a minor to avoid the judgment or decree passed in the earlier
proceeding by invoking section 44 of the Evidence Act without taking resort to a
separate suit for setting aside the decree or judgment."
"In the present case if a judgment falls within the ambit of section 44 of the Evidence
Act it can be avoided in the proceedings in which it is sought to be relied upon and it is
not necessary to have it set aside by instituting independent proceedings in a
competent court. What was required to be considered was whether the judgment in the
earlier declaratory suit fell within the ambit of section 44 of the Evidence Act and for
that purpose it was necessary to examine whether an inference of fraud or collusion
could be drawn from the gross negligence on the part of the next friend of the
appellant. Since the matter has not been examined from this aspect, it is appropriate
that the matter be remitted to the Deputy Director (Consolidation) for considering
whether in view of the ﬁnding recorded by him there was gross negligence on the part
of the next friend of the appellant in prosecuting the earlier declaratory suit ﬁled, an
inference of fraud or collusion can be drawn so as to attract the provisions of section
44 of the Evidence Act. If he ﬁnds that such an inference can be drawn he would not be
bound by the judgment in the earlier declaratory suit but if he ﬁnds that such an
inference cannot be drawn he would be bound by the said judgment till it is set aside by
the competent court in an appropriate proceeding."1019

[s 44.5] Challenge by stranger.—
A decree passed by a foreign court was not allowed to be challenged by a person who
was a stranger to the proceedings which culminated in the decree. It is necessary for a
person to be able to challenge that he had a pre-existing interest in the subject-matter
of the decree and that was adversely affected by the decree. Events happening
subsequently to the passing of the decree could not clothe the stranger with a right to
maintain an action against the decree. A person marrying a woman was trying to
challenge that the decree of divorce passed in a proceeding between the woman and
her ﬁrst husband was illegal.1020

[s 44.6] Challenge to criminal conviction.—
The defendant in a civil proceeding sought permission to adduce evidence to challenge
his conviction in an earlier criminal proceedings. The court said that he could adduce
evidence which challenged his convictions. To do otherwise would be manifestly unfair
under section 11 of the Civil Evidence Act, 1968, a conviction was prima facie evidence
that a person did commit the offence of which he was convicted, but, unlike under
section 13 it is not conclusive evidence, and a defendant to civil proceedings is allowed
under section 11 to prove, if he can, that he did not commit the offence. The position of
a defendant in civil proceedings who sought to re-open a criminal matter which had
previously been decided against him is to be distinguished from that of a plaintiff in the
same situation.1021
Where the plaintiff sued the defendant for compensation for injury caused in a road
traﬃc accident and cited a criminal conviction of the defendant in a road traﬃc
offence, it was held that the defendant could challenge the conviction. The court said:
"A plaintiff who brought a civil action in respect of injuries sustained in a road traﬃc
accident and sought to rely on the defendant's conviction of driving without due care
and attention was not entitled to summary judgment under the Rules of the Supreme
Court O XIV where the defendant admitted the conviction but wished to contend, on the
basis of an expert's report, that he was wrongly convicted. It was clear from the Civil

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Evidence Act, 1968 section 11(2) that it was open to such a defendant to challenge his
conviction if he had good reason to do so and could satisfy the onus of proof to the
civil standard. In such circumstances, since there were serious issues to be tried, the O
XIV procedure (summary) was not appropriate."1022
Dealing with a case in which defective buildings were provided, the court said: "It would
be unjust to disregard the new evidence which demonstrated that her account was
credible. The case illustrated the need to ensure that aﬃdavits were not used by
solicitors as a means of putting across complex legal arguments. Aﬃdavits and
statements of truth were statements of evidence in the words of the witness and
should not contain anything on which the witness could not be cross examined.1023

991 Rajib Panda v Lakhan Sendh Mahapatra, (1899) 27 Cal 11 , 20. Also see Keepattel Bappu v

Kizhakke Valappi Muhammad, AIR 1993 Ker 272 .
992 Bansi Lal v Dhapo, (1902) 24 All 242 ; Rajib Panda v Lakhan Sendh Mahapatra, (1899) 27 Cal

11 , 20; Bhagwandas Narandas v Patel & Co, (1939) 42 Bom LR 231 .
993 Venkatappa Naick v Subba Naick, (1905) 29 Mad 179.
994 Siraj Fatma v Mahmud Ali, (1932) 54 All 646 FB; Desari Venkanna v Desari, AIR 1980 NOC 82

(AP).
995 Mahesh Chandra Bayan v Manindra Nath Das, (1941) 1 Cal 477 .
996 Punnayah v Viranna, (1921) 45 Mad 425.
997

Kumar Ganganand Singh v Maharaja Sir Rameshwar Singh Bahadur, (1927) 6 Pat 388;

Mathura Singh v Ram Rudra Prashad Sinha, (1935) 14 Pat 824.
998 Krishnadas Padmanabhrao v Vithoba Annappa, (1939) Bom 340: 41 Bom LR 59 FB.
999 RB Kamakshya N Singh v Baldeo, (1948) 27 Pat 441; Kungammal v Muthukumar, 2001 AIHC

3134 : AIR 2001 NOC 106 (Mad), the son of the property owner ﬁled a suit to exclude the
property from partition, but lost it. His wife ﬁled a second suit on the basis of a will and lost it.
Her children, on attaining majority, ﬁled the third suit saying that ﬁrst their father and then their
mother conducted the litigation negligently and, therefore, they were not bound by decrees in
such suits. No proof was offered of the fact of negligence or of lack of diligence. Hence, the
ﬁndings in the earlier suits operated as res judicata. The sons were not entitled to avoid the
decree of partition.
1000 A decree holder or one claiming through him can avoid the decree under section 44. Ibne

Hasan v Hasina Bibi, AIR 1984 All 216 .
1001 Nachittar Singh v Jagir Kaur, AIR 1984 P&H 197; Joginder Singh v Nirmal Naini Mehta, AIR

1986 Del 305 .
1002 Sardarmal v Aranvayal Sabhapathy, (1896) 21 Bom 205.
1003 Ketliamma v Kelappan, (1887) 12 Mad 228.
1004 Beerappa v Yeshwantrao, AIR 1972 Mys 338 .
1005 Siraj Fatma v Mahmud Ali, (1932) 54 All 646 FB
1006 Venkata Seshayya v Kotiswara Rao, (1936) 39 Bom LR 317 : 64 IA 17 : (1937) Mad 263.
1007 Meadows v Duchess of Kingston, (1775) 2 Amb 756.
1008 Wharton, 14th Edn, p 212.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1009 The Queen v Saddlers Co, (1863) 10 HLC 404, 431.
1010 Nistarini Dassi v Nundo Lall Bose, (1899) 26 Cal 891 , 908.
1011 Sarthakram Maiti v Nundo Ram Maiti, (1906) 11 Cal WN 579.
1012 Paranjpe v Kanade, (1882) 6 Bom 148, 153; Bhikaji v Balvant, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1046 ;

Mahomed Golab v Mahomed Sulliman, (1894) 21 Cal 612 .
1013 See Goberdhan Singh v Ritu Roy, (1896) 23 Cal 962 ; Banka Behary Dass v Raj KumarDass,

(1899) 27 Cal 231 ; Govinda Kuar v Lala Kishun Prosad, (1900) 28 Cal 370 ; Honapa v Narsapa,
(1898) 23 Bom 406; Sham Lall Mitra v Amarendra Nath Bose, (1895) 23 Cal 460 .
1014 State of Orissa v Fakir Charan Sethi, (2015) 1 SCC 466 (para 18) : 2014 (9) SCJ 654 ,

relying on State of Orissa v Harapriya Bisoi, (2009) 12 SCC 378 : [2009] 7 SCR 34 .
1015

Shripadchuda Venkangauda v Govindgouda Narayangouda, (1940) 42 Bom LR 1185 :

(1941) Bom 160. See Parameswaran v Aiyappan Pillai, AIR 1959 Ker 206 .
1016 Asharﬁ Lal v Koili, AIR 1995 SC 1440 : 1995(4) SCC 163 : 1995 All LJ 1154.
1017 Embassy Hotels Pvt Ltd v Gajraj, (2015) 14 SCC 316 , para 17 : 2015 (1) Ren CR (Civil) 310.
1018 Prabhatai Shankarrao Bodhankar v Chimote and Sons, Amravati, 2017 AIR CC 210, para 65 :

2017 (2) BomCR 207 (Bom-DB).
1019 Asharﬁ Lal v Koili, (1995) 4 SCC 163 : AIR 1995 SC 1440 : 1995 All LJ 1154 : 1995 RD 390.
1020 J v Oyston, [1999] 1 WLR 694 , QBD, the court followed Deva Prasad Reddy v Kamini Reddy,

AIR 2002 Kant 356 .
1021 Nawrot v Chief Constable of Hampshire, The Independent, Jan. 7 1992 : 1992 CLY 3346.
1022 McCauley v Hope; sub nom, McCauley v Vine, (1999) 1 WLR 1977 (CA).
1023 Alex Lawrie Factors Ltd v Morgan, The Times, August 18, 1999 (CA).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 45] Opinions of experts.—
When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law, or of science, or
art, or as to identity of handwriting 1024 [or ﬁnger impressions], the opinions upon that
point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, [s 45.5] 1025 [or in
questions as to identity of handwriting [s 45.8]] 1024 [or ﬁnger impressions] are relevant
facts.
Such persons are called experts.
ILLU.STRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison.

Opinion of evidence
The opinions of experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison by which A
is supposed to have died, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of

unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was
doing what was either wrong or contrary to law.
The opinions of experts upon the question whether the symptoms exhibited by
A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and whether such unsoundness of
mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts which
they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are
relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another

document is produced which is proved or admitted to have been written by A.
The opinions of experts on the question whether the two documents were
written by the same person or by different persons, are relevant.

COMMENT
This section is an exception to the rule as regards the exclusion of opinion evidence.
Opinions of experts are relevant upon a point of (a) foreign law, (b) science, (c) art, (d)
identity of handwriting and (e) ﬁnger impressions.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Both under this section and section 47 the evidence is of an opinion, in the former by a
scientiﬁc comparison and in the latter on the basis of familiarity resulting from
frequent observations and experience. In either case the court must satisfy itself by
such means as are open that the opinion may be acted upon.1026 Expert opinion is only
opinion evidence and is not helpful to the court in interpretation of the law.1027

[s 45.1] Principle.—
It is "a general rule that the opinion of witnesses possessing peculiar skill is admissible,
whenever the subject-matter of enquiry is such that inexperienced persons are unlikely
to prove capable of forming a correct judgment upon it without such assistance. In
other words, this is so when it so far partakes of the character of a science or art as to
require a course of previous habit or study to obtain a competent knowledge of its
nature."1028 The need to hear an expert opinion is the ﬁrst and foremost
requirement.1029
The opinion of an expert witness on technical aspects has relevance but the opinion
has to be based upon specialised knowledge and the data on which it is based, has to
be found acceptable by the court.1030 The duty of an expert is to furnish the court his
opinion along with all the materials. It is for the court thereafter to see whether the
basis of the opinion is correct and proper and then form its own conclusion, unlike a
witness of facts where facts are facts and they remain and have to remain as such for
ever and he does not give his opinion on facts but presents the facts as such. However,
the expert gives an opinion on what he has tested or on what has been subjected to
any process of scrutiny. The inference drawn thereafter is still an opinion based on his
knowledge. In case, subsequently, he comes across some authentic material, which
may suggest a different opinion, he must address the same, lest he should be branded
as intellectually dishonest. Objective approach and openness to truth actually form the
basis of any expert opinion.1031 Merely because an expert has tendered an opinion
while furnishing the basis of the opinion and that too without being conclusive and
deﬁnite, it cannot be said that he has committed perjury, so as to help somebody. And,
mere rejection of the expert evidence by itself may not also warrant institution of
proceedings under section 340, CrPC, 1973.1032 The opinions of skilled witnesses
cannot be received when the inquiry relates to a subject which does not require any
peculiar habits or course of study to qualify a man to understand it,1033 e.g., similarity
of fraudulent trademark.1034 In all other cases witnesses must speak only of facts and
not of opinion or inferences.1035
The reason for the rule is thus explained by Report on Cross Evidence:1036
An artist's views concerning the components of a chemical compound or the law of a South
American State, would not assist the English Court in coming to the conclusion with regard
to these matters for the simple reason that they do not warrant an inference to the probable
existence of the facts to which he deposes.

Goddard LJ, in the decision of the court of Appeal in Hollington v Hewthorn,1037 in a
civil proceeding dismissed the judgment of a criminal court on the same facts as
irrelevant being only the opinion of the criminal court. "It frequently happens that a
bystander has a full and complete view of an accident. It is beyond question that while
he may inform the court of everything that he saw, he may not express any opinion on
whether either or both of the parties were negligent. The reason commonly assigned is
that this is the precise question the court has to decide, but in truth, it is because his
opinion, is not relevant. Any fact that he can prove is relevant but his opinion is not."
The Supreme Court of India in Mobarik Ali Ahmed v State of Bombay,1038 preferred to
rely upon the reason that if a witness was permitted to express his opinion, it would
amount to delegation of judicial function. "A witness has to state the facts which he

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
has seen, heard or perceived and not the conclusion which he has formed on observing
or perceiving them (Section 60). The function of drawing inference is a judicial function
and must be performed by the Court."

[s 45.2] Who is an expert.—
An "expert" witness is one who has devoted time and study to a special branch of
learning, and thus is specially skilled on those points on which he is asked to state his
opinion.1039 His evidence on such points is admissible to enable the tribunal to come
to a satisfactory conclusion.1040 The section does not refer to any particular
attainment, standard of study or experience, which would qualify a person to give
evidence as an expert. Generally, a witness is considered as an expert if he is skilled in
any particular art, trade or profession, and possessed of peculiar knowledge
concerning the same. He must have made a special study of the subject or acquired a
special experience therein. In such cases, the question is: Is he peritus? Is he skilled?
Does he possess adequate knowledge?1041 The question of competency of ﬁtness of a
witness as an expert is to be decided by the judge.1042 Experts cannot act as judges or
jury. The court has to assess their opinion and decide ﬁnally.1043 An expert, in order to
be competent as a witness, need not have acquired his knowledge professionally. It is
suﬃcient, so far as the admissibility of the evidence goes, if he has acquired special
experience therein.1044 The opinion of an expert must be given orally and a mere report
or certiﬁcate by him is not evidence.1045 Senior Scientist (Chemistry), Central Forensic
Science Laboratory was held to be an expert in science, though not falling in the
category of oﬃcers mentioned section 293, CrPC. His opinion would be a relevant
piece of evidence in view of section 45.1046 In MS Reddy v State Inspector of Police,
ACB, Nellore,1047 it was held that, in the case of an alleged fraud committed on large
scale by Oﬃcers of Irrigation Department in carrying out work of jungle clearance, an
engineer working in that department entrusted to assist the investigation agency could
not be said to be an "expert" because of special knowledge acquired by him while in
service. All persons who practise a business or profession which requires them to
possess a certain knowledge of the matter in hand are experts, so far as expertness is
required. It is the duty of the Judge to decide whether the skill of any person in the
matter on which evidence of his opinion is offered, is suﬃcient to entitle him to be
considered as an expert. The opinion (prediction as to duration of pregnancy) of an
experienced obstetrician cannot be rejected merely because she is not specialised in
gynaecology.1048 Where a handwriting expert was not in practice since 1950 and also
expressed opinions beyond his natural ﬁeld, his evidence was rejected.1049 A person
who is not well-versed with a particular language cannot testify as an expert as to
handwriting.1050 Whether an expert is competent to speak on the matter of
handwriting can be discovered by cross examination.1051 The opinion of a goldsmith
can be relied upon. "They are able to ﬁnd out whether a piece of metal is gold or not by
the colour of the streak produced by rubbing on a touchstone though their assessment
of purity may not be exact."1052 An Excise Inspector who had put in twenty-one years of
service, tested countless samples of liquor, and whose competence to test the
contents and strength of seized liquor had not been questioned at all, was an expert
within the meaning of the section.1053 Where an expert had given no reasons in
support of his opinion, nor was it shown that he possessed special skill, knowledge and
experience in the science of identiﬁcation of ﬁngerprints, the Supreme Court did not
consider it safe to rely upon his opinion even if it was supposed to be admissible under
section 45.1054

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A government scientiﬁc expert certainly stands on a different footing as compared to
others i.e. those called by a party.1055
Where the evidence of a dumb witness required interpretation, the Principal of the
Government Residential School for Deaf was held to be an expert interpreter. The
testimony of the prosecutrix with the help of the interpreter proved not only the
commission of rape but also the identity of the offender. The court said that her
testimony could be relied upon.1056 A police oﬃcer who was trained to handle guns
was considered an expert for the purpose of certifying whether the gun in question was
in a working condition.1057
A caddie was held to be not an expert for the purpose of expressing opinion whether a
golf player, who had caused death of a caddie hitting him by a stroke of the stick, had
acted rashly and negligently.1058 Where a person was charged with the theft of railway
raw coal and the question was whether the coal found in his possession belonged to
that category of railway property, the court rejected the opinion of a person about
whom there was no evidence on record to show that he had acquired any special
knowledge or still to give his opinion as an expert in the matter of raw coal belonging to
railways.1059

[s 45.3] Nursing staff, whether expert psychiatric stress.—
S, a nurse manager of patients with learning disabilities, brought an action for stress at
work against his employer, alleging that he was overworked and not provided with
suﬃcient support. He disclosed an expert report from another nurse manager, then the
general manager of learning disabilities service with a different NHS Trust, who
purported to give evidence in relation to liability and causation. The employer applied
for an order debarring the witness from giving either expert evidence or evidence as a
witness of fact, on the basis that he failed to recognise his duty to the court and
purported to give expert evidence on matters for which he had no expertise. It was held
that the experience of the witness should be such as to make him capable of giving
evidence as to management practice, but that he was not qualiﬁed to give expert
evidence on the issues of causation of psychiatric injury or foreseeability in relation to
psychiatric injury. He wrongly (1) made reference to published material which postdated the period of alleged negligence; (2) raised issues that predated the period of
alleged negligence and which were not pleaded in the particulars of claim, and (3)
made ﬁndings of fact and expressed an opinion on the issue of liability, thereby
trespassing on the function of the judge. As a result, and due to the intemperate
language employed in the report, the report could not be said to be the objective and
unbiased evidence of an expert of the court. The evidence was wholly discredited. The
employer also intended to call at trial the manager of another home for patients with
learning disabilities as a witness of fact, which was a further relevant consideration
when debarring the witness from giving evidence, either as an expert or of fact at the
trial.1060

[s 45.4] Role of expert opinion.—
The court is bound to defer to the opinion of an expert where skill and experience alone
render a person a competent Judge. In the case of an expert witness there exists the
tendency to support the view which is favourable to the side which employs him so that
it is diﬃcult to get from him an independent opinion. An expert may revise his opinion if
he ﬁnds cogent reason and his evidence need not be disbelieved on this ground.1061

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The court, normally would look at an expert evidence with a greater sense of
acceptability, but it is equally true that the courts are not absolutely guided by the
report of the experts, especially if such reports are perfunctory and unsustainable. The
purpose of expert opinion is primarily to assist the court in arriving at a ﬁnal conclusion
but such report, is not a conclusive one.1062
An expert's evidence as to the handwriting is opinion evidence and it can rarely, if ever,
take the place of substantive evidence. Before acting on such evidence it is usual to
see if it is corroborated either by clear direct evidence or by circumstantial
evidence.1063 Expert evidence can be used to corroborate other evidence.1064 Opinion
as to handwriting was accepted for corroboration of professional statements.1065
Credibility and competence of an expert are material questions. Where the High Court
did not believe an expert the Supreme Court did not interfere.1066
Where an expert was instructed by both sides, the court debarred him from evidence.
There was hardly any chance left with him to prepare an unbiased report.1067 Where
the claim was against a Housing Society by its tenant for personal injury caused by
disrepaired state of the premises and for speciﬁc performance, the court said that the
fact that the designated expert was employed by the Authority did not disqualify him as
an expert provided that he was actually qualiﬁed for the job. The court, however,
stressed the need for independent experts whose credentials were not in dispute.1068
Documents need to be referred for an expert opinion, only in absence of other means to
prove the same.1069

[s 45.4.1] Court not functus oﬃcio because of expert opinion.—
The opinion of an expert may not have any binding effect on the court. The court does
not become functus oﬃcio because of an expert opinion. It is not the province of the
expert to act as judge or jury.1070 The ultimate opinion has to be formulated by the
court.1071 Expert opinion is merely an aid to the court to arrive at a conclusion. Such an
opinion is not binding. It is optional for the court to accept or reject it.1072 However,
interpretation by a technical body in regard to purely technical matters deserves
acceptance and will not be interfered with, unless it is arbitrary or unreasonable.1073
The Calcutta High Court observed as follows:1074 "The duty of an expert is to depose
and not to decide. The only function of the expert is to furnish the data with necessary
scientiﬁc criteria so as to enable the judge to come to an independent conclusion."
The guiding principle for courts dealing with expert opinion has been succinctly
summed up by the Supreme Court in the following words:
The possibility of some variations in the exhibits, medical and ocular evidence cannot
be ruled out. But it is not that every minor variation or inconsistency would tilt the
balance of justice in favour of the accused. Where contradictions and variations are of
a serious nature, which apparently or impliedly are destructive of the substantive case
sought to be proved by the prosecution, they may provide an advantage to the accused.
The courts, normally, look at expert evidence with a greater sense of acceptability, but
courts are not absolutely guided by the report of the experts, especially if such reports
are perfunctory, unsustainable and are the result of a deliberate attempt to misdirect
the prosecution. Where the eyewitness account is found credible and trustworthy,
medical opinion pointing to alternative possibilities may not be accepted as conclusive.
The expert is not only to provide reasons to support his opinion but the result should be
directly demonstrable. The court is not to surrender its own judgment to that of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
expert or delegate its authority to a third party, but should assess his evidence like any
other evidence. The purpose of expert testimony is to provide the court with useful,
relevant information. The purpose of an expert opinion is primarily to assist the court in
arriving at a ﬁnal conclusion. Such report is not binding upon the court. The court is
expected to analyse the report, read it in conjunction with the other evidence on record
and then form its ﬁnal opinion as to whether such report is worthy of reliance or
not.1075
A medical witness called in as an expert to assist the court is not a witness of fact and
the evidence given by the medical oﬃcer is really of an advisory character given on the
basis of the symptoms found on examination. The expert witness is expected to put
before the court all materials inclusive of the data which induced him to come to the
conclusion and enlighten the court on the technical aspect of the case by explaining
the terms of science so that the court although not an expert may form its own
judgment on those materials after giving due regard to the expert's opinion because
once the expert's opinion is accepted it is not the opinion of the medical oﬃcer but of
the court.1076
Medical evidence is only an evidence of opinion. It cannot be decisive.1077 If the
medical and ocular evidence is contrary then the ocular evidence must prevail.1078 The
story recited by eye-witness can be veriﬁed by medical evidence.1079 The court said in
this case:
You must remember this particular point of view that if you believe the eye-witnesses, then
there is no question of having it supported by medical evidence…But if you do not believe
the eye-witnesses then consideration of the medical evidence in any manner becomes
unnecessary.

An expert should be an independent person. Where an assessee company produced an
expert witness to prove that an item being produced by the company was covered by
an exemption entry, the opinion was held to have been rightly rejected by the Tribunal
because the expert belonged to the company itself and was not an independent
person.1080
The opinion of Forensic Science Laboratory that the substance recovered from the
accused was "opium" was not accepted. The court said that the opinion was not
binding on the court. The court considered the evidence and the relevant provisions of
the NDPS Act and came to the conclusion that the substance in question was an
"opium derivative" intoxicants.1081
Without scientiﬁc report, the court is not competent to opine with regard to the physical
disability of the witness, more particularly when other witnesses deposed that he was
little hard of hearing and not totally deaf.1082

[s 45.5] "Science or art".—
These words include all subjects on which a course of special study or experience is
necessary to the formation of an opinion.1083 The following is an oft quoted passage
from FIELD: "The words "science" or "art" are to be broadly construed, the term
"science" not being limited to higher sciences, and the term "art" not being limited to
ﬁne arts but having its original sense of handicraft, trade, profession and skill in work
which, with the advance of culture has been carried beyond the sphere of the common
pursuits of life into that of artistic and scientiﬁc action."1084

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The study of certain customs and manners of tribes and castes, of the areas occupied
by them and of other connected matters comes within the meaning of "science or art"
in this section. The words "science or art" are to be broadly construed, the term
"science" not being limited to the higher sciences and the term "art" not being limited to
ﬁne arts but having its original sense of handicraft, trade, profession and skill in work,
which, with the advance of culture, has been carried beyond the sphere of common
pursuits of life into that of "artistic" and "scientiﬁc" action. The tests which may be
applied in determining whether a particular question is one of scientiﬁc nature and
consequently whether skilled witnesses may pass their opinions upon it are: Is the
subject-matter of enquiry such that inexperienced men are unlikely to prove capable of
forming a correct judgment upon it without the assistance of experts; that is, does it so
far partake of the character of a science or art as to require a course of previous habit
or study in order to obtain a competent knowledge of its nature. Books dealing with
customs and manners of different castes and tribes are admissible in evidence to
prove them.1085
Adulteration is a matter of science. The opinion of an expert was not allowed to be
rejected only because the sample taken was less than the statutory requirement
because it was otherwise suﬃcient for test purposes.1086 Microscopic evidence
cannot be interfered with only because some further superior method, such as "photo",
was not adopted.1087 The opinion of an expert on narcotic substances was not allowed
to be rejected for the fact that he did not know the difference between narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances, the court saying that a medical oﬃcer is not expected to
know the differences in the legal parlance.1088
Soil erosion is also a matter of science. In the matter of the renewal of a mining lease,
refusal of renewal was based on the ground of the expert opinion that constant mining
operations would result in accelerated soil erosion in the leased area. The court
refused to substitute the opinion of the expert body with its own opinion.1089
An expert has to be skillful and has to show that he has adequate knowledge of the
subject. In this case, the Government had to acquire on payment from the growers
diseased apples and to destroy them. There was a complaint that the growers had
submitted false claims as to quantity. The expert who was appointed to report on the
fruit bearing capacity of the orchards, visited the orchards in the subsequent year when
the apple season was over. He had not made any scientiﬁc study on research on the
subject nor was he offered any such job earlier. He prepared his report on the basis of
surmises and conjectures. His report was not relied upon.1090
The word "science" occurring in section 45 includes experts in type-writers and typewriting has to be read within the meaning of the word "handwriting".1091
Where experts are called to pronounce their opinions on scientiﬁc questions, they may
refresh their memory by referring to professional treatises. The word "science" is
comprehensive enough to include the opinion of an expert in footprint.1092

[s 45.6] Age.—
A doctor's opinion as to age of a person based on his or her height, weight and teeth,
does not amount to legal proof of the age of that person.1093 But such evidence is
relevant. In a charge of kidnapping and rape, the age of the victim was in question. The
lady doctor certiﬁed that it was on the basis of the X-ray plate examination that she
formed her opinion that the age of the prosecutrix was 15 years. She cited passage on
the point from Modi's Medico-Legal Jurisprudence. The court said that her evidence

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was not liable to be rejected.1094 In Anita v Atal Bihari,1095 it was held that in
ascertaining date of birth, opinion of radiologist cannot be preferred over the entry in
the register of births and deaths maintained under the provisions of an Act. In an
alleged case of kidnapping of a girl, the medical evidence showed her age between 17
and 18 years and the documentary evidence showed her to be above 18 years. It was
held that medical evidence was not a conclusive proof of age.1096
Where determination of age for purpose of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 was
necessary and where two certiﬁcates issued by respective schools where the accused
had been a student conﬂicted with each other, it was held that the evidence of age
contained in the medical Board opinion and radiological examination was to be
preferred.1097
It has been held that ossiﬁcation test to determine the age of a person is not a
conclusive test.1098 In another case, where the age of the rape victim had to be known,
to the court that the age determined by the doctor only on clinical examination was
based on fragile premises. He had not performed ossiﬁcation test or other pathological
tests.1099

[s 45.6.1] Rigor Mortis.—
Time of death.—Rigor mortis is an important factor for assessing time of death.1100
In the determination of time of death Rigor mortis is only rough guide. The doctor who
had held post-mortem examination had occasion to see the injuries of the deceased
quite closely. No evidence that he had deliberately given wrong report. His evidence
could not be discarded. Opinion of the doctor holding post-mortem examination is to
be preferred to expert opinion based on basis of post-mortem report and notes on
post-mortem report and also taking into consideration the presence of rigor mortis,
lividity, coolness and the report of injuries found on the person of the deceased.1101
A doctor's evidence can never be absolutely certain on point of time so far as the
duration of injuries is concerned.1102

[s 45.7] Medical opinion.—
Opinion of medical oﬃcer cannot be taken as contradicting the positive evidence of the
witness to the facts.1103
Doctor's version as to the time of rape and that of the prosecution showed a gap of
some hours. It was held that medical evidence would not be rejected on that ground
alone.1104 Where the medical witness, who had examined the rape-cum-murder
accused, stated that the accused had not had intercourse within one hour of his
examination, his evidence carried conviction with the court. It also ﬁts with the other
circumstances attending the case.1105 Between the opinion of two doctors the opinion
which supports direct evidence should be accepted.1106 Where the direct evidence
about assault by a particular person is satisfactory and reliable, medical evidence
cannot override that because the latter is hypothetical.1107 In case of discrepancy
between medical evidence and ocular evidence, the latter will prevail because medical
evidence is only an opinion as regards the nature of death.1108 The High Court should
not substitute its opinion as to the murder weapon for that of the expert.1109 Weapon
must be shown to the expert so as to enable him to comment whether all or any of the
wounds would have been caused with it.1110 A doctor's opinion about weapon, though

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
theoretical, cannot be totally wiped out.1111 A medical leave certiﬁcate cannot be
questioned on the ground that it did not mention the condition of the patient in detail
such as whether he was able to move or not.1112 Whether a book advocating the use of
cocaine tended to deprave and corrupt has been held to be a technical matter entitling
medical men to speak.1113

[s 45.7.1] Medical evidence vis-à-vis oral evidence.—
Evidentiary value of medical evidence is only corroborative and not conclusive and
hence, in case of a conﬂict between the oral evidence and the medical evidence, the
former is to be preferred unless the medical evidence completely rules out the oral
evidence.1114

[s 45.7.2] Serologist's report.—
Where the Serologist's report stated that blood on two of the clothes belonging to the
accused was human blood, it was held that it connect the accused with crime.1115
The serological report with negative inference is not fatal to the prosecution case
because at a considerable period, the blood gets disintegrated in natural course.1116
A medical oﬃcer is not a ballistic expert. He was not expected to answer whether the
injury in question could have been caused by bullet alone.1117

[s 45.7.3] Polygraph Test.—
The test is administered for ﬁnding out whether the statements being made by the
person and his responses are correct or not. If he tells lies his responses are of a
different kind. Foreign courts have subjected such a test to limitations in criminal
cases.1118

[s 45.7.4] Narco analysis.—
This test does not have absolute success rate.1119

[s 45.7.5] Brain Electrical Activation Proﬁle Test.—
This test is used for crime detection. Its reliability depends.1120

[s 45.7.6] Brain mapping test.—
The admissibility of the result of a scientiﬁc test depends upon its authenticity.
Whether the brain mapping test is so developed that the report would have probative
value depends upon further consideration after submission of the report. The
prosecution itself did not rely upon. So did the High Court. The Supreme Court also did
not place any reliance upon it.1121

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 45.7.7] Medical evidence of Chronic alcoholism.—
The court said that the evidence of mental inﬁrmity was relevant to the question of the
capacity of the accused for self control. As the medical reports had only been available
a few days before the trial, they could not be considered by the court of Appeal. A
retrial was ordered.1122

[s 45.7.8] Chemical analyser.—
In Shatrughan v State of MP,1123 it was held that an unexhibited report of the chemical
examiner did not require to be formally proved by any witness. It was a document
which proved itself under section 293, CrPC. Where the samples taken out from the
seized contraband remained with the police oﬃcer for three days without being noted
down anywhere in records and thereafter they were sent to the chemical analyser and
the prosecution gave no satisfactory explanation to exclude the possibility of
tampering during that period, it was held that the certiﬁcate of the chemical analyser
that the samples examined by him contained heroin must be discarded.1124 Where the
doctor failed to give his opinion about the nature of injury, the court cannot substitute
its opinion assuming the role of an expert.1125 Medical evidence is not sacrosanct and
when the court is insistent on authenticity of some relevant particulars, it can ask for
the same by way of clariﬁcation from the concerned physician in the witness box.1126

[s 45.7.9] Nautical assessors' opinion.—
The advice given by nautical assessors is expert evidence, admissible in Admiralty
Courts, on all issues of fact about seamanship.1127 The decision of the case, however,
rests entirely with the court and even in purely nautical matters the court is not bound
to follow the advice of assessors, but on questions of nautical science and skill great
attention must obviously be paid to the opinion of assessors since they are the only
source of information on these points and some reasons should be given for
disregarding them.1128

[s 45.7.10] Injury certiﬁcate.—
Entries in injury certiﬁcate need not carry the names of the actual assailants.1129

[s 45.8] "Handwriting".—
The science of handwriting is not an exact science and great care and caution should
be exercised by the court in determining the genuineness of handwriting.1130 A
handwriting expert can certify only probability and not 100% certainty.1131 It is
necessary for the admission of the evidence of a handwriting expert, that the writing
with which the comparison is made should be admitted or proved beyond doubt to be
that of the person alleged, and that the comparison should be made in open court in
the presence of such person.1132 The evidence of handwriting expert is only an opinion
evidence and is not conclusive and cannot be relied upon unless corroborated by clear

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
direct evidence or by circumstantial evidence.1133 Opinion of the handwriting expert
can be sought for determining the age of the disputed handwriting.1134
Though the opinion of a handwriting expert on the question of the handwriting of a
person is relevant it is not conclusive and the handwriting of the person can be proved
by other means also.1135 The court said: A court is competent to compare the disputed
writing of a person with others which are admitted or proved to be his writings. It may
not be safe for a court to record a ﬁnding about a person's writing in a certain
document merely on the basis of comparison, but a court can itself compare the
writings in order to appreciate properly the other evidence produced before it.
The conviction of a guard for forging a railway receipt only on the evidence of
handwriting expert was set aside.1136 It is open to the court to rely upon other evidence
than upon the opinion of expert that a document is executed by a particular
person.1137 Where the court's opinion agreed with the expert as to handwriting, a
conviction was upheld.1138 Where the question was whether a pronote was forged, it
was held that expert opinion could not prevail over the evidence of eye-witnesses.1139

[s 45.8.1] Competence of handwriting expert.—
In case there is no expert opinion to assist the court in respect of handwriting available,
the court should seek guidance from some authoritative textbook and the court's own
experience and knowledge, however even in the absence of the same, it should
discharge its duty with or without expert, with or without any other evidence.1140

[s 45.9] Palm impression.—
Under this section the reasons as well as the opinion given by a ﬁnger-print expert as to
the identity of a palm impression are admissible in evidence.1141

[s 45.10] Thumb impression.—
The court cannot compare by itself the thumb impression on a document. Such
comparison is to be made by an expert.1142 Where it could not be proved that the
thumb impression on the sole receipt was that of the deceased alone, it was held that
comparison of ﬁnger prints of the deceased with that of the thumb impression on the
sale receipt was of no consequence.1143

[s 45.11] Fingerprints.—
The evidence given by a ﬁngerprint expert need not necessarily be corroborated; but
the court must satisfy itself as to the value of the evidence of the expert in the same
way as it must satisfy itself of the value of other evidence.1144
Where the court had to determine the credibility of a ﬁngerprint expert, it found that he
was working in the Fingerprint Bureau as Fingerprint Researcher since 1971. He had
passed All India Fingerprint Expert Examination conducted by the Central Fingerprint
Bureau. He was given promotion as a ﬁngerprint expert and also as ﬁngerprint
inspector. He had deposed in a number of civil and criminal cases as an expert. The
court observed that he was duly qualiﬁed and experienced and therefore his opinion

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
could not be discarded.1145 Where the ﬁngerprints evidence was obtained in a
suspicious manner, the Supreme Court said that a conviction could not be sustained on
the basis of such evidence though otherwise the expert opinion was free from any
inﬁrmity.1146
Where the court had to examine the reliability of ﬁnger-print evidence and it was found
that specimen of the ﬁnger prints were not taken before the magistrate and the seized
articles were neither produced nor exhibited, a conviction on the basis of such an
evidence was held to be not proper.1147 In this case, the glass on which ﬁnger
impressions were found was seized from the house of the accused when he was in
custody but the glass was neither produced nor exhibited, the evidence was held to be
not reliable.1148
Where the photographic impressions of ﬁngers which were taken earlier were not good
enough to enable the expert to come to any deﬁnite conclusion and, therefore, second
impressions were taken, it was held that raising suspicions about the second
impressions without cross-examining the photographer was not proper.1149
In a case involving robbery, non-examination of the photographer, who lifted the ﬁnger
prints and also non-production of the negatives of the photographs of the ﬁnger prints
lifted by chance, could not be a ground for acquittal of the accused.1150
Where the weapon of offence with which the accused servant was supposed to have
caused the death of his mistress was handled by several persons before its seizure, it
was held that it was of no consequence that the weapon was not got examined by a
ﬁnger print expert.1151
The evidence of a ﬁngerprint expert is not a substantive evidence. It can only be used
to corroborate some items of substantive evidence, which are otherwise on record. In
this case, the accused, hired criminals, had shot dead their victim at point blank range.
His body fell half inside and half outside the car. There was no evidence to show that
the killers had any reason to touch the car and that too with the ring ﬁnger. The
evidence of ﬁnger prints on the car ceased to have any relevance.1152

[s 45.11.1] Factors to be kept in mind in considering Fingerprint Evidence.—
The admissibility of ﬁngerprint evidence is dependent upon (1) the expertise and
experience of expert witnesses, whose evidence should be qualiﬁed with a jury
direction that such evidence is not in itself conclusive of guilt; (2) the number of ridge
characteristics matching the ﬁngerprints of the accused with the ﬁngerprints found at
the scene of the crime. Where there were less than eight matching ridge
characteristics, a judge would rarely exercise his discretion to allow the admission of
such evidence and, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, the prosecution
should not attempt to introduce it; (3) whether there were any dissimilar
characteristics; (4) the size of print relied upon, and (5) the quality and clarity of the
print relied upon, which could involve consideration of any ﬁnger injuries.1153

[s 45.12] Footprints.—
The science of identiﬁcation is a rudimentary science and not much reliance can be
placed on the result of such identiﬁcation. The track evidence, however, can be relied
upon as a circumstance which, along with other circumstances, would point to the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
identity of the culprit though by itself it would not be enough to carry conviction in the
minds of the court.1154
The Supreme Court observed that the science of identiﬁcation of footprints is not a
fully developed science. Evidence of footprints for the purpose of proving identity of
the accused can be used to reinforce the other evidence.1155

[s 45.13] Ear print comparison.—
The accused appealed against his conviction for the murder of an elderly lady in her
home. The prosecution relied, inter alia, on the evidence of two experts on ear print
comparison, ear prints having been found on the glass of the window which the
intruder had forced open to gain entry to the victims home. The accused argued that
the jury should not have heard the expert evidence because the evidence of three
forensic scientists, all of whom cast doubt on the evidence given by the experts
instructed by the prosecution. It was held that the expert evidence relied on by the
prosecution was admissible.1156

[s 45.14] Voice.—
In a divorce petition, the husband tapped the conversation of his wife with others and
sought to produce the disc in the court to substantiate his case. The court said that the
act of recording conversation without knowledge of the wife was illegal and amounted
to infringement of her right to privacy. Such tapes, even if true, were not admissible in
evidence.1157

[s 45.15] Psychological autopsies on levels of well-being.—
The accused was convicted for the murder of his heavily pregnant wife, she was found
hanging in the garage of their home. At his trial the accused did not adduce any
evidence. His original appeal was dismissed in 1995 on the ground that defence
counsel had made a reasoned decision not to call expert evidence. The accused
sought to adduce fresh evidence, inter alia, from a distinguished psychologist relating
to the state of mind of his wife at the time of her death. His appeal was dismissed. The
court said that while psychological evidence relating to the state of mind of a victim or
defendant that fell short of mental illness could be admitted in certain cases if derived
from medical records or established criteria, the existing academic standing of
psychological autopsies is not suﬃcient to allow their admittance as expert evidence.
While not alone fatal to the case, it was apparent that the psychologist, while an expert
in his ﬁeld, had not previously attempted the task required of him in the instant case.
The psychological reports are speculative and could not be validated quantitatively or
by previously established research. The opinions within the expert evidence were
based upon biased information mainly provided by the accused and his family, who has
not previously given evidence. It was likely that a jury would be capable by themselves
of assessing levels of well-being and would not require an expert in order to do so.1158

[s 45.16] Typewritten documents.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The opinion of an expert that a particular letter was typed on a particular machine is
not admissible as it does not fall within the ambit of this section.1159 Opinion of a
person who is claimed to be an expert on typewritten documents to prove that two
different documents were typed on the same typewriter is not admissible under this
section. Such a person cannot also be permitted to point out the similarities between
the documents in respect of their typing or the defects which might enable the court to
come to a conclusion as to whether the documents were or were not typed on the
same typewriter. It is not permissible for a court to compare photographic
enlargements and measurements of the letters in two documents and to arrive at a
conclusion as to whether they were typed on the same typewriter or not.1160 Such
categorical exclusion is not likely to stand any longer. The Supreme Court has observed
that the opinion of those who are capable of knowing the origin of a typescript should
fall, in view of the scientiﬁc advances, within the meaning of expert opinion.1161

[s 45.17] Tracker dog.—
In Abdul Razak v State of Maharashtra,1162 the Supreme Court has expressed the
opinion that in the present state of scientiﬁc knowledge evidence of dog tracking, even
if admissible, is not ordinarily of much weight.

[s 45.18] Ballistic expert.—
It cannot be laid down as a general proposition that in every case where a ﬁre-arm is
alleged to have been used by an accused person, in addition to the direct evidence,
prosecution must lead the evidence of a ballistic expert, however good the direct
evidence may be and though on the record there may be no reason to doubt the said
direct evidence.1163 Where those observed the incident stated that two persons
independently ﬁred at their victim and the expert stated that probably both the ﬁres
were from the same gun, it was held that the expert opinion shaky and, therefore, eyewitness account would prevail.1164 It is not necessary for an expert for expressing his
opinion for the ﬁring capacity of a ﬁrearm that he should have it test-ﬁred.1165 In a case
of murder it was held that till the guns were sent for ballistic examination and a report
was obtained that they were in working order, mere recovery of guns could not connect
the accused with the crime.1166 Where the ballistic expert was not examined and,
neither did the accused request for his cross-examination nor did the court ﬁnd it
necessary to summon him, it was held that the report of the ballistic expert was
admissible in evidence without calling him as witness.1167 Where the witnesses had
identiﬁed the assailants who had ﬁred gun shots and the ﬁring was corroborated by the
report of ballistic expert, the conviction of the accused was conﬁrmed.1168 Where the
ballistic expert mentioned that he had ﬁred six live cartridges from the riﬂe in question
before recording his opinion that the empty cartridge recovered from the spot was ﬁred
from the said riﬂe and his opinion was not challenged in the trial court, the opinion of
the expert could not be disbelieved at the appellate stage.1169 The opinion of the
ballistic expert about pin marks of the cartridges could not be rejected merely on the
ground that no photographs of the cartridges concerned were taken.1170
The view of the ballistic expert as to the distance from which gun shots were ﬁred at
the deceased was preferred over that of medical expert.1171 Where the question was
whether a fatal gun-shot injury was suicide or homicide, the plea that the deceased was
a schizophrenic patient and committed suicide was ruled out because of the noting in
the medical opinion that there was absence of tattooing and blackening of skin

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
surrounding the wound. This ruled out the theory of suicide as the shot must not have
been ﬁred from point blank range.1172

[s 45.19] Explosives expert.—
The evidence of the explosives expert to the effect, that ammonium nitrate along with
other articles recovered from the accused were suﬃcient for preparation of bombs for
explosion, was relied upon.1173

[s 45.20] Expert evidence on valuation of Property.—
The general opinion of the plaintiff vendor or of an advocate related to him that the
valuation of the property was much higher was held to be unworthy of reliance
particularly when concrete instances of other sales by the plaintiff were available and
when neither of them was an expert on the subject of valuation of immovable
property.1174
When the valuation report is available, it was held that the High Court committed an
error in resorting to a guess estimate for reducing the value of the building.1175

[s 45.21] Oral agreement, identiﬁcation of voice.—
A suit for speciﬁc performance of a sale of property was based upon an oral
agreement. The plaintiff (purchaser) produced a tape recorded conversation between
him and the seller showing the existence of the oral agreement. At his instance, the
court issued a direction to the parties to appear before the court to have their voice
recorded for identiﬁcation by expert opinion at the cost of the plaintiff. The court said
that no prejudice to the defendant or miscarriage of justice was likely to result from
such procedure.1176

[s 45.22] Corroboration not necessary.—
The Supreme Court has laid down that although the approach has to be one of caution,
there is no rule of law that the evidence of an expert should not be acted upon unless
substantially corroborated.1177
Chinnappa Reddy J said in this case:1178 "We begin with the observation that the
expert is no accomplice. There is no justiﬁcation for condemning his opinion to the
same class of evidence as that of an accomplice and insist upon corroboration. It has
occasionally been said on very high authority that it would be hazardous to base a
conviction solely on the opinion of a handwriting expert. But the hazard in accepting
the opinion of any expert, is not because experts, in general, are unreliable witnesses—
the equality of credibility or incredibility being one which an expert shares with all other
witnesses—but because all human judgment is fallible and an expert may go wrong
because of some defect of observation, some error of premises or honest mistake of
conclusion. The more developed and more perfect a science, less is the chance of an
incorrect opinion and converse if the science is less developed and imperfect. The
science of identiﬁcation of ﬁnger prints has attained near perfection and the risk of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
incorrect opinion is practically non-existent. On the other hand, the science of
identiﬁcation of handwriting is not so perfect and the risk is, therefore, higher. But that
is far from doubting the opinion of a handwriting expert as an invariable rule and
insisting upon substantial corroboration in every case, however the opinion may be
backed by the soundest of reasons. It is hardly fair to an expert to view his opinion with
initial suspicion and to treat him as an inferior sort of witness. His opinion has to be
tested by the acceptability of the reasons given by him. An expert deposes and does
not decide. His duty is to furnish the Judge with the necessary scientiﬁc criteria for
testing the accuracy of his conclusion, so as to enable the Judge to form his own
independent judgment by the application of those criteria to the facts proved in
evidence."1179
After reviewing all the earlier Supreme Court decisions, the learned judge concluded:
"We are ﬁrmly of the opinion that there is no rule of law, nor any rule of prudence which
has crystallised into a rule of law, that the opinion evidence of a handwriting expert
must never be acted upon, unless substantially corroborated. But, having due regard to
the imperfect nature of the science of identiﬁcation of handwriting, the approach
should be one of caution. Reasons for the opinion must be carefully probed and
examined. All other relevant evidence must be considered. In appropriate cases
corroboration must be sought. In cases where the reasons for the opinion are
convincing and there is no reliable evidence throwing a doubt, the uncorroborated
testimony of a handwriting expert may be accepted."

[s 45.23] Motor vehicle inspector.—
In a case of death by negligent driving, the report of the motor vehicles inspector was
placed on record with the consent of the parties. The court did not allow the report to
be questioned subsequently on the ground that the inspector was not examined.1180

[s 45.24] Scheduled Tribe Certiﬁcate Scrutiny Committee.—
The conclusions recorded by the Scheduled Tribe Certiﬁcate Scrutiny Committee about
the caste of the petitioners, which were reasonable and fully supported by the material
placed on record and aﬃrmed by the High Court, were found to be neither perverse nor
based on no evidence. The Supreme Court declined to interfere.1181

[s 45.25] Cost factor in calling expert.—
In a claim for intimidation, the court said that the cost of relying on psychiatric
evidence would be disproportionate to the potential advantage to be gained by its use.
The court felt that the trial judge, having seen the witnesses would be in a position to
assess the merits of the employee's allegations and decide whether the conditions
described by the employee amounted to intimidation or not.1182

[s 45.26] Solicitor's professional negligence, evidence from another solicitor.—
The plaintiff brought an action for professional negligence against his former solicitor
concerning his advice and dealings with a mortgage. A sought to adduce expert
evidence from a senior solicitor at another ﬁrm as to how a reasonably competent

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
solicitor should have approached an enquiry of the type posed by the plaintiff. The
plaintiff took out the mortgage to assist her brother establish a solicitor's practice. The
solicitor objected to the evidence on the basis that it usurped the judicial function.
It was held that it assisted the court which lacked the relevant experience and was
properly admitted in terms of the Civil Evidence Act, 1972, section 3.1183

[s 45.27] Conﬂict of interest and expert witnesses.—Guidance notes by Court
of Appeal
1184.— In the judgment of the court on this appeal and application to adduce new

evidence, delivered by Sir Mark Potter P but to which all of its members contributed, the
court of Appeal made the following observations and gave the following guidance
relating to conﬂict of interest and expert witnesses:
[100] We start with the point of principle. Does the presence of a conﬂict of interest
automatically disqualify an expert? In our judgment, the answer to that question is No: the
key question is whether the expert's opinion is independent. It is now well established that
the expert's expression of opinion must be independent of the parties and the pressures of
the litigation. Authority for this can be found in paras 1 and 2 of the guidance which
Cresswell J gave in National Justice Cia Naviera SA v Prudential Assurance Co Ltd, The
Ikarian Reefer,1185 as summarised on pp. 938-939 (para 35.3.1) of the White Book (Civil
Procedure (2006 Edn)) Vol 1:
1. Expert evidence presented to the court should be, and should be seen to be, the
independent product of the expert uninﬂuenced as to the form or content by the exigencies
of litigation.1186
2. An expert witness should provide independent assistance to the court by way of objective
unbiased opinion in relation to matters within his expertise.1187 An expert witness in the
High Court should never assume the role of an advocate…
[101] Moreover, CPR 35.3 sets out the overriding duty of an expert witness. His duty is to
assist the court in relation to matters which fall within his expertise. The need for the expert
to give an independent opinion ﬂows also from this duty, which is stated to override any
duty which the expert may owe to his client:
(1) It is the duty of an expert to help the court on the matters within his expertise. (2) This
duty overrides any obligation to the person from whom he has received instructions or by
whom he is paid.
[102] However, while the expression of an independent opinion is a necessary quality of
expert evidence, it does not always follow that it is suﬃcient condition in itself. Where an
expert has a material or signiﬁcant conﬂict of interest, the court is likely to decline to act on
his evidence, or indeed to give permission for his evidence to be adduced. This means it is
important that a party who wishes to call an expert with a potential conﬂict of interest
should disclose details of that conﬂict at as early a stage in the proceedings as possible…
[113] The obligation to disclose the existence of a conﬂict of interest in our judgment stems
from the overriding duty of an expert, to which we have already referred and which is clearly
laid down in CPR 35.3, and also from the duty of the parties to help the court to further the
overriding objective of dealing with cases justly (CPR 1.3). The court needs to be assisted
by information as to any potential conﬂict of interest so that it can decide for itself whether
it should act in reliance on the evidence of that expert.
[114] We note that the practice of the court as set out in the CPR and practice directions, the
valuable new Protocol for the Instruction of Experts to give evidence in civil claims (set out
at pp 966-977 of Civil Procedure), and the commentaries in Civil Procedure and Civil Court
Practice (the Green Book), do not refer in terms to the need for disclosure by an expert of a
conﬂict or potential conﬂict of interest. We also note that the standard form of order used
by Master Ungley and Master Yoxall, to whom clinical negligence matters in the Queen's
Bench Division in London are assigned, requires the production of an expert's curriculum
vitae (cv) but this is only where the court has directed a single expert, and the parties
cannot agree on who it should be. As already stated, in our judgment, an expert should
produce his CV when he provides his report, and that CV should give details of any
employment or an activity which raises a possible conﬂict of interest. This may indeed
already be best practice.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[115] The practice direction supplementing CPR Pt 35 provides that an expert must verify
his expert's report by a statement of truth in the following form:
I conﬁrm that insofar as the facts stated in my report are within my own knowledge I have
made clear which they are and I believe them to be true, and that the opinions I have
expressed represent my true and complete professional opinion.
[116] In addition, the practice direction also requires the expert's report to state any
qualiﬁcation, if the expert is not able to give his opinion without qualiﬁcation, and that the
expert understands his duty to the court and has complied and will continue to comply with
the duty.
[117] An expert will often make a declaration at the end of his report which not only
contains the statement of truth required by the practice direction but also contains other
matters designed to meet other requirements of the CPR or practice directions, or other
issues which have arisen in practice. No doubt, in principle these declarations serve the
valuable purpose of focusing the mind of the expert on all these matters…
[119] In our judgment, the Civil Procedure Rules Committee should consider extending the
requirement for an expert's declaration at the end of his report. Its present form is directed
to ensuring that the contents of the report represent the independent and unvarnished
opinion of the expert making the report. But, as we have explained above, there is another
side to independence. The expert should not leave undisclosed any conﬂict of interest
which might bring into question the suitability of his evidence as the basis for the court's
decision. The conﬂict of interest could be of any kind, including a ﬁnancial interest, a
personal connection, or an obligation, for example, as a member or oﬃcer of some other
body. But ultimately, the question of what conﬂicts of interest fall within this description is a
question for the court, taking into account all the circumstances of the case.

1024

Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, section 3. For discussion in Council as to whether "ﬁnger

impressions" include "thumb impressions", see Gazette of India, 1898, Part VI, p. 24.
1025 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 4.
1026 Fakhruddin v State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 1326 : 1967 Cr LJ 1197 .
1027 Forest Range Oﬃcer v P Mohammed Ali, AIR 1994 SC 120 .
1028 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1418, p 902.
1029 Ramesh Chandra Agarwal v Regency Hospital Ltd, AIR 2010 SC 806 : (2009) 9 SCC 709 .
1030 Sultan Singh v State of Haryana, (2014) 14 SCC 664 (para 13) : 2015 Cr LJ 259 .
1031 Prem Sagar Manocha v State (NCT of Delhi), (2016) 4 SCC 571 , para 20 : 2016 (1 ) Scale

220 .
1032 Prem Sagar Manocha v State (NCT of Delhi), (2016) 4 SCC 571 , para 22 : 2016 (1 ) Scale

220 .
1033 Ibid, section 1419, p 902. Nagina Sharma v State of Bihar, 1991 Cr LJ 1195 (Pat), an expert

has to appear personally, Government's duty to issue personal appearance of Government
doctors emphasised.
1034 Swadeshi Mills Co Ltd v Juggi Lal Kamlapat Cotton Mills Co Ltd, (1926) 49 All 92 .
1035 Babuli v State of Orissa, AIR 1974 SC 775 : 1974 Cr LJ 510 .
1036 328 (1958).
1037 Hollington v Hewthorn, (1943) KB 507 at p 595 (CA).
1038 Mobarik Ali Ahmed v The State of Bombay, 1958 SCR 328 at p 342 : AIR 1957 SC 857 .
1039 Ramesh Chandra Agarwal v Regency Hospital Ltd, AIR 2010 SC 806 : (2009) 9 SCC 709 , it

has to be shown that he has made a special study of the subject or acquired special experience
in that ﬁeld of study.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1040 Powell, 10th Edn, p 39.
1041 The quotation is from R. v Silverlock, (1874) 2 QB 766 , 771 per LORD RUSSEL
1042 MR Zafer, Scientiﬁc Evidence : Expert Witnesses, (1962) JILI (Special Issue) 56.
1043 Law Society of India v Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Ltd, AIR 1994 Ker 308 .
1044 Collector, Jabalpur v AY Jahagir Khan, AIR 1971 MP 32 .
1045 Perumal Mudaliar v South Indian Railway Co Ltd, (1937) Mad 764; Ahmedabad Municipality

v Shantilal, AIR 1961 Guj 196 .
1046 Amarjit Singh v State (Delhi Admn), 1995 Cr LJ 1623 (Del).
1047 MS Reddy v State Inspector of Police, AC.B, Nellore, 1993 Cr LJ 558 (AP).
1048 Baldev Raj Miglani v Urmila Kumari Smt., AIR 1979 SC 879 : 1979(3) SCC 782 . See Chatt

Ram v State of Haryana, AIR 1979 SC 1890 : 1979 Cr LJ 1411 , generally on the meaning of
"expert".
1049 Lakshmi Chand v Ishroo Devi, AIR 1977 SC 1694 : 1977(2) SCC 501 .
1050 Gulab Chand v Satya Vrat, AIR 1983 All 54 .
1051 Balkrishna Das v Radha Devi, AIR 1989 All 133 .
1052 Assistant Collector of Central Excise v VP Syed Mohd., AIR 1983 SC 168 , 169 : 1983 Cr LJ

225 . : (1983) 1 SCC 370 .
1053 SC Batra v VP, AIR 1974 SC 639 : 1974 Cr LJ 590 . Huding Singh v State of Orissa, 1995 Cr

LJ 1128 (Ori), conviction can be maintained on the evidence of oﬃcials of Excise Department.
1054 Mahmood v State of UP, AIR 1976 SC 69 , 73 : 1976 Cr LJ 10 .
1055 Prem Sagar Manocha v State (NCT of Delhi), (2016) 4 SCC 571 , para 19 : 2016 (1 ) Scale

220 .
1056 Public Prosecutor, HC of AP v Lingisetty Sreena, 1997 Cr LJ 4003 (AP).
1057 Jarnail Singh v State of Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 453 : AIR 1999 SC 321 : (1998) 8 SCC 126 .
1058 M Shaﬁ Goroo v State, 2000 Cr LJ 2172 (Delhi).
1059 Sahdeo Ram v State, 2002 Cr LJ 1090 (Pat.).
1060 Storey v Dorset Community NHS Trust, Oct. 18, 1999, Judge Overend, CC (Plymouth). [Ex.

rel Robert Weir, Barrister, Devereux Chamber, Devereux Court, London] CLY 2000.
1061

Subodh Kumar v Soshi Kumar, AIR 1958 Cal 264 . Expert evidence based on notes

prepared by him in the exercise of his oﬃcial duty but copies of notes not supplied to the
accused, the notes could not be relied upon. Vithal Mahadev Patil v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr
LJ 1796 (Kant).
1062 Tomaso Bruno v State of UP, (2015) 7 SCC 178 , para 40 : 2015 (2) SCJ 328 ; Paramesh

Chandra Sen v Sanjukta Mukherjee, AIR 2017 Cal 254 , the court should not merely go by the
"ipse dixit" of the report of the handwriting expert to form its conclusive opinion. The facts
revealed in the said report may be relevant facts but cannot be a sole determinant fact either to
impinge the document or to uphold the same.
1063 Shashi Kumar v Subodh Kumar, AIR 1964 SC 529 ; Balkrishna Das v Radha Devi, AIR 1989

All 133 , 141.
1064 Awadesh v State of MP, (1988) 2 SCC 557 : AIR 1988 SC 1158 , where the opinion of

medical experts was used to corroborate the ﬁnding that the eye-witnesses must not have been
present at the scene of the occurrence.
1065 UP v Boota Singh, (1979) 1 SCR 298 ; AIR 1978 SC 1770 . A conviction can also be

founded on expert opinion. Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 349 : 1977 Cr LJ 214 .
1066 Kanchan Singh v State of Gujarat, (1979) 2 SCJ 260 : 1979 Cr LJ 889 : AIR 1979 SC 1011 ;

Prem Ballab v State, AIR 1977 SC 56 : 1977 Cr LJ 12 , evidence of food inspector, corroboration
considered not necessary. Direct evidence satisfactory and reliable, it could not be rejected on

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the basis of opinion evidence (here medical evidence) S.G Gundegowda v State, 1996 Cr LJ 852
(Kant), relying on Punjab Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1984 SC 1233 : 1984 Cr LJ 921 : 1984
Supp 233 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 484 . Expert evidence weak, not safe without corroboration,
handwriting, S Gopal Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1996 SC 2184 : 1996 Cr LJ 3237 ; Girish Vinayakrao
Naik v Shivamurthappa, AIR 2001 Kant 210 , request for appointment of handwriting expert
made at the appellate stage after 10 years, from the date of appeal, genuineness of the suit
document was denied, delay was not explained, application rejected. Krishna S v State, 1998 Cr
LJ 785 (Kant), expert turned hostile, he had certiﬁed as a Government doctor that the
prosecutrix was the victim of rape. In the court he tried to protect the accused. Serious view was
taken because it was nothing short of perjury concerned authorities were advised to take
appropriate disciplinary proceedings against him.
1067 Dunne v Kierggroup Plc., April 7, 2000 Devereur Court, London, 2000 CLY 103. The matter

had arisen out of construction site accident.
1068 Field v Leeds City Council, (2001) CPLR 129 (CA); Hugher v Wrexhamanaclor Hospital NHS

Trust, April 7, 2000, 2000 CLY 1, an application for instructing additional expert was rejected
because the issue in question was not a new issue. Hari Singh v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 3630 :
(2010) 12 SCC 108 , evidence of eye-witnesses that the shut was ﬁxed from close range was
fully corroborated by medical evidence. Sarvesh Narain Shukla v Daroga Singh, AIR 2008 SC 320 :
(2007) 13 SCC 360 , ocular evidence and expert opinion consistent on the point that different
ﬁre arms were used.
1069 Sayed Moinuddin v Md Mehaboob Alam, AIR 2016 SC 192 , para 13.
1070 Ramesh Chandra Agarwal v Regency Hospital Ltd, AIR 2010 SC 806 : (2009) 9 SCC 709 .
1071 Thyssen Stahhunion GmbH v SAIL, AIR 2002 Delhi 255 . Vishnu v State of Maharashtra, AIR

2006 SC 508 : (2006) 1 SCC 283 : 2006 Cr LJ 303 , expert medical evidence is not binding
against ocular evidence. The opinion of the medical oﬃcer is for assistance of the court. He is
not a witness of fact. The evidence of a witness of fact may prevail over it.
1072 Ajoy Kumar Das v Kalpana Das, AIR 2007 NOC 897 (Cal—DB). Signature on the will was

compared by the court with admitted signature and was found to be genuine. Of the two
attesting witness, appeared and testiﬁed to the signature of the other witness.
1073 Grid Corpn. of Orissa Ltd v Eastern Metals & Ferro Alloys, (2011) 11 SCC 334 .
1074 Ibid at p 268.
1075 Dayal Singh v State of Uttaranchal, AIR 2012 SC 3046 : (2012) 8 SCC 263 .
1076 Madan Gopal Kakkad v Naval Dubey, (1992) 3 SCC 204 , 221 :1992 SCC (Cri)598. To the

same effect, Ramesh Chandra Agarwal v Regency Hospital Ltd, AIR 2010 SC 806 : (2009) 9 SCC
709 , credibility of the expert witness depends on the reasons stated by him in support of his
conclusions, and date and material furnished by him for that purpose. A patient who suffered
from medical negligence ﬁled an application for reconsideration of the expert opinion. Rejection
of his application was held to be not proper. The order of rejection was quashed.
1077 Mani Ram v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1993 SC 2453 : 1993 Cr LJ 2530 .
1078 Umesh Singh v State of Bihar, (2013) 4 SCC 360 .
1079 Sunil Chandra v State, AIR 1954 Cal 315 , at p 318.
1080 Novapan India Ltd v CCE&C, (1994) 73 ELT 769 .
1081 Amarsingh Ramjibhai Barot v State of Gujarat, (2005) 7 SCC 550 : AIR 2005 SC 4248 .
1082 Hema Majhi v Dubraj Majhi, AIR 2016 NOC 477 (Ori).
1083 Stephen's Dig, 12th Edn, (1946) Article 49.
1084 Field, Evidence, 2442 (9th Edn).
1085 Mahadeo v Vyankammabai, (1947) Nag 781.
1086 Kisan v Maharashtra, AIR 1979 SC 1824 : 1980 Supp SCC 390 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1087 Ramanathan v State of TN, 1978 Cr LJ 1137 .
1088 Durand Didier v UT of Goa, AIR 1989 SC 1966 at 1970 : 1990(1) SCC 95 .
1089 T Veerabhadrappa v Minister of Mines and Steel, AIR 1998 Kant 412 .
1090 State of HP v Jai Lal, AIR 1999 SC 3318 : 1999 Cr LJ 4294 : (1999) 7 SCC 280 .
1091 State v SJ Choudhary, 1996 Cr LJ 1713 : AIR 1996 SC 1491 , overruling Hanumant v State

of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1952 SCR 1091 : 1952 Cr LJ 129 and reversing Criminal
Revision No. 105 of 1987 (Delhi). Arulmighu Sadayappasamy Temple v State of Tamil Nadu,
(2017) 4 Mad LJ 230, the expression "science or art", occurring in section 45 includes
handwriting expert as well as a typewriting expert.
1092 Basudeo Gir, (1959) Pat 69. Exceptional cases cited in treatises cannot overrule clear

evidence before the court, Baldev Raj Miglani v Urmila Kumari Smt, AIR 1979 SC 879 : 1979(3)
SCC 782 .
1093 Emperor v Qudrat, (1939) All 871 .
1094 Ram Swaroop v State of UP, 1989 Cr LJ 2435 All. See also Mangat Ram v State, 1987 Cr LJ

224 Delhi, rough estimate of age given by illiterate relatives was accepted because it was
supported by medical opinion. Jitmohan Lohar v State, 1997 Cr LJ 2842 (Ori), difference of
opinion between ossiﬁcation test and school admission certiﬁcate about the age of the rape
victim. Ossiﬁcation test could not be relied upon documentary evidence was found to be more
reliable.
1095 1993 Cr LJ 549 (MP).
1096 SK Belal v State of Orissa, 1994 Cr LJ 467 (Ori). Abdul Razzak v State, 2000 Cr LJ 3921

(All), medical opinion as to age, radiological that, margin of error in such test two years on either
side. The court said that this margin could not be given where otherwise there is conclusive and
decisive evidence of age.
1097 Dayachand v Sahib Singh, AIR 1991 SC 930 : 1991 Cr LJ 1370 ; Sunil Kumar v State of UP,

2000 Cr LJ 4687 (All), entry in school register did not appear to be genuine, medical certiﬁcate
prevailed over school register.
1098 Prem Chand v State of HP, 2000 Cr LJ 951 (HP), age had to be determined in this case for

the purposes of charge of rape.
1099 Kamal Kishore v State of HP, 2000 Cr LJ 2292 : AIR 2000 SC 1920 .
1100 Indradeo Rai v State of Bihar, 1992 Cr LJ 4005 (Pat).
1101 Tanviben Pankajkumar Divetia v State of Gujarat, 1997 Cr LJ 2535 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2193

.
1102 Ram Swaroop v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 806 at p 810 : AIR 2000 SC 715 .
1103 Basappa Bhimappa v State of Mysore, AIR 1961 Mys 21 . Salimzia v State of UP, AIR 1979

SC 391 : (1979) 2 SCR 394 : 1979 Cr LJ 323 , exit wound cannot be smaller. Nanhau Ram v State
of MP, AIR 1988 SC 912 : 1988 Cr LJ 936 : 1988 Supp SCC 152 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 342 , direct
evidence that the deceased was alive upto half an hour after the incident and did make the
statement, not wiped out by the medical opinion that the gun shot injuries which he sustained
would not leave him alive upto that time. State of UP v Krishna Gopal, 1989 Cr LJ 288 : AIR 1988
SC 2154 : (1988) 4 SCC 302 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 928 , medical opinion suggesting alternative
possibilities not allowed to prevail upon positive eye-witness account; Amar Singh v State of
Punjab, 1987 Cr LJ 706 : AIR 1987 SC 726 , where medical report differed from injuries
described by witnesses, medical evidence prevailed. Radha Kant Yadav v State of Jharkhand,
2003 Cr LJ 13 (Jhar), medical opinion that death was homicidal and not suicidal, prevailed.
1104 Pratap Misra v State of Orissa, AIR 1977 SC 1307 : 1977 Cr LJ 817 . The Supreme Court

remarked in another case that medical evidence as to the time of death should not be viewed
with mathematical accuracy. Pattipati Venkaiah v State of AP, AIR 1985 SC 1715 : 1985 Cr LJ

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
2012 : (1985) 4 SCC 80 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 484 . Medical opinion that injuries were caused with a
sharp weapon was not negatived by the fact that the prosecution failed to produce the weapon
in question. BV Danny Mao v State of Nagaland, 1989 Cr LJ 226 (Gau). Contradiction between
medical evidence and eye-witness account as to the fatal injury brought about acquittal. Ashim
Das v State of Assam, 1987 Cr LJ 1533 Gau; Ramesh Kumar v State (Delhi Admn.), 1990 Cr LJ
255 (Del). For an example where the medical evidence was preferred to the ocular, see Rajgopal
Panda v State of Orissa, 1990 Cr LJ 1848 (Ori).
1105 Jaharlal Das v State of Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 1809 : AIR 1991 SC 1388 : (1991) 3 SCC 27 :

1991 SCC (Cri) 527 . Weapon of offence, if available, should be shown to the medical witness
and his opinion invited as to whether all or any of the injuries on the victim could be caused with
that weapon. K Mallikarjuna v State of AP, 1995 Cr LJ 3100 (AP). State Govt of NCT of Delhi v
Sunil, 2001 Cr LJ 504 (SC), medical report in a case of rape and murder preferred.
1106 Piara Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 2274 : 1977 Cr LJ 1941 ; Purna Palai v State of

Orissa, 1987 Cr LJ 1406 (Ori). Again, in a rape case where the doctors differed, it was held that
the evidence of expert witness which supported the direct evidence should be accepted. Ram
Antony Danasekaran v State of TN, 1992 Cr LJ 475 (Mad). Medical opinion being an evidence of
only corroborative nature, it cannot be used to rule direct eye witness account. R Jagdish Murty v
Balaram Mohanty, 1992 Cr LJ 996 (Ori), where the court explained the importance of witnesses
to the judicial process by citing Bentham as saying that the witnesses are the eyes and ears of
justice. Medical evidence not to be made the sole touch-stone and following State of UP v
Krishna Gopal, AIR 1988 SC 2154 : 1989 Cr LJ 288 : (1988) 4 SCC 302 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 928 and
Solanki Chimanbhai Ukabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1983 SC 484 : 1983 Cr LJ 822 : (1983) 2 SCC
174 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 379 . State v Rangaswamy, 2003 Cr LJ 607 (Kant), there was a pro accused
medical report in the case of rape or sexual assault, the court said that it was evidence of the
fact that there was misconduct on the part of doctors in public hospitals resulting in 94%
acquittal in such cases. The court appealed to the conscience of the medical profession and
directed the State Government to ensure stoppage of illegalities in hospitals.
1107 Punjab Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1984 SC 1233 : 1984 Cr LJ 921 : 1984 Supp SCC 233

: 1984 SCC (Cri) 484 . Dharamvir v State of UP, 1990 Cr LJ 839 : 1989 All LJ 454, medical
evidence not ruling out eye-witness version.
1108 Arjun Naik v State of Orissa, 2002 Cr LJ 2785 (Ori).
1109 State of UP v Shanker, AIR 1981 SC 897 : 1981 Cr LJ 23 . See also Munir Ad v State of

Rajasthan, AIR 1989 SC 705 ; 1989 Cr LJ 845 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 377 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 455 ,
where the Supreme Court speciﬁcally recognised that the doctor preparing the post mortern
report was competent to express opinion about the nature of the weapon used in the assault.
1110 Ishwar Singh v State of UP, AIR 1976 SC 2423 : 1976 Cr LJ 1883 . For evidence of age by

radiological test see Jaya Mala v Home Secy., J&K, AIR 1982 SC 1297 : 1982 Cr LJ 1777 ; State of
Maharashtra v Lahu Laxman Pabale, 2003 Cr LJ 1174 (Bom), nothing was brought out in the
cross-examination of the doctor to contradict his expert opinion that the punctured wounds on
the body of the deceased could have been caused with a wooden stick and an iron rod. The
Supreme Court said that the rejection of such opinion by the court was not proper.
1111 Anwarul Haq v State of UP, (2005) 10 SCC 581 : AIR 2005 SC 2382 : 2005 Cr LJ 2602 .
1112 Nityananda v Sipra, AIR 1986 or 102, seeking adjournment on medical basis.
1113 R v Skirving, (1985) 2 All ER 705 . See All ER Annual Review 1985 at p 157. On sifting of

expert evidence in personal injury cases. See Sullivan v West Yorkshire Passenger Transport
Executive, (1985) 2 All ER 134 ; medical opinion preferred as against eye-witnesses. Purshottam
v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 1873 : 1980 Cr LJ 1298 ; MD Jadhav v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1976
SC 2327 : 1976 Cr LJ 1873 , medical report as charred bodies found reliable. Manguli Dei v State

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of Orissa, AIR 1989 SC 483 ; 1989 Cr LJ 823 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 161 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 322 ,
where the body in a highly decomposed state and the difference between the medical version
that there was only injury and that of the accused that he administered four axe injuries on the
head was ignored, being not relevant.
1114 Yogesh Singh v Mahabeer Singh, 2017 Cr LJ 291 , para 43 (SC) : 2016 (10) JT 332 . See

also Sadhu Saran Singh v State of UP, 2016 Cr LJ 1908 , para 21(iii) : (2016 ) 4 SCC 357.
1115 Boddu Murali v State of AP, 1993 Cr LJ 2077 (AP).
1116 Amar Mondal v State of WB, 2016 Cr LJ 5036 , para 46 (Cal-DB).
1117 Mahmood v State of UP, AIR 2008 SC 515 : 2008 Cr LJ 698 .
1118 Selvi v State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 1974 : (2010) 7 SCC 263 .
1119 Ibid
1120 Ibid
1121 Ranjitsing Brahamajeetsing Sharma v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2005 SC 2277 : (2005) 5

SCC 294 : 2005 Cr LJ 2533 .
1122 R. v Parker, (Philip) [CA (Crim Div)] 1997 CLY 435 (1127).
1123 1993 Cr LJ 120 (MP).
1124 Mohd. Hussain B Ramzan v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 1020 (Bom).
1125 Babloo v State of MP, 1995 Cr LJ 3534 (MP), relying on Gambhir v State of Maharashtra, AIR

1982 SC 1157 : 1982 Cr LJ 1243 .
1126 Archana Devi v Kaji Majibur Rahaman, AIR 1996 Cal 118 . Sree Vijayakumar v State, (2005)

10 SCC 737 : 2005 Cr LJ 3085 , found to be not reliable because there was no assurance that
the sample was preserved and protected as originally submitted.
1127 The Clan Lemont, (1946) 79 Lloyd LR 521, at p 524.
1128 Asiatic S.N Co v Arabinda, AIR 1959 SC 597 : 1959 Supp (1) SCR 979 .
1129 P Babu v State of AP, 1993 Cr LJ 3547 .
1130 Vandavasi Karthikeya v S Kamalamma, AIR 1994 AP 102 ; Ameer Mahammed v Harkat Ali,

AIR 2002 Raj 406 , the opinion of an expert cannot be rejected only on the ground that he is a
remunerated witness or that it is based on imperfect science. The court followed the decisions
in Judah v Isolyrie Shrojbashini Bose, AIR 1945 PC 174 ; Murailal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 :
1980 Cr LJ 396 .
1131 MK Usman Koya v CS Santha, AIR 2003 Ker 191 .
1132 Suresh Chandra Sanyal v Emperor, (1912) 39 Cal 606 .
1133 SPS Rathor v CBI, AIR 2016 SC 4486 , para 27 : 2016 (10) SCJ 232 .
1134 Uppu Jhansi Lakshmi Bai v J Venkateswara Rao, AIR 1994 AP 90 .
1135 State of Gujarat v Vinaya Chandra, AIR 1967 SC 778 : 1967 Cr LJ 668 . The opinion of an

expert about the handwriting in a will is relevant but it would require corroboration. Joseph v
Aleyamma, AIR 1991 NOC 28 (Ker). Evidence of the handwriting expert must be received with
great caution. Bhargava K Salunkhe v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 1228 (Bom), relying on
Magan Bihari Lal v State of Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 1091 : 1977 Cr LJ 711 . Mohd. Asadullah v State,
2003 Cr LJ 2355 (J&K), mere opinion of handwriting expert without any corroborative evidence
was held to be not suﬃcient for recording conviction on a charge of forgery and cheating.
Rajinder Bajaj v Indian Tanning Industries, AIR 2008 Del 62 : (2008) 100 DRJ 534 , appointment as
commission agent, the court found glaring discrepancy in the signature on the appointment
letter and those on the written statement and aﬃdavit. Expert opinion was not necessary. The
documents was fabricated.
1136 Magan Bihari Lal v State of Punjab, AIR 1977 SC 1091 : 1977 Cr LJ 711 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1137 Srichand v Ramrati Devi, AIR 1980 All 294 . See also VS Abdul Sattar v SP CBI, 1987 Cr LJ

1670 (Ker), where there is other evidence, the opinion of expert can be sidelined.
1138 Ram Pyarelal v State of Bihar, AIR 1980 SC 1523 : 1980 Cr LJ (NOC) 175 .
1139 Brij Basi v Moti Ram, AIR 1982 All 323 .
1140 Ajay Kumar Parmar v State of Rajasthan, (2012) 12 SCC 406 ; Approved Muraru Lal v State

of MP, (1979) 3 SCC 612 : AIR 1981 SC 363 .
1141 Emperor v Babulal Behari, (1928) 30 Bom LR 321 : 52 Bom 223; Bhaluka Behera v State,

(1957) Cut 200. Thumb impression of one was disputed by the other. The court was competent
to ask for specimen impression for self-comparison. Sheo Narain v Raisat, AIR 1986 P&H 174.
1142

Inum Beevi v KS Syed Ahamed Kabir, AIR 2001 NOC 25 (Mad) : 2001 ALHC 756.

Thiruvengada Pillai v Navaneethammal, AIR 2008 SC 1541 : (2008) 4 SCC 530 , the court
recorded ﬁnding about authenticity of thumb impression without the beneﬁt of any expert
opinion merely by casual perusal, held illegal.
1143 Sadashio Mundaji Bhalerao v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2007 SC 1028 : (2007) 15 SCC 421

.
1144 Emperor v Fakir Mahomed, (1935) 38 Bom LR 160 : 60 Bom 187, differing from Jassu Ram

v The Crown, (1923) 4 Lah 236; Keshavlal v State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 1221 , examination by
ﬁnger print expert in order to connect the accused with the weapon of offence, the allegation
that the accused had stabbed his mistress, the weapon was handled by many people before its
seizure. Non examination of the ﬁnger print expert was held to be not material.
1145 State v M Krishna Mohan, AIR 2008 SC 368 : (2007) 14 SCC 667 .
1146 Chandiran v State of Kerala, AIR 1990 SC 2148 : 1990 Cr LJ 2296 .
1147 Babu Khan v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2960 : 1997 Cr LJ 3567 .
1148 Ibid
1149 Ammini v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 481 : AIR 1998 SC 260 .
1150 Ajay Kumar Singh v Flag Oﬃcer, Commanding-in-Chief, AIR 2016 SC 3528 , para 14 :

2016(6) Scale 785 .
1151 Keshavalal v State of MP, 2002 Cr LJ 1776 (SC).
1152 Musheer Khan v State of MP, AIR 2010 SC 762 : (2010) 2 SCC 748 .
1153 R v Buckley (Robert John), (1999) 163 JP 561 , [CA (Crim Div)].
1154 Pritam Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1956 SC 415 : 1956 Cr LJ 805 . Shankaria v State of

Rajasthan, AIR 1978 SC 1248 : 1978 Cr LJ 1251 . The expert may tell whether the evidence is
usable and what degree of identiﬁcation it can afford. Mohan Lal v Ajit Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1183 :
1978 Cr LJ 1107 . Where the expert was not called by the either party, the matter could not be
raised in appeal. Phool Kumar v Delhi Admn., AIR 1975 SC 905 : 1975 Cr LJ 778 .
1155 Babu Khan v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2960 : 1997 Cr LJ 3567 ; Mohd. Aman v State

of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2960 : 1997 Cr LJ 3567 : (1997) 10 SCC 44 .
1156 R v Dallagher, (2002) EWCA Crimes 1903, The Times, August 21, 2002 CA (Crim Div). The

accused was, however, acquitted for other reasons.
1157 Rayala v N Rayala, AIR 2008 AP 98 . The wife could not be compelled to undergo voice test

and an expert could not be appointed to make comparison.
1158 R v Gilfoyle (Appeal Against Conviction), (2001) 2 Cr App R 5, CA (Crim Div).
1159 Hanumant v State of MP, AIR 1952 SC 343 : 1953 Cr LJ 129 .
1160 Chelaji Gomaji v Jashodharabai, (1958) 60 Bom LR 251 ; Emperor v Jhabwala, (1933) 55 All

1040 .
1161 State v SJ Chowdhary, 1990 Cr LJ 1112 : AIR 1990 SC 1050 : (1990) 2 SCC 1050 .
1162 Abdul Razak v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1970 SC 283 : 1970 Cr LJ 373 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1163 Gurcharan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 340 : 1963(1) Cr LJ 323 ; Mohan Singh v

State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 2161 : 1975 Cr LJ 1865 , where the technical evidence was full of
doubts. Ram Narayan v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 1725 at p 1726 where ballistic evidence
was against the prosecution case. See also,Ramanathan v State of TN, AIR 1978 SC 1204 at
1213 : 1978 Cr LJ 1137 , evidence not rejected only because the ballistic expert had not taken
photographs. State of MP v Surpa, AIR 2001 SC 2408 , death due to gunshot injuries, bullet
removed from chest cavity of deceased by doctor, not sent to ballistic expert for examination.
The case became weakened and in the light of other weaknesses acquittal upheld. Dhula v
State. Forensic Science Laboratory report in regard to bloodstains present on the weapon of
offence, could not be used against the accused unless it was put to accused in his statements
under section 313, CrPC and accused was given an opportunity to explain it. State of Punjab v
Jugraj Singh, 2002 Cr LJ 1504 (SC), the eye-witness account of gun-shot injuries was
controverted by the investigating oﬃcer by saying that guns were not in working condition. He
did not send the guns for ballistic examination. The eye-witness account prevailed.
1164 Anvaruddin v Shakoor, 1990 Cr LJ 1269 : AIR 1990 SC 1242 .
1165 Sukhpal v State of Haryana, AIR 1995 SC 578 : 1995(1) SCC 10 .
1166 Lakhasingh v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 2952 (Raj). Bhani Ram v State of Rajasthan,

1995 Cr LJ 3165 (Raj) without ballistic report, recovery of cartridges is useless. State of MP v
Supra, 2001 Cr LJ 3292 (SC), matters of death by gunshot injuries, not referred to ballistic
expert, other evidence also weak.
1167 Balak Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 2451 (Raj).
1168 Bhola Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 137 : 1993 Cr LJ 3904 . Lakhbir Singh v State of

Punjab, AIR 1994 SC 1029 : 1994 Cr LJ 1374 , the opinion of the ballistic expert was that the
cartridges recovered could not have been ﬁred from the weapon seized. The positive eyewitness account and the medical opinion prevailed over that of the ballistic expert. The
witnesses had seen the country made pistols being wielded by the accused persons. The doctor
veriﬁed that injuries were caused by gun shots. SS Ajmer Singh v State of Punjab, 1993 SCC Cri
1113 , delay in sending the pistol to the expert for ﬁnding out whether it was in working
condition, not fatal in the circumstances of the case. Mani Ram v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1993
SC 2453 : 1993 Cr LJ 2530 , inordinate delay in sending empty cartridges to ballistic expert, not
material because the possibility of substitution was ruled out on the facts.
1169 Surat Singh v State of AP, 1995 Cr LJ 3189 (AP), explaining and distinguishing. In Re, K

Thimma Reddy, AIR 1957 AP 758 : 1957 Cr LJ 1091 ; Fakruddin v State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR
1967 SC 1326 : 1967 Cr LJ 1197 and Santosh Kumar v State of Madhya Pradesh, 1988 Cr LJ
1583 and Gopal Singh Gorkha v State of Uttar Pradesh, 1991 Cr LJ 1235 : 1991 All LJ 374.
1170 SG Gundegowda v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr LJ 852 (Kant), following Ramnathan v State

of TN, 1978 CLR (SC) 318 : 1978 Cr LJ 1137 ; S.G Gundegowda v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr LJ
852 (Kant). Delay of one month in sending the gun to the ballistic expert for examination is
inconsequential if the seals are found to be intact. Baldev Singh v State of Punjab, (1990) 4 SCC
692 : AIR 1991 SC 31 , delay in sending the crime articles to the laboratory created doubt about
the connection of the cartridges with the crime. The pistol and ﬁred cartridges were seized on
Jan. 15 but sent to the Forensic Science Lab only on Jan. 27. Bal Shanta v UOI, 2001 Cr LJ 2152
(Guj), an application for testing the range of ﬁre made after 27 years of the incident was not
allowed.
1171 Raza Pasha v State of MP, AIR 1983 SC 575 : 1984 Mad LJ (Cri) 1; Vinod Kumar v State of

UP, AIR 1991 SC 300 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 353 , view of the ballistic expert that the gun could not
have been triggered of accidentally in the process of snatching; two shots were ﬁred, which
could not have happened accidentally. Prem Kumar v State of Bihar, 1995 Cr LJ 2634 , failure to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
send the cartridges recovered from the body of the deceased to the ballistic expert was held to
be not fatal particularly when the riﬂes alleged to have been used in the incident were not
recovered.
1172 Santokh Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2010 SC 3274 : (2010) 8 SCC 784 .
1173 Chandra Prakash v State of Rajasthan, (2014) 8 SCC 340 (para 67) : 2014 (5) SCJ 1 .
1174 Uday Chand Dutt v Saibal Sen, (1987) Supp SCC 506 : AIR 1988 SC 367 .
1175 Rajesh Valel Puthuvalil v Inland Waterways Authority of India, (2014) 16 SCC 394 , para 4 :

2014 (8) Scale 592 .
1176 Pustimargiya Tritiya Peeth Pranyas Shri Dwarkadheesh Mandir v Addl. DJ, AIR 2009 Raj 9 .
1177 Murarilal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 : 1980 Cr LJ 396 . Citing Lord President Cooper in

Decei v Edinburgh Magistrate, (1953) SC (Scotland) 34 on the importance of expert evidence,
and Ram Chandra v State of UP, AIR 1957 SC 381 and Fakhrudin v State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 1326
: 1967 Cr LJ 1197 .
1178 Murari Lal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 at p 534 : (1980) 1 SCC 704 : 1980 Cr LJ 396 .
1179

The learned Judge cited Lord Cooper in Derie v Edinburgh Magistrate, 1953 SC 34

(Scotland) as cited by Cross Evidence, from earliest times the courts have received the opinion
of experts as shown in Buckley v Rice Thomas, (1554) 1 Plowd 118. The court considered the
earlier Supreme Court decisions in Ram Chandra v UP State, AIR 1957 SC 381 : 1957 Cr LJ 559 .
1180 Keshavamurthy v State, 2002 Cr LJ 103 (Kant).
1181 Pournima Suryakant Pawar v State of Maharashtra, (2013) 3 SCC 690 (para 13) : AIR 2013

SC 1508 .
1182 Gumpo v Church of Scientology Religious Education College Inc., 2000 CP Rep 38 (QBD).
1183 Archer v Hickmotts [1997] PNLR 318. [CC (County Court)].
1184 Toth v Jarman, (2006) 4 All ER 1276 : 2006 EWCA Civ 1028 .
1185 (1993) 2 Lloyd's Rep 68 at 81-82.
1186 Whitehouse v Jordan, (1981) 1 All ER 267 at 276 : (1981) 1 WLR 246 at 256-257 per Lord

Wilberforce.
1187 See Polivitte Ltd v Commercial Union Assurance Co plc, (1987) 1 Lloyd's Rep 379 at 386 per

Garland J and Re J (Child Abuse: Expert Evidence), (1991) 1 FCR 193 per Cazalet J.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
1188[s 45A] Opinion of Examiner of Electronic Evidence.—

When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to any
information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section
79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), is a relevant fact.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence
shall be an expert.]

COMMENT
This section was inserted vide Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008.1189
The Explanation to this section explains the purpose behind the insertion of this
section, i.e. to extend the status of an "expert" to the statutory oﬃce of Examiner of
Electronic Evidence, created under section 79 of Information Technology Act, 2000.1190
Electronic or digitalized documents form a distinct category of documents, different
from the traditional documents, and a different form of expertise is required for the
purpose of giving an expert's opinion regarding such electronic or digitalized
documents. It has been therefore provided that in a judicial proceeding, when either
electronic or digitalized document which constitutes part of any information
transmitted or stored in any computer resource, is the subject-matter for a court to
form an opinion, then the opinion given by Examiner of Electronic Evidence shall be
admissible as a relevant fact under this newly inserted section.
Only if the electronic record is duly produced in terms of section 65-B of the Evidence
Act, 1872, would the question arise as to the genuineness thereof and in that situation,
resort can be made to section 45-A, i.e., the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic
Evidence.1191

1188 Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(b) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
1189 (10 of 2009), section 51 (w.e.f. 27.10.2009, vide Notiﬁcation No. SO 2689(E), dated 27-10-

2009).
1190 (21 of 2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1191 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 13) : AIR 2015 SC 180 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 46] Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.—
Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent with the
opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison.

The fact that other persons, who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain
symptoms which experts aﬃrm or deny to be the symptoms of that poison, is
relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea-

wall.
The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there
were no such sea-wall, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is
relevant.

COMMENT
[s 46.1] Principle.—
The opinion of an expert is open to corroboration or rebuttal. The illustrations indicate
that for this purpose res inter alia acta is receivable.
An exception to the general rule, which lays down that evidence of collateral facts
cannot be received, arises "where the question is a matter of science, and where the
facts proved, though not directly in issue, tend to illustrate the opinions of scientiﬁc
witnesses. Thus, where the point in dispute was, whether a sea-wall had caused the
choking up of a harbour, and engineers were called to give their opinions as to the
effect of the wall, proof that other harbours on the same coast, where there were no
embankments, had begun to be chocked up about the same time as the harbour in
question, was admitted, as such evidence served to elucidate the reasoning of the
skilled witnesses."1192
Where the ocular evidence was that a number of assailants surrounded the person and
continuously subjected him to injuries and the medical report showed some knife
injuries, it was held that the eye-witness account stood nulliﬁed.1193

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 46.2] Toxicologist's report.—
Where the accused was convicted of driving with excess blood alcohol and he
produced expert evidence from a toxicologist questioning the reliability of the blood
alcohol test results. That contention was rejected on the basis that the toxicological
evidence had been purely theoretical, that the expert had not actually carried out his
own analysis and that the evidence as to the amounts of blood tested had come from a
rough estimate by the police oﬃcer involved. It was held that the evidence of the
toxicologist was admissible evidence that raised signiﬁcant doubt as to the accuracy
of the blood alcohol tests undertaken. The evidence was not merely theoretical but was
opinion evidence based on certain uncontroversial facts. That evidence could not be
rejected without some logical basis for doing so which did not exist. Given that the
accused was found to be only four mg over the prescribed limit, the doubts raised by
the toxicologist meant that it could not be said that the prosecution had discharged its
burden of proof.1194

[s 46.3] Application for fresh expert evidence.—
An accused appealed against his conviction for murder contending that expert
evidence which was subsequently discovered and which was admissible was capable
of casting a doubt on the safety of his conviction and, therefore, should be allowed to
be admitted. The court allowed the appeal and ordered retrial.1195 It said that when
considering whether fresh evidence should be admitted on appeal, regard has to be
paid as to whether there was a reasonable explanation for the failure to adduce the
evidence at trial. However, that is not decisive and the court should also consider other
factors, including the effect of the evidence if it is received and whether in the light of
those ﬁndings, it is necessary or expedient in the interests of justice to do so. In the
instant case, the evidence was from two reliable experts and was capable of belief.
Although there was no satisfactory explanation for the failure to adduce the evidence
at the trial, it clearly had the potential to afford grounds for allowing an appeal against
conviction.

1192 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 337, p 234; Folkes v Chadd, (1782) 3 Doug. 157. See generally

Murarilal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 at 535 : 1980 Cr LJ 396 .
1193 Ram Karan Mal v State, 1990 Cr LJ 846 : 1989 All LJ 463.
1194 Gregory v DPP, (2002) EWHC 385 , (2002) 166 JP 400 , QBD (Admin Ct).
1195 R v Cairns, The Times, March 8, 2000 (CA Crimes Div.).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 47] Opinion as to handwriting when relevant.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom any document was
written or signed, [s 47.2] the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of
the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not
written or signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.— A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another
person when he has seen that person write, or when he has received documents
purporting to be written by that person in answer to documents written by himself or
under his authority and addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course of
business, documents purporting to be written by that person have been habitually [s
47.3] submitted to him.

ILLUSTRATION
The question is, whether a given letter is in the handwriting of A, a merchant in London.
B is a merchant in Calcutta, who has written letters addressed to A and received letters
purporting to be written by him. C is B's clerk, whose duty it was to examine and ﬁle B's
correspondence. D is B's broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting
to be written by A for the purpose of advising him thereon.
The opinions of B, C and D on the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A
are relevant, though neither B, C nor D ever saw A write.

COMMENT
[s 47.1] Principle.—
When the court has to form an opinion as to the handwriting of any person, the opinion
of a person acquainted with the handwriting of such person is admissible in evidence.
This section indicates one of the methods of proving handwriting. The handwriting of a
person may be proved in the following ways:—
(1) By the evidence of the writer himself.
(2) By the evidence of a person who has seen the person, whose handwriting is in
question, write.1196
(3) By the evidence of a person acquainted with such handwriting either by receiving
letters purporting to be written by the person in answer to documents written by the
witness or under his authority and addressed to that person or when, in the ordinary

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
course of business, documents purporting to be written by that person have been
habitually submitted to him. The wife can be regarded as a person acquainted with the
handwriting of her husband. A letter written by her husband to another woman
acknowledging marital relationship with her was in question.1197 Evidence as to
handwriting of a witness who did not say he was familiar with the handwriting in
question was rejected.1198
In this category may be included cases where a person having custody of family
records obtains familiarity with the handwriting of persons who are dead and gone.1199
(4) By the evidence of an expert in comparing handwriting. The court must satisfy itself
by such means as are open to it that the opinion may be acted upon.1200
(5) By the court comparing the document in question with any others proved to the
satisfaction of the court to be genuine.
(6) The court may also direct any person present in court to write any words or ﬁgures
for the purpose of enabling the court to compare the words or ﬁgures so written with
any words alleged to have been written by such person.
A witness need not state in the ﬁrst instance how he knows the handwriting, since it is
the duty of the opposite party to explore on cross-examination the sources of his
knowledge, if he be dissatisﬁed with the testimony as it stands. It is within the power of
the presiding Judge and often it may be desirable to permit the opposing advocate to
intervene and cross-examine so that the court may at that stage be in a position to
come to a deﬁnite conclusion on adequate materials as to the proof of the
handwriting.1201
A document wholly in the handwriting of a party is said to be an autograph or
holograph; where it is in the handwriting of another person, and is only signed by the
party, the signature may be called "onomastic"; where it is signed by a cross or other
symbol, "symbolic".1202

[s 47.2] "Signed".—
Signing includes signature by stamping.1203

[s 47.3] "Habitually".—
This word means "usually", "generally", or "according to custom". It does not refer to the
frequency of the occasions but rather to the invariability of the practice. A recordkeeper, who in the course of his oﬃcial duty has to ﬁle papers sent to him, is
competent to testify to the handwriting of a person whose papers are so ﬁled, though
the number of such papers may not be numerically great.1204

[s 47.4] Evidentiary value.—
Where the dead body of a woman was recovered from a room in a guest house, where
she stayed along with her husband, and two slips also recovered from the room
showed under expert opinion the handwriting and signature of her husband, the
Supreme Court said that the opinion of the expert could be relied upon when supported

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
by other items of evidence and could be used as corroborative circumstantial
evidence.1205 Where the handwriting expert was not examined the Bombay High Court
held that no value or weightage could be given to his opinion.1206 In this case the
letters of the deceased to his brother were shown to the wife of the deceased in crossexamination and she stated that they were in the handwriting of her husband. She was
not cross-examined on this point. Her opinion as to handwriting became relevant.

1196 In the matter of a First Grade Pleader, (1914) PR No. 18 of 1915 (Civil).
1197 Shankeappa v Sushilabai, AIR 1984 Kant 112 .
1198 Rahim Khan v Khurshid Ad., AIR 1975 SC 290 : 1994(2) SCC 660 .
1199 Pusaram v Manmal, (1951) 1 Raj 764 .
1200 Fakhruddin v State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 1326 : 1967 Cr LJ 1197 ; Alamgir v State (NCT

Delhi), 2003 Cr LJ 456 : AIR 2003 SC 282 , the accused alleged to have killed his wife in a guest
house room and left after locking the room. Two slips of paper were recovered from the room. A
handwriting expert gave the opinion that the handwriting on the slips was that of the accused.
The court said that the opinion could be relied upon if it was supported by other items of
evidence and also as corroborating circumstantial evidence. The chain of circumstances was
found to be complete.
1201 Shankar v Ramji, (1903) 5 Bom LR 663 : 28 Bom 58.
1202 Best, 12th Edn, section 232, p 217.
1203 Shyamsunder v Kurpasindhu, (1962) Cut 501.
1204 Emperor v Ponde (No. 2), (1925) 27 Bom LR 1031 .
1205 Alamgir v State, (NCT) Delhi, AIR 2003 SC 282 .
1206 Bapurao v State of Maharashtra, 2003Cr LJ 2181 (Bom) following State of Maharashtra v

Damu Gopinath Shinde, AIR 2000 SC 1691 : 2000 Cr LJ 2301 where the expert was the Assistant
State Examiner of Documents but no value was attached to his opinion without his appearing as
a witness.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
1207[s 47A] Opinion as to electronic signature when relevant.—

When the court has to form an opinion as to the 1208 [electronic signature] of any
person, the opinion of Certifying Authority which has issued the 1209 [Electronic
Signature Certiﬁcate] is a relevant fact.]

COMMENT
[s 47A.1] Opinion as to digital signature.—
A new section has been added so as to provide for relevancy of expert opinion on the
genuineness of a digital signature. The new provision says that when the court has to
form an opinion as to the digital signature of any person, the opinion of the certifying
authority which has issued the Digital Signature Certiﬁcate is a relevant fact. A
"certifying authority" means an authority who has been granted a licence to issue a
digital signature certiﬁcate under section 24 of Information Technology Act, 2000.
The purpose behind the insertion of this section is to extend the status of an "expert" to
the statutory oﬃce of the Certifying Authority which has issued the Digital Signature
Certiﬁcate.
In 2008, an amendment1210 was made to this section, whereby the word "digital" was
substituted with the word "electronic".
After the entire regimen of "digital signature" having been substituted by "electronic
signature", the Oﬃce of Certifying Authority of electronic signature has been made the
statutory regulator who issues electronic signature certiﬁcate. By the insertion of this
new section, the said statutory regulator, i.e. the Certifying Authority which has issued
the electronic signature certiﬁcate, has been conferred the status of an "expert"
meaning thereby that whenever the court has to form an opinion regarding the
electronic signature of any person, the opinion given by Certifying Authority of
electronic signature shall be admissible as a relevant fact under this newly inserted
section.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1207 Ins. by the Information Technology Act (Act 21 of 2000), section 92 and Second Schedule

(w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
1208 Subs. by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 2009), section 52(c),

for "digital signature" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
1209 Subs. by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 2009), section 52(c),

for the words "Digital Signature Certiﬁcate" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
1210

(10 of 2009), section 52 (w.e.f. 27.10.2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O 2689(E) dated

27.10.2009).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 48] Opinion as to existence of right or custom, when relevant.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom [s
48.2] or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom or right, of persons who

would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.— The expression "general custom or right" includes customs or rights
common to any considerable class of persons.
ILLUSTRATION
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is a
general right within the meaning of this section.

COMMENT
[s 48.1] Principle.—
Opinions of persons who are in a position to know of the existence of a custom or
usage in their locality are admissible. For example, a person, who had been in the habit
of writing out deeds of sale, or one who had been seeing transfers frequently made,
would certainly be in a position to give his opinion whether there was a custom or
usage in that particular locality, and the opinion of such persons would be
admissible.1211 The witness in question should, however, possess experiential
qualiﬁcation before his evidence gathers any credibility. If he does not have this
qualiﬁcation he should show the grounds on which his opinion is based. But if his
opinion is not based on reliable information, his mere repetition of hearsay would not
carry any weight.1212
This section read with section 60 requires that the person who holds the opinion
should be called as a witness.1213
The section deals with oral evidence given in court by the person expressing the
opinion. Section 13 applies to all rights and customs, public or private, and refers to
speciﬁed facts which may be given in evidence. Under section 32, clause (4), opinion as
to public right or custom of a person, who is dead or who had become incapable of
giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without unreasonable delay
or expense, is admissible. The statements made by deceased persons after the
controversy had arisen, and therefore inadmissible under section 32, are not admissible
under this section and section 49. They cannot be admitted under clause (7) of section
32 either.1214

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 48.2] "Custom".—
As to "custom", see Comment on section 13. "Custom" is an unwritten law established
by usage. "Custom" should be distinguished from "usage". "Usage" is a fact and
"custom" is a law. There can be usage without custom, but not custom without usage.
A custom could properly be proved by general evidence given by members of the family
or tribe without proof of special instances.1215 Judicial decisions recognising customs
are relevant evidence.1216 When a custom has been repeatedly brought to the notice of
the courts and has been recognised by them regularly in a series of cases, it attains the
force of law.1217 The question of private customary divorce among Jat Sikhs of Punjab
arose before the High Court of Delhi.1218 The court said: The witness must be a person
likely to know of the custom. His testimony must be based upon personal knowledge.
The weight of his evidence would naturally depend upon his position and character and
of persons on whose statements he formed his opinion, but he cannot be conﬁned to
instances in which he had personally known the usage or custom exercised as a matter
of fact. The court cited the following observation of the Privy Council:1219 A tribal or
family custom excluding a daughter or sister from inheritance in favour of collaterals
may be proved by general evidence as to its existence by members of the tribe or
family who would naturally be cognizant of its existence and its exercise without
controversy. No speciﬁc instances need be proved.1220
Explanation.—The Explanation indicates that private rights are excluded from the
operation of the section. Such rights must be proved by facts such as acts of
ownership. The word "general" is an equivalent of the term "public".

1211 Sariatullah Sarkar v Pran Nath Nandi, (1898) 26 Cal 184 .
1212 Daniraiji Vrajlalji v VM Chandraprabha, AIR 1971 Guj 188 .
1213 Amina Khatun Musammat v Khalil-ur-Rahman Khan, (1933) 8 Luck 445 .
1214 Amina Khatun Musammat v Khalil-ur-Rahman Khan, (1933) 8 Luck 445 .
1215 Ahmad Khan v Channi Bibi, (1925) 52 IA 379 : 6 Lah 502. See Rahimatbai v Hirabai, (1877)

3 Bom 34. Radha Krishna Kandolkar v Tukaram, AIR 1991 Bom 119 , not only that right to draw
was used for 30 years, recognition by the community is also necessary.
1216 Tulshiram v Chunilal, (1940) Nag 149.
1217 Suganchand Bhikamchand v Mangibai Gulabchand, (1941) 44 Bom LR 358 : (1942) Bom

467.
1218 Balwinder Singh v Gurpal Kaur, AIR 1985 Del 14 .
1219 Ahmad Khan v Channi Bibi, AIR 1925 PC 267 .
1220 Reference was also made to Gururadhwaja Pd v SP Singh, (1900) 10 Mad LJ 267 in which

it was held by PC that the opinion of a witness as to the existence of a family custom based
upon information derived from deceased persons in relevant. See further, Munshi Das v R Mal
Singh, AIR 1977 SC 2002 , where evidence of opinion was not satisfactory.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 49] Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to—the usages, [s 49.1] and tenets [s 49.2] of
any body of men or family, the constitution and governance of religious or charitable
foundation, or the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by
particular classes of people, the opinions of persons having special means of
knowledge [s 49.3] thereon, are relevant facts.

COMMENT
The opinions of persons who have special means of knowledge as to (a) usages, (b)
tenets, of any body of men or family, (c) constitution of any religious foundation, (d)
meanings of words or terms used in a district, are admissible in evidence. "Such
persons are, so to speak, the depositaries of customary law, just as the text books are
the depositaries of the general law".1221
This section must be read with section 51.

[s 49.1] "Usages".—
These will include usages of trade and agriculture, mercantile usage and any usage
common to a body of men or family. Usages of a family will include, for instance, the
custom of primogeniture, or any peculiar course of descent.

[s 49.2] "Tenets".—
This will include any opinion, principle, dogma, or doctrine which is held or maintained
by a body of men. It will apply to religion, politics, science, etc.

[s 49.3] "Special means of knowledge".—
All that is meant by this expression is that the person must have had opportunities for
acquiring knowledge of a usage or custom and that he had acquired the necessary
knowledge.
Evidence relating to works that are technical is also admissible under this section.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

1221 Jugmohandas Mangaldas v Sri Mangaldas Nathubhoy, (1886) 10 Bom 528, 543.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 50] Opinion on relationship, when relevant.—
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to another,
the opinion, [s 50.1] expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, of
any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of
knowledge on the subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be suﬃcient to prove a marriage in proceedings
under the Indian Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 1869) or in prosecutions under section 494,
495, 497 or 498 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married.

The fact that they were usually received and treated by their friends as husband
and wife, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B.

The fact that A was always treated as such by members of the family, is
relevant.

COMMENT
When the court has to ascertain the relationship of one person to another, the opinion
of any person having special means of knowledge, as expressed by conduct, is
admissible in evidence. The opinion may be of a member of the family or an outsider,
but he must have special means of knowledge. Evidence of general reputation, which is
an accumulation of perception testimonies, heard and gathered and reduced to an
assertion to court, is not admissible, but the opinion or belief of a person specially
competent in this respect, as expressed by his conduct in outward behaviour, is
relevant. It is this conduct, which can be tendered in evidence, and the court is to
examine whether such conduct is based on the opinion held by the person.1222 The
word "conduct" is not necessarily limited to the conduct of the relations of the person,
whose relationship is in dispute, but is wide enough to include the conduct of the
witness who was giving his opinion about the existence of such relationship.1223
A member of the family can speak in the witness box of what he has been told and
what he has learned about his own ancestors, provided what he says is an expression
of his own independent opinion (even though it is based on hearsay derived from
deceased, not living, persons) and is not merely repetition of the hearsay opinion of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
others, and provided the opinion is expressed by conduct. His sources of information
and the time at which he acquired the knowledge (for example, whether before the
dispute or not) would affect its weight but not its admissibility.1224 On a question of
pedigree, family conduct is admissible to prove relationship; and the treatment of
friends and neighbours may be received as presumptive proof of marriage. The opinion
on behalf of a family regarding relationship; may be inferred from the family conduct,
e.g., distribution of family property; tacit recognition of relations.

[s 50.1] "Opinion".—
Opinion means something more than mere retailing of gossip or of hearsay; it means
judgment or belief, that is, a belief or a conviction resulting from what one thinks on a
particular question. Now, the "belief" or conviction may manifest itself in conduct or
behaviour which indicates the existence of the belief or opinion.1225 In Sitaram Nai v
Puranmal Sonar,1226 the Supreme Court explained the meaning of the term "opinion" in
this connection. The court said that it was laid down in Dolgobinda v Nimai Charan
Misra,1227 that what is relevant is the opinion expressed by conduct and opinion means
something more than mere relating of gossip or of hearsay; it means judgment or
belief, that is, a belief or conviction resulting from what one thinks on a particular
question. The section does not make the evidence of mere general reputation
admissible as a proof of relationship. It is the conduct or outward behaviour which
must be proved in the manner laid down in section 60. A family barber's statement that
he knew a particular person to be a son is not relevant. The statement that the chief of
the family used to call him as son was held to be within ambit. The witness admitted in
cross-examination that the family had no ﬁxed barber.
In Dolgobinda1228 case, SK Das, J said:
Opinion means something more than mere retailing of gossip or of hearsay; it means
judgment or belief, that is a belief, that or a conviction resulting from what one thinks on a
particular question. Now, the belief or conviction may manifest itself in conduct or
behaviour which indicates the existence of the belief or opinion. What the section (s. 50)
says is that such conduct or outward behaviour as evidence of the opinion held is relevant
and may therefore be proved.

We also accept as correct the view that section 50 does not make evidence of mere
general reputation (without conduct) admissible as proof of relationship.
Where the plaintiff claimed to be the daughter of one of the head members of the
genealogical branches of the family and there was evidence of witnesses on the point
of the claimed relationship of which they had knowledge as relatives and neighbours,
the claim of the plaintiff was held to be allowable. Contradictions of triﬂing nature in
the testimony of the witnesses was held to be not material.1229
The opinion of Karna Guru as to relationship was admitted because he was holding
that respect in the family for ﬁfty years.1230 Where there was no documentary evidence
to show that the women whose legal representatives were claiming shares in the land,
were the daughters of the land owner, oral evidence of an old co-villager was not
suﬃcient to infer their relationship particularly because he had no relationship with the
family of the owner of the land.1231
The newly created offences of dowry death (section 304B, IPC) and dowry harassment
(section 498A, IPC) also require proof of marriage. In a case before the AP High
Court,1232 the accused admitted the deceased to be his wife, the relatives, including
the father of the deceased girl acknowledged marriage by exchange of garlands, living
together and termination of a pregnancy. The court held that this was suﬃcient
evidence within the meaning of section 50 of the fact of marriage.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A second marriage was proved with the help of circumstantial evidence, witnesses
were not present at the marriage, but they deposed to the fact of second marriage and
living with the second wife. The father of the second wife admitted that fact. The
court's ﬁnding on the preponderance of probability that the fact of second marriage
was proved was held to be not improper.1233
Over the question of marriage for the purposes of succession to the wife's estate, the
sister and friend of the husband and eye-witnesses deposed to the fact of marriage.
They had the special means of knowledge of the relationship. The relationship was
kept secret because the parties belonged to different castes. The evidence was held to
give a strong support to the presumption of marriage under section 50.1234

[s 50.2] Opinion as to relationship—[Proviso].—
The proviso indicates that opinion on relationship cannot be suﬃcient to prove a
marriage in proceedings under the Indian Divorce Act, or in prosecutions for bigamy,
adultery and enticing away a married woman. In such cases the fact of the marriage
must be strictly proved in the regular way.1235
Where the evidence is that a man and a woman lived and were treated as husband and
wife for a number of years, in the absence of any material pointing to the contrary
conclusion, a presumption might have been drawn that they were lawfully married. But
the presumption which may be drawn from long cohabitation is rebuttable, and if there
are circumstances which weaken or destroy that presumption the court cannot ignore
them. The long cohabitation of a person's mother with his father was established by
oral as well as documentary evidence. This was suﬃcient to record a ﬁnding of lawful
wedlock. Examination of relatives or of persons having special knowledge was not
necessary.1236 Where the cumulative effect of the other circumstances warrants the
conclusion that the man failed to prove the factum of his marriage with the woman, his
claim to succeed to her estate as her heir under the customary law of Punjab must
fail.1237
Where the marriage in question was celebrated several years ago, the court said that
oral evidence might be the only available evidence.1238 In a case for maintenance, the
husband denied marriage. The claimant (wife) led evidence to show that both of them
were living together as husband and wife. Their daughter corroborated this statement
and said that she always received money from him. The court said that the
presumption became applicable that they were legally married. He could not prove that
the claimant was married to any other person or that he himself was married to some
other person.1239

1222 Chandu Lal Agarwala v Khalilar Rahman, (1942) 2 Cal 299 .
1223 Nidhiram v Munei, (1954) Cut 547; Sm. Fulkalia v Nathuram, (1960) Pat 891; Shriram

Sardarmal v Gourishankar, AIR 1961 Bom 136 . Jagdish Parshad v Sarwan Kumar, AIR 2003 P&H
3, the deceased father of the plaintiff had visited a temple where he made a signed entry in the
bahi maintained by the Panda of the temple to the effect that a particular person (the defendant)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was his nephew. This was held to be relevant to show that he was not the son so as to claim
any inheritance.
1224 Sitaji v Bijendra Narain, AIR 1954 SC 601 .
1225 Doigobinda v Nimai Charan, AIR 1959 SC 914 : 1959 Supp (2) SCR 836 . Such opinion can

be substantiated by the person holding the opinion or by the evidence of any other person.
Champa Devi v MS Singh, AIR 1981 Pat 103 .
1226 Sitaram Nai v Puranmal Sonar, AIR 1985 SC 171 at 176.
1227 Dolgobinda v Nimai Charan Misra, AIR 1959 SC 914 : 1959 Supp (2) SCr 836 .
1228 Supra, AIR 1959 SC 914 at 918 : 1959 Supp (2) SCR 814 .
1229 Gourhari Das v Sanilata Singh, AIR 1999 Ori 61 .
1230 Gobinda Das v B Rout, AIR 1958 NOC 154 (Ori).
1231 Sankhali Dhal v Nilamani Dei, AIR 1994 Ori 298 .
1232 Vadde Rama Rao v State of AP, 1990 Cr LJ 1666 AP.
1233 Ajay Chandrakar v Ushabai, AIR 2000 NOC 32 (AP), the suit was by the ﬁrst wife for

declaration of nullity of the second marriage.
1234 Bhagwandas Yadav v Rohit Tiwari, AIR 2010 NOC 589 (MP).
1235 Empress v Pitambur Singh, (1879) Cal 566 , FB; Wadhawa v Fatteh Muhammad, (1893) PR

No.5 of 1894 (Cr). B Chandra Manikyamma v B Sudarsana Rao, 1988 Cr LJ 1849 (AP), strict proof
of second marriage needed; second marriage and then both parties converting into Islam, not
for conviction but for convenience, marriage held invalid. Hazura Singh v Tej Kaur, AIR 2002 P&H
162, a widow not allowed to succeed to the estate of her deceased husband because there was
evidence that she was living with another person and had also borne his children and also that
she was living in adultery.
1236 Milkhi Ram v Milkhi Ram, AIR 1996 HP 116 .
1237 Gokal Chand v Parvin Kumari, (1952) SCJ 331 .
1238 Lakshmamma v Kamalamma, AIR 2001 Kant 120 at p 121.
1239 Pradeep Kumar Gupta v Kanti Devi, 2003 Cr LJ 1350 (Jhar).KK Thankappan v KS Jayan, AIR

2003 Ker 114 , there was no proof, documentary or oral of the fact of marriage nor any
witnesses of opinion as to relationship produced. There was only one fact and that was that the
woman lived with the man in his house till her death and the court said that this did not confer
the status of wife on her. Bant Singh v Niranjan Singh, AIR 2008 SC 2512 : (2008) 4 SCC 75 , suit
for property, the plaintiff disputed that the defendant's mother was his sister, witness of 80
years was brother-in-law of defendant's mother, he had knowledge about family affairs, attended
mother's marriage, acquainted with genealogy of the family, the court agreed that he had special
means of knowledge about the family.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSONS, WHEN RELEVANT
[s 51] Grounds of opinion, when relevant.—
Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on which such
opinion is based are also relevant.
ILLUSTRATION
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of
forming his opinion.

COMMENT
Where the opinion of an expert is receivable, the grounds or reasoning upon which such
opinion is based may also be inquired into. Opinion is no evidence, without assigning
the reason for such opinion. The correctness of the opinion can better be estimated in
many instances when the reasons upon which it is based are known. If the reasons are
frivolous or inconclusive the opinion is worth nothing.
Where reasons for the support of opinion were introduced at the time of evidence, it
was held that the grounds so introduced formed part of the relevant testimony, for the
opposite was not thereby deprived of their opportunity to cross-examine the expert nor
it was otherwise prejudiced.1240

1240 Adithela Immanual Raju v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 243 (Ori).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
[s 52] In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.—
In civil cases the fact that the character of any person concerned is such as to render
probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him is irrelevant, except in so far as
such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.

COMMENT
In civil cases evidence of the character of any party to the suit to prove the probability
or improbability of any conduct imputed to him is irrelevant.
"In respect of the character of a party, two distinctions must be drawn, namely between
the cases when the character is in issue and is not in issue and when the cause is civil
or criminal. When a party's general character is itself in issue, whether in a civil or
criminal proceeding, proof must necessarily be received of what that general character
is, or is not. But when general character is not in issue but is tendered in support of
some other issue it is, as a general rule, excluded. So in civil proceedings evidence of
character to prove conduct imputed is declared by the Act to be irrelevant (section 52).
The two exceptions to this rule are, that in civil proceedings evidence of character as
affecting damages, is admissible (section 55); and in criminal proceedings…the fact
that the person accused is of a good character is relevant, but the fact that the has a
bad character is, except in certain speciﬁed cases, irrelevant (sections 53 and 54.)"1241

[s 52.1] Principle.—
The general exclusion of character evidence is based on grounds of public policy and
fairness, since its admission would surprise and prejudice the parties by raking up the
whole of their careers, which they could not possibly come into court prepared to
defend.1242 The business of the court is to try the case, and not the man; and a very
bad man may have a very righteous cause.1243

[s 52.2] Scope.—
This section refers to the character of parties to the suit, and not to the character of
witnesses. It excludes evidence of character from being given only for the purpose of
rendering probable or improbable any conduct imputed to the party. But when the facts
which are relevant otherwise than for the purpose of showing character are proved, and
those facts raise inferences concerning the character of a party to the suit, such facts
become relevant not only to prove the facts for which they were directly tendered, but
also for the purpose of showing the character of the party concerned. In such a case it

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is open to the court to form its own conclusion as to the character of the party, and as
to the effect of such character on the conduct imputed to the party.1244

[s 52.3] "Character".—
The word "character" occurring in this section and sections 53 and 54 has been deﬁned
in the Explanation to section 55. "Character" is a combination of the peculiar qualities
impressed by nature or by habit of the person, which distinguish him from others.1245
The evidence of character relates either (a) to character of witnesses, or (b) to
character of parties. Character of a witness affects his credit and is always material as
it helps the court to come to the conclusion whether his evidence should be treated as
trustworthy. Questions touching the character of a witness are allowed to be put to a
witness who comes to give evidence in a case.

1241 Woodroffe and Ameer Ali's Evidence,10th EdnVol II, p 718.
1242 The Queen Rowton, (1865) 34 LJ (MC) 57.
1243 Wigmore on Evidence, 135.
1244 Norton, 230.
1245 Webster.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
[s 53] In criminal cases previous good character relevant.—
In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is of a good character is
relevant.

COMMENT
[s 53.1] Principle.—
The principle upon which good character may be proved is that it affords a
presumption against the commission of crime. This presumption arises from the
improbability, as a general rule as proved by common observation and experience, that
a man who has uniformly pursued an honest and upright course of conduct will depart
from it and do an act so inconsistent with it. Such a person may be overcome by
temptation and fall into crime, and cases of that kind often occur; but they are
exceptions. The rule is otherwise; the inﬂuence of this presumption from character will
necessarily vary according to the circumstances of different cases.1246 Character
evidence is a very weak evidence; it cannot outweigh positive evidence in regard to the
guilt of a person.1247
The following passage in the judgment of Dixon CJ in Attwood v R,1248 explains
matters about such evidence in respect of the weight which ought to be attached to it:
The history of the admission of evidence of good character, as given in Stephen's
History of the Criminal Law of England, shows that such evidence does not stand on
precisely the same plane as the concerning the relevant facts going to prove or
disprove the issue. This is made abundantly clear by the following statement by Lord
Ellenborough CJ in Davison. "This is the whole of the evidence on the substance of the
charge. What follows is evidence, highly important if the case be at all doubtful, if it
hangs in even scales. If you do not know what way to decide, character should have an
effect; but it is otherwise in cases which are clear…If the evidence were in even balance,
character should make it preponderate in favour of the defendant;…". In Frost, Tindal CJ,
thus expresses himself on evidence of good character called on behalf of the
defendant : "If the evidence which goes to the fact is suﬃciently strong to convince you
that the act of criminality which is imputed to him was actually committed, then it is no
more than weighing probability against fact. If the scales are hanging even, and you
feel a doubt whether the party is guilty or not of the act charged against him, then
undoubtedly you will give him the full beneﬁt of such testimony of general character
which he may have earned by his previous conduct in life. You are to weigh it not as
direct evidence in the case, not as positive evidence contradicting any that has been
brought on the other side, but as testimony, probably, to induce you to doubt whether
the other evidence is correct, and not to discard that evidence if you think it is so."

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

1246 Wigmoreon Evidence, 123.
1247 Bhagwan Swarup v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 682 : 1965 (1) Cr LJ 608 .
1248 (1960) 102 CLR 353 at p 157.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
1249[s 53A] Evidence of character or previous sexual experience not relevant in

certain cases.—
In a prosecution for an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B,
section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 1250[section 376A, section 376AB, section
376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB] or section 376E of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such offence, where
the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of such
person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the issue
of such consent or the quality of consent.]

COMMENT
[s 53A.1] Principle.—
This section was inserted vide the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 20131251 on the
basis of recommendation given by Justice JS Verma Committee report in the
aftermath of the Nirbhaya Rape incident. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 has
further amended section 53A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. In section 53A of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, for the words, ﬁgures and letters "section 376A, section
376B, section 376C, section 376D", the words, ﬁgures and letters "section 376A, section
376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB" have
been substituted. Section 53A required amendment to bring sections 376AB, 376DA
and 376DB of the Indian Penal Code within its purview.
This section bars the leading of evidence of the character of the victim or her previous
sexual experience with any person on the issue of consent given by the victim or the
quality of consent, by making it not relevant. Therefore, now, during the course of trial
for the offences speciﬁed in this section, namely the offences under section 354,
section 354-A, section 354-B, section 354-C, section 354-D, section 376, section 376-A,
section 376AB, section 376-B, section 376-C, section 376-D, section 376DA, section
376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any of these
offence, the defence is barred from either leading any evidence or putting questions in
cross-examination, which relates to or is suggestive of the victim's past previous sexual
experience with any other person, in order to show that the victim was a consenting
party to the offence which is being tried.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1249 Ins. by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 (13 of 2013), section 25 (w.e.f. 3-2-

2013).
1250 Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, sec. 8, for "section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section

376D" (w.r.e.f. 21-4-2018).
1251 Act 13 of 2013, section 25, (w.e.f. 03.02.2013).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
1252[[s 54] Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.—

In criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad character is
irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, [s 54.2] in
which case it becomes relevant.
Explanation 1.—This section does not apply to cases in which the bad character of any
person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.—A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.]
SYNOPSIS

COMMENT
[s 54.1] Principle.—
Evidence of bad character of an accused person (of whose good character evidence
has not been given) is not relevant under this section for the purpose of raising a
general inference that the accused is likely to have committed the offence charged.
Such evidence is irrelevant and cannot be legally admitted in evidence whether elicited
by the prosecution or by the defence.1253 This description of the accused as a lawbreaker amounted to evidence of character. The Supreme Court excluded it.1254 A
man's guilt is to be established by proof of the facts alleged and not by proof of his
character; such evidence might create prejudice but not lead a step towards
substantiation of guilt.1255 The prohibition does not in any way affect evidence which
is required to prove a motive for the crime or which is otherwise relevant.1256 But in
assessing punishment the court may take into consideration the accused's character
and antecedents or the state of crime in the country or locality.1257
If evidence is otherwise relevant, it is not rendered inadmissible under this section,
merely because it shows bad character or the commission of offences other than the
offence with which the accused is charged.1258

[s 54.2] "Unless evidence has been given that he has a good character".—
Where the accused has attempted to show his good character in his own aid under the
preceding section, the prosecution may in rebuttal offer evidence of his bad character.
The accused by going into his own character gives a challenge to the prosecution. The
prosecution, therefore, is at liberty to refute his claim that he has a good character,
otherwise the court would be misled.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The bad conduct cannot be taken into consideration as laid down in this section,
unless and until the defence is taken that the accused had good character.1259
Where a murder accused had tendered no evidence to show that he was a person of
good character, it was held that the prosecution could not be allowed to adduce
evidence tending to show that he was a person of bad character.1260

[s 54.3] Where bad character in issue—
[Explanation 1].—Where the bad character of any person is itself a fact in issue, then the
principle of this section does not apply. See section 110(f) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. Therefore, evidence can be given of particular trait of bad character which
may be in issue.1261

[s 54.4] Previous convictions—
[Explanation 2].—A previous conviction is not admissible in evidence against the
accused, except where he is liable to enhanced punishment under section 75 of the
Penal Code on account of previous conviction or unless evidence of good character be
given, in which case the fact that the accused has been previously convicted of an
offence is admissible as evidence of bad character.1262
As to evidence of previous convictions Lord Denning said:1263
I do not accept (this) argument. I think that previous convictions are admissible. They stand
in a class by themselves. They are the raw material upon which bad reputation is built up.
They have taken place in open Court. They are matters of public knowledge. They are
accepted by people generally as giving the best guide to his reputation and standing. They
must, of course, be relevant, in the sense, that they must be convictions in the relevant
sector of his life and have taken place within a relevant period such as to affect his current
reputation. They are very different from previous instance of misconduct, for those have not
been tried out or resulted in convictions, or come before a Court of law. To introduce these
might lead to endless disputes, whereas previous convictions are virtually indisputable.1264

It has been held that the Crown could rely on attested copies of a foreign court's
conviction records in order to rebut accused's claim of good character. Under the
Evidence Act, 1851, section 7, the Crown could rely on "examined copies" or
"authenticated copies" of a foreign court's records of conviction. Fingerprint evidence
and the evidence of the police oﬃcer had been admissible since it had the objective of
establishing that the person convicted in the foreign court and accused were one and
the same person.1265
A previous conviction may also be relevant under section 8 as showing motive. It may
also become relevant within the meaning of section 14, Explanation 2, when the
existence of any state of mind, or body, or bodily feeling, is in issue or relevant.1266 It
may also be relevant under section 43. See illustration (e).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1252 Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, section 6, for section 54..
1253 Mi Myin v King-Emperor, (1908) 5 LBR 4; Emperor v Gangaram, (1920) 22 Bom LR 1274 .
1254 Ram Lakhan v State of UP, AIR 1977 SC 1936 : 1977 Cr LJ 1566 .
1255 Amrita Lal Hazra v Emperor, (1915) 42 Cal 957 .
1256 Jagwa Dhanuk v King-Emperor, (1925) 5 Pat 63.
1257 King-Emperor v Nga Ba Shein, (1928) 6 Ran 391 FB.
1258 Sarojekumar Chakrabarti v Emperor, (1932) 59 Cal 1361 .
1259 Divesh Vaidya v State of HP, 2016 Cr LJ 1935 , paras 52 and 53 (HP-DB).
1260 Prithvi Singh v State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 4424 (All).
1261 Bai Chaturi v State of Gujarat, AIR 1960 Guj 5 .
1262 Emperor v Duming, (1903) 5 Bom LR 1034 ; Teka Ahir v The King-Emperor, (1920) 5 PLJ 706

. See also, R v Powell, (1988) 1 All ER 193 CA, where the accused had put his own character in
issue, he was allowed to be cross-examined on his previous conviction on grounds of allowing
his premises to be used for purposes of prostitution. The accused was presently charged with
living wholly or in part on the earning of prostitution contrary to section 30 of Sexual Offences
Act, 1956 [English].
1263 Goody v Odhams Press Ltd, (1967) 1 QB 333 (CA).
1264 It was a great train robbery case. The defendants commented upon the person who was

convicted for the same saying that because his previous record of convictions he had become a
dangerous menace to the society. He ﬁled a civil suit for defamation. He contended that the
defendants should not be allowed to adduce evidence of his previous convictions.
1265 R v Mauricia, [2002] EWCA Crimes 676, The Times, March 11, 2002, CA (Crim Div).
1266 Emperor v Alloomiya, (1903) 5 Bom LR 805 : 28 Bom 129.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART I RELEVANCY OF FACTS
CHAPTER II OF THE RELEVANCY OF FACTS

CHARACTER WHEN RELEVANT
[s 55] Character as affecting damages.—
In civil cases the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the amount
of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation.—In sections 52, 53, 54 and 55, the word "character" includes both
reputation and disposition; but, except as provided in section 54, evidence may be
given only of general reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts by
which reputation or disposition were shown.

COMMENT
[s 55.1] Principle.—
Evidence to be conﬁned to general reputation and general disposition.—It is in civil cases,
where the question of amount of damages to be awarded to the plaintiff is concerned,
that the character of the plaintiff becomes relevant.1267
In civil cases good character, being presumed, may not be proved in aggravation of
damages, but bad character is admissible in mitigation of damages, provided that it
would not, if pleaded, amount to a justiﬁcation. For example, in cases of defamation
the general bad reputation of the plaintiff may be proved. In cases of breach of promise
of marriage the plaintiff's general character for immorality is relevant. In cases of
seduction evidence of the general character for immorality on the part of the person
seduced is relevant. The argument in favour of considering reputation is that the
person should not be paid for the loss of that which he never had.
The evidence of the plaintiff's character was held to be receivable in a case in which a
journalist had sued a woman drama artist who had said that he was abusing his
position as a journalist for making money.1268 Cave J said: "He complains of an injury
to his reputation, and seeks to recover damages for that injury, and it seems most
material that the jury who have to award those damages should know, if the fact is so,
that he is a man of no reputation. "To deny this would", as is observed in Starkie on
Evidence, "be to decide that a man of the worst character is entitled to the same
measure of damages with one of unsullied and unblemished reputation. A reputed thief
would be placed on the same footing with the most honourable merchant, a virtuous
woman with the most abandoned prostitute. To enable the jury to estimate the
probable quantum of injury sustained, knowledge of the party's previous character is
not only material, but seems to be absolutely essential…"
In an action for breach of promise of marriage, the defendant was allowed to cite
evidence of the plaintiff's bad character in mitigation of damages.1269 In an action for

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
damages, for seduction or rape, evidence of bad character of the plaintiff was allowed
as it was likely to affect the damages that the plaintiff ought to receive.1270
The evidence of character is required to be conﬁned only to "general evidence of
reputation". This was laid down in Scott v Sampson.1271 "If these rumours and
suspicions have, in fact, affected the plaintiff's reputation, that may be proved by
general evidence of reputation. If they have not affected it, they are not relevant to the
issue. Unlike evidence of reputation, it is particularly diﬃcult for the plaintiff to meet
and rebut such evidence.1272 Referring to the evidence of disposition, the learned judge
said that "evidence of facts and circumstances tending to show the disposition of the
plaintiff, both principle and authority seemed equally against its admission."
Explaining Lord Denning observed:1273 "The reason is no doubt that the words
"character" and "reputation" have various meanings. A man's "character", it is
sometimes said, is what he in fact is whereas his reputation is what other people think
he is."
"Evidence of a person's good or bad character can be given only by those who know
him and have had dealings with him, for his character is the esteem in which he is held
by others who know him and are in a position to judge his worth.1274 In R v Rowton,1275
a witness as to character said: "I know nothing of the neighbourhood's opinion,
because I was only a boy at school when I knew him". "The witness then expressed his
own opinion about the character of the accused. This was held to be irrelevant. The
court said: "The evidence must be of the man's general reputation, and not the
individual opinion of the witness. The witness who acknowledged that he knew nothing
of the general character, and had no opportunity of knowing it in the sense of
reputation, would not be allowed to give an opinion as to a man's character."
Evidence of reputation or disposition must be conﬁned to the particular traits which the
charge is concerned about. Thus, it would be useless to offer evidence of a prisoner's
reputation for honesty on a charge of cruelty, or of his mild disposition on a charge of
theft. Reputation for honesty would be relevant on a charge of theft, and a merciful
disposition on a charge of cruelty.1276

[s 55.2] "Character" includes reputation and disposition—
[Explanation].—The word "character" includes both reputation and disposition.
"Reputation" means what is thought of a person by others, and is constituted by public
opinion. "Disposition" respects the whole frame and texture of the mind. It
comprehends the springs and motives of actions. "Temper" inﬂuences the action of the
moment, "disposition" is permanent and settled; "temper" may be transitory and
ﬂuctuating. It is possible to have a good disposition with a bad temper, and vice
versa.1277

[s 55.3] Who is qualiﬁed as witness of character.—
Since there is no formal qualiﬁcation for this purpose, all that is necessary is that the
witness must expressly appear to be qualiﬁed. There is the following statement of law
in Wigmore on Evidence:
When the character of a party or of a witness is to be evidenced by reputation, the
reputation must itself be proved by a witness qualiﬁed by an opportunity to obtain
knowledge of it. The ﬁrst step here consists in an application of the general principle

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that a witness must expressly appear to have had the means of knowledge, before his
testimony can proceed.1278

[s 55.4] Knowledge of the witness must be based on residence in the place of
repute, not on mere inquiry.—
The admissible reputation is that which is built up in the neighbourhood of a man's
domicile or in the circle where his livelihood is followed and it is of slow formation. It is
the sum of all that is said or not said for or against him. Consequently, it used to be
ruled that a reputation can be adequately learned only by the witness' residence in the
place, not by a mere visit of inquiry, or by a casual sojourn, or by a conversation with a
resident who reports the reputation. How long this residence must have been, or how
near to the place of domicile or occupation, was not deﬁned by ﬁxed rule—the
qualiﬁcation varied according to circumstances and it should be left entirely to the trial
court. But in modern days of organized investigation and research it is easy to see that
this original common law rule is too strict. Systematic inquiry by a person coming from
outside will often be a better source of knowledge than the causal opportunities of a
neighbour or a friend; the only reason for distrust exists when the inquirer is a paid
partisan agent who seeks evidence of one person only.

1267 D Shastri v KB Sahay, (1953) 32 Pat 276.
1268 Scott v Sampson, (1882) 8 QBD 49 : 51 LJ QB 382 : 46 LT 412.
1269 Jefferson v Paskell, (1916) 1 KB 57 at p 68 (CA).
1270 Verry v Watkins, (1836) 7 C&P 308.
1271 (1882) 8 QBD 491 : 51 LJ QB 380 : 40 LT 412.
1272 Cave J at p 504.
1273 Plato Films Ltd v Spide, (1961) AC 1090 at 1137.
1274 Lord Denningin Plato Films Ltd v Spidel, (1961) AC 1090 at 1137.
1275 R. v Rowton, (1865) 169 ER 1497 : 11 LT 745.
1276 Norton, 234.
1277 Crabb's Synonyms, p 323; See Bhagwan Swarup v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 682 :

1965(1) Cr LJ 608 . For distinction between "reputation" and "rumour", see Harbhajan Singh v
State of Punjab, AIR 1961 Punj 215 , at p 226.
1278 Teese v Huntington, 23 How. 2 (1859); Shewitz v United States, 293 Fed. 581 (6th Cir.

1923); Gage v United States, 167 F. 2d 122 (9th Cir. 1948) (reputation as of twelve years
previously excluded for remoteness in discretion of court. McClellan v State, 117 Ala, 140, 145,
23 So. 653, 655 (1898) ("ordinarily" the witness means of knowledge will not be inquired into, if
he says that he knows); Elmore v State, 216 Ala. 298, 113 Soo 32 (1927). Crabtree v Kile, 21 III.
180 (1859); Crabtree v Hagenbaugh, 25 III. 214 (1861); Spies v People, 122 III. 1, 12 NE 865
(1887); People v Lyons, 4 III.2d 396, 122 N.E.2d 809 (1954) (witness who testiﬁes on direct
examination to reputation admits on cross-examination that his testimony is based on his own
personal opinion; motion to strike granted); People v Wendt, 104 III. App. 2d 192, 244 N.E. 2d 384
(1968) (witness had opinion based on speciﬁc encounters but no knowledge of reputation).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Brown v State, 196 Ind. 77, 147 N.E. 136 (1925) (merely having heared only one complaint does
not exclude a witness otherwise qualiﬁed). Commonwealth v Rogers, 136 Mass. 158 (1883) (the
judge may inquire whether the witness has any knowledge, but not into its means or extent);
State v Barnard, 176 Minn. 349, 223 N.W. 452 (1929) (trial court's discretion); State v Palmersten,
210 Minn. 476, 299 N.W. 669 (1941) (witness should ﬁrst be asked whether he is acquainted
with reputation); State v Boswell, 2 Dev. 210 (1829); State v Parks, 3 Ired. 296 (1843) (the witness
must profess to know the general reputation before testifying); State v O'Neale, 4 Ired. 88, 89
(1843) ("the regular mode is to inquire whether have the means of knowing the general
character); State v Speight, 69 N.C. 72, 75 (1873) "whether he knew the general character of the
witness, and the means by which he had acquired that knowledge" must be asked; State v Ellis,
243 N.C. 142, 90 S.E.2d 255 (1955) (witness who did not know reputation in the community of
residence not qualiﬁed, though knew of reputation where crime committed. Gomez v State, 145
Tex. Crimes 168, 171, 166 S.W.2d 699, 700 (1942) "If appellant sought to show that the
deceased's reputation as a quarrelsome and dangerous man was bad, he should ﬁrst have
shown by the witness that he knew the reputation. People v Dunham, 344 III. 268, 274, 176.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER III FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
[s 56] Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.—
No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice [s 56.1] need be proved.

COMMENT
Part I dealt with what facts may, and what facts may not, be proved in a civil or criminal
case. Part II deals with the question what sort of evidence must be given of a fact
which may be proved. This Part shows the manner in which a fact in issue or relevant
fact must be proved.
All facts in issue and relevant facts must be proved by evidence, either oral or
documentary. To this rule there are two exceptions: (a) facts judicially noticeable; and
(b) facts admitted.
In the case of the facts dealt with by this section, the judge's belief in their existence is
induced by the general knowledge acquired otherwise than in particular proceedings
before the court and independently of the action of the parties therein. The meaning of
the section will, however, be apparent, if we consider together with this section the last
words of section 57. What these two provisions really come to is this: With regard to
the facts enumerated in section 57, if their existence comes into question, the parties
who assert their existence, or the contrary, need not in the ﬁrst instance produce any
evidence, in support of their assertions. They need only ask the judge to say whether
these facts exist or not, and if the judge's own knowledge will not help him, then he
must look the matter up; further, the judge can, if he thinks proper, call upon the parties
to assist him. But in making this investigation the judge is emancipated entirely from all
the rules of evidence laid down for the investigation of facts in general. He may resort
to any source of information which he ﬁnds handy and which he thinks will help him.
Thus, he may consult any book or obtain information from a bystander.1

[s 56.1] "Take judicial notice".—
This expression means recognition without proof of something as existing or as being
true.2 Judicial notice is based upon very obvious reasons of convenience and
expediency; and the wisdom of dispensing with proof of matters within the common
knowledge of every one has never been questioned. Taking judicial notice of the
scarcity of dwellings, the Calcutta High Court held that a dwelling house cannot be
acquired without providing alternative accommodation.3 The Supreme Court has held
that the court can take judicial notice of alternative sources.4 The court can take
judicial cognizance of the fact that a certain area is terrorist-stricken.5 The court can
take judicial notice of the fact that many blind persons have acquired great academic
distinction.6
The court can take judicial notice of the fact that the system of education in the State
has virtually crumbled and serious allegations are made frequently about the manner in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
which the system is being worked.7

1 Markby 49.
2 For example, the court taking judicial notice that the law and order situation has deteriorated

over the years and continues to be worsening fast and, therefore, it is an importune time to think
of reconsidering death penalty. Shashi Nayar v UOI, AIR 1992 SC 395 : 1992 Cr LJ 514 .
3 Bamandas Mukherjee v State of West Bengal, AIR 1985 Cal 159 .
4 Assistant Collector of Central Excise v Dunlop India Ltd, AIR 1985 SC 330 : 1985(1) SCC 260 .
5 Abdul Malik v State of UP, AIR 1994 All 376 . Kesho Ram v Joga Ram, AIR 2009 Del 157 , death

due to bomb explosion in bus, Sikh related violence was in full swing in Northern India, the court
took judicial notice of this fact. Claim petition under MV Act maintainable.
6 Jai Shankar Prasad v State of Bihar, AIR 1993 Pat 22 .
7 Managing Committee of Rajo Sidheshwar High School v State of Bihar, AIR 1996 Pat 19 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER III FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
[s 57] Facts of which Court must take judicial notice.—
The Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts:—
8

[(1) All laws in force in the territory of India;]

(2) All public Acts passed or hereafter to be passed by Parliament 9 [of the United

Kingdom], and all local and personal Acts directed by Parliament 9 [of the
United Kingdom] to be judicially noticed:
(3) Articles of War for 10[the Indian] Army, 11[Navy or Air Force];
12

[(4) The course of proceedings of Parliament of the United Kingdom, of the

Constituent Assembly of India, of Parliament and of the Legislatures
established under any laws for the time being in force in a province or in a
State;]
(5) The accession and the sign manual of the Sovereign for the time being of the

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland;
(6) All seals of which English Courts take judicial notice: the seals of all the 13

[Courts in 14 [India]], and all Courts out of 12 [India] established by the authority
of 15 [the Central Government or the Crown Representative]: the seals of
Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction and of Notaries Public, and all
seals which any person is authorised to use by 16 [the Constitution or an Act of
Parliament of the United Kingdom or an] Act or Regulation having the force of
law in 14 [India];
(7) The accession to oﬃce, names, titles, functions and signatures of the persons

ﬁlling for the time being any public oﬃce in any State if the fact of their
appointment to such oﬃce is notiﬁed in 17[any Oﬃcial Gazette];
(8) The existence, title and national ﬂag of every State or Sovereign recognised by
18[the Government of India];

(9) The divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world, and public

festivals, fasts and holidays notiﬁed in the Oﬃcial Gazette;
(10) The territories under the dominion of 18 [the Government of India];
(11) The commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between 18

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[the Government of India] and any other State or body of persons;
(12) The names of the members and oﬃcers of the Court and of their deputies and

subordinate oﬃcers and assistants, and also of all oﬃcers acting in execution
of its process, and of all advocates, attorneys, proctors, vakils, pleaders and
other persons authorized by law to appear or act before it;
(13) The rule of the road 19[on land or at sea].

In all these cases, and also on all matters of public history, literature, science
or art, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents of
reference.
If the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact, it
may refuse to do so unless and until such person produces any such book or
document as it may consider necessary to enable it to do so.

COMMENT
The list of facts of which the court shall take judicial notice and which are enumerated
in this section is not exhaustive. It is for the sake of convenience that the courts are
allowed to take judicial notice of certain facts which are so clearly established that
evidence of their existence is unnecessary. The Supreme Court has held that the court
can take judicial notice of circumstances in August–September, 1947 (communal
disturbances after partition) in certain parts of the country.20
The section does not appear to have the effect of absolving the parties from any rules
governing the proof of facts on which they desire to rely. The section does not say how
any fact, historical or otherwise, is to be proved by the parties, but gives the court
liberty to resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents of reference on matters
of public history.21

[s 57.1] "All Laws in force"—
[Clause 1].—Under clause (1) of this section the court should take judicial notice of all
Indian laws. "Indian law" is deﬁned by the General Clauses Act, section 3(29), and
includes any law, ordinance, order, bye-law, or regulation passed or made at any time by
any competent legislature, authority, or person in India.22 The expression "All laws"
includes statutory law as well as unwritten law whether of personal or of a local nature.
A report made by an oﬃcer containing customary law applicable to a particular
community is admissible in evidence.23 See Constitution of India, Article 13(3)(b). The
factual background of a statutory enactment as stated in the statute itself is judicially
noticeable.24 Multi-storeyed Building Regulations were held to be judicially noticeable,
they being statutory instruments made in public interest.25
A Government Order on conversion of agricultural land was held to be judicially
noticeable.26 Courts are bound to take judicial notice of statutory regulations even if
they are not pleaded.27
Regulations made under the Act became part of the law and a tribunal takes judicial
notice of the law, being at liberty to refresh memory by referring to the text of the
regulations which, if there is any doubt about it, can be established by reference to a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
copy printed by the Government printer.28 The Supreme Court pointed out that the
court should have taken judicial notice of the fact that a notiﬁcation had been issued
concerning the land of an intermediary29 the fact that the Life Insurance Corporation, a
statutory corporation, has adopted varying ages of retirement for different services,30
the fact of Government's white paper on Punjab agitation and information in it about
Bhindranwale.31 The courts also take judicial notice of general customs.32 The general
lien of bankers is part of the law merchant, and is to be judicially noticed like the
negotiability of bill of exchange or days of grace allowed for their payment. When a
general usage has been judicially ascertained and established, it becomes a part of the
law merchant which courts of justice are bound to know and recognise.

[s 57.2] Public Acts—
[Clause 2].—Statutes are either public or private, general or special. A public or general
Act is a universal rule applied to the whole community, which the courts must notice
judicially and ex oﬃcio, although not formally set forth by a party claiming an
advantage under it. But special or private Acts are rather exceptions than rules, since
they only operate upon particular persons and private concerns, and the courts are not
bound to take notice of them, if they are not formally pleaded, unless an express clause
is inserted in them that they shall be deemed public Acts, and shall be judicially noticed
as such without being specially pleaded—which provision is now usually introduced.33
Where the Hindi version of an Act contained a wrong entry in a schedule of the Act, the
Supreme Court said that the English version should be taken into judicial notice being
an authoritative text of the Act.34

[s 57.3] Articles of War—
[Clause 3].—Articles of War for oﬃcers, soldiers, etc., are contained in the Army Act
(XLVI of 1950).

[s 57.4] Parliamentary proceedings—
[Clause 4].—The court is bound to take judicial notice of the prorogation of a State
Legislative Assembly,35 so also of the budget speech of the Finance Minister.36
Refusal to take judicial notice of statutory notiﬁcation has been held to be an error
which is of patent nature justifying review.37

[s 57.5] Accession to oﬃce, etc.—
[Clause 7].—Judicial notice of the signatures of the Secretaries to the Government on
any instrument can be taken under this clause.38 A true copy of a Gazette notiﬁcation
can be received in evidence if the other party does not object to its admissibility as
secondary evidence.39

[s 57.6] Flags—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[Clause 8].—All courts must take judicial notice of the existence and title of every State
or Sovereign recognised by the Government of India.

[s 57.7] Divisions of time, etc.—
[Clause 9].—The phrase "divisions of time" includes also Indian eras. Thus, Samvat,
Shaka, Hindi, Bengali, Hizari and Jalus eras will be judicially noticed. The court is bound
to take judicial notice of the holidays notiﬁed in the Oﬃcial Gazette of any Local
Government.40 Where an incident took place at 7 a.m. in the month of April, it was held
that the court could take judicial notice of the fact that it was not dark at that time.41 A
Magistrate ordering demolition of a dilapidated house taking judicial notice of
incessant rains in the area was held to be justiﬁed.42

[s 57.8] "The rule of the road on land or at sea"—
[Clause 13].—This means the rule that horses and vehicles of all description should
keep to the left side of the road. At sea, the rule is that ships and steamboats, on
meeting, should port their helms, so as to pass on the port or left side of each other;
steamboats should keep out of the way of sailing ships; and every vessel overtaking
another should keep out of its way.

[s 57.9] Matters of common knowledge.—
On all matters of public history, literature, science, or art, the court may sort for its aid
to appropriate books or documents of reference. Thus, ancient facts of public nature
and published works of history can be relied upon for ﬁnding the meaning of a
"math".43
Under the last paragraph the court is given the discretion to refuse to take judicial
notice of any fact unless the person calling upon the court to take judicial notice of
such fact produces any such book or document as may be necessary to enable it to do
so.44
The court can take judicial notice of the fact that an all-India railway strike was
imminent on a particular day and that it actually commenced on a certain day.45
The only guiding principle, apart from statute, as to judicial notice which emerges from
the various recorded cases, appears to be that wherever a fact is so generally known
that every ordinary person may be reasonably presumed to be aware of it, the court
noticed it, either simpliciter if it is at once satisﬁed of the fact without more, or after
such information or investigation as it considers reliable and necessary in order to
eliminate any reasonable doubt.46 The basic essential is that the fact is to be of a class
that is so generally known as to give rise to the presumption that all persons are aware
of it. This excludes from the operation of judicial notice what are not "general" but
"particular" facts. As to "particular" facts, even the judge's own personal knowledge is
not to be imported into the case: Hurpurshad v Sheo Dayal,47 and Meethun Bebee v
Busheer Khan.48 To import knowledge of a particular fact in issue would be to import
evidence in the strict sense regarding a matter as to which the court is supposed to
have no knowledge whatsoever of its own.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The court cannot be called upon to take judicial notice of facts published in a
newspaper. The presence of the newsman who personally perceived the reported facts
would be necessary.49 The court did not take judicial notice of prices prevailing in
different parts of the country at a given time and context.50
In a petition against calling of bandh by a political party, the Kerala High Court said that
it could take judicial notice of what actually happens when a call for bandh is
enforced.51
The court also pointed out that the list is not exhaustive. The court can also take notice
of the enormous and manifold increase of rents throughout the country particularly in
the urban areas52 and, in a matter of acquisition, of the fact that land prices in the area
have risen,53 but not of the fact whether alternative accommodation is available for the
purposes of evicting a tenant. This has to be proved as a fact.54 Judicial notice was
taken of the fact of the existence of followers of Islam in India and their belief in Koran
as of divine origin through their Prophet.55 The question whether a particular village
was granted to a particular person by a former Ruler is not a matter of public history
within the meaning of this section.56
In the absence of any evidence the court cannot take judicial notice of the practice that
sale deeds are generally undervalued.57
The court could take judicial notice of the fact that the requirement of land by the
Government for providing housing accommodation was a matter of national urgency;58
that the police and jail authorities were using handcuffs and other fetters
indiscriminately and without any justiﬁcation.59 The court can take notice of illegal
immigration.60 The court can take judicial notice of customs.61
Judges cannot and do not act within "ivory towers". Not to take notice of matters which
are notorious is to shut one's eyes in the face of reality. It is true that judges cannot act
on their own private knowledge or belief regarding the facts of a particular case but
they are entitled to use the knowledge of the common affairs of life which men of
ordinary intelligence possess. There are matters which are so notorious or clearly
established that evidence of their existence is unnecessary. Speaking of this State (the
State of Bihar) I have no doubt that the usufruct derived by usufructuary mortgages of
agricultural lands is at least twice (and in many cases even thrice) the legally
permissible rate of interest for secured creditors.62
The court can take judicial notice of the fact that the Governments, whether at the
Centre or States, cannot by themselves take effective measures for imparting
education to the country's children.63
It is the discretion of the State Government to create new Districts. This action of the
Government cannot be challenged. But the court can take judicial notice of the fact that
the essential infrastructure for the new District has not been provided. If no judicial
authorities are functioning in the new District it will be causative of great public
inconvenience. The Government can be asked to focus its attention towards creation
of judicial and administrative complexes.64
In the matter of determination of value of land for the purposes of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894, the court said that judicial notice could be taken of the fact that there is
upward trend in prices of land and a continuously rising inﬂation.65
In a case arising out of the right of a woman to family pension, the court took note of
the fact that human experience shows that it is very rare that a woman with children

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
would claim that she was the wife of a person who was not her husband.66
The courts can take judicial notice of a custom which has been repeatedly recognised
by the courts. Proof of such a custom would then not be necessary.67

[s 57.9.1] Subsequent events.—
The circumstances in which and the riders subject to which the court can take judicial
notice of subsequent events were thus explained by the Supreme Court68 in a case in
which there was a current ﬁnding of the authorities below as to the landlord's personal
need which became belied by some events taking place during the pendency of the
proceedings:
The power of the Court to take note of subsequent events is well-settled and undoubted.
However, it is accompanied by three riders; ﬁrstly, the subsequent event should be brought
promptly, to the notice of the Court; secondly, it should be brought to the notice of the Court
consistently with rules of procedure enabling Court to take note of such events and
affording the opposite party an opportunity of meeting or explaining such event; and thirdly,
the subsequent event must have a material bearing on right to relief of any party.

[s 57.10] Consultation of books and references.—
Matters in respect of which the court may take judicial notice, the court may call upon
the party concerned to provide help by producing expert guidance and books and
journals. Where a camel in a zoo bit a visitor and, in a tort action against the authorities,
the court could have taken notice of the fact whether the camel is a domestic or wild
animal, but even so consulted witnesses.69 Glauson LJ explained matters as follows:
The judges take judicial notice of the ordinary course of nature and in this particular
case of the ordinary course of nature—in regard to the position of camels among other
animals. The reasons why the evidence was given was for the assistance of the judge
in forming his view as to what the ordinary course of nature in this regard in fact is, a
matter of which he is supposed to have complete knowledge. The point is best
explained by reading a few lines from that great work, the late Mr Justice Stephen's
Digest of the Law of Evidence. In the 12th edition, Article 62 is as follows:
No evidence of any fact of which the court will take judicial notice need be given by the
party alleging its existence; but the judge, upon being called upon to take judicial notice
thereof, may, if he is unacquainted with such fact, refer to any person or to any document or
book of reference for his satisfaction in relation thereto, or may refuse to take judicial notice
thereof unless and until the party calling upon him to take such notice produces any such
document or book of reference". From the statement it appears that the document or book
of reference only enshrines the knowledge of those who are acquainted with the particular
branch of natural phenomena; and, in the present, case, owing to some extent to the fact
that there appears to be a serious ﬂaw in a statement in a well-known book of reference on
the matter here in question, the learned judge permitted oral evidence to be given before
him by persons who had, or professed to have, special knowledge with regard to this
particular branch of natural history. When that evidence was given and weighed up with the
statements in the books of reference the facts became perfectly plain; and the learned
judge was able without any diﬃculty whatever to give a correct statement of the natural
phenomena material to the matter in question of which he was bound to take judicial
notice.70

The Supreme Court in a case discussed not only the evidence adduced before the trial
court but also referred to textbooks and other materials and concluded on that basis
that the custom in question was prevalent in a certain community. The court said that
such material could be relied upon without much evidence.71

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

8 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for para (1).
9 Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
10 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Her Majesty's".
11 Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, section 25 and Sch I, for "or Navy".
12 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for para 4.
13 Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "Courts of British India".
14 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "the States".
15 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the "the G.G. or any L.G. in Council".
16 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, "any Act of Parliament or other".
17 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "the Gazette of India, or in the Oﬃcial Gazette of any L.G.".
18 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "the British Crown".
19 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 5.
20 Shiv Nath v UOI, AIR 1965 SC 1666 .
21 "The Englishman", Ltd v Lajpat Rai, (1910) 37 Cal 760 .
22 Public Prosecutor v Thippayya, (1949) Mad 371; S Nagarajan v Vasantha Kumar, 1988 Cr LJ

1217 . Foreign law is a matter of fact. It has to be proved the same way as any other fact,
Attorney General of South Australia v Brown, (1960) AC 432 (PC).
23 Tula Ram Sah v Shyam Lal Sah, (1924) 49 All 848 .
24 J Kumar v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 1064 : (1982) 2 SCC 116 : 1982 SCC (L&S) 177.
25 3 ACES, Hyderabad v MC of Hyderabad, AIR 1995 AP 17 , judicial notice taken, demolition not

stayed because the contractor prevented the Municipality from issuing public notice cautioning
investors. Municipal Regulations as to construction of buildings were held to be judicially
noticeable. The court followed Pratibha Co-op Housing Society Ltd v State of Maharashtra, AIR
1991 SC 1453 : (1991) 3 SCC 341 . Ramilal v Ghisa Ram, (1996) 7 SCC 507 : AIR 1996 SC 3338 ;
judicial notice of change in law under which the party's right of preemption was defeated. To the
same effect, Karan Singh v Bhagwan Singh, (1996) 7 SCC 559 : AIR 1996 SC 2249 . See JW
Every-Burns, Regulations Judicially Noticed, (1957) 3 Aust LJ 458 at p 460.
26 Udit Gopal Beri v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2001 Raj 147 ; State of UP v Pista Devi, (1986) 4 SCC

251 : AIR 1987 SC 2055 , the Court could take judicial notice of the fact that there was national
urgency for acquisition of land for housing.
27 Rajasthan State Electricity Board v Laxman Lal, 1991 Supp 2 SCC 531.
28 Yan Omerion v Bowick, (1809) 2 Camp 42 : 170 ER 1073; Mc Quaker v Goddard, (1940) 1 KB

607 , at 700.
29 UOI v Nihar Kanta Jha, AIR 1987 SC 1713 : (1987) 3 SCC 465 .
30 LIC of India v SS Srivastva, AIR 1987 SC 1527 : 1988 Supp SCC 1 .
31 Sukh Deo Singh v Union Territory, AIR 1967 P&H 5.
32 Lord Campbell in Brando v Barnet, (1846) 12 CLF 787 (HL). Jiwan Singh v Des Raj, AIR 1982

Punj (NOC) 306, the Court took judicial notice of the fact that agricultural land devolved upon
sister's sons and not upon distant collaterals. This custom was found to be universal in Punjab.
This was also known to all the agricultural communities there. Citing Ujagar Singh v Mst. Jeo,
AIR 1959 SC 1041 .
33 Field, 8th Edn, p 418.
34 Nityanand Sharma v State of Bihar, AIR 1966 SC 2306 .
35 State of Punjab v Satya Pal, AIR 1969 SC 903 : 1969(1) SCR 478 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
36 State of UP v Anupam Traders, 1989 SCC (Cr) 701 : 1989 Supp (2) SCC 88.
37 State Bank of Travancore v K Vinayachandran, AIR 1989 Ker 302 .
38 Kali Pada Upadhya v King-Emperor, (1944) 23 Pat 475.
39 State of Kerala v Enadeen, AIR 1971 Ker 193 FB.
40 Gyan Singh v Budha, (1932) 14 Lah 240. Mannsingh v Commissioner of Police, 1989 Cr LJ

1573 (Guj), (judicial notice of holidays).
41 Balwan v State, 1989 Cr LJ 2475 (Del).
42 Tejmal v State of Maharashtra, 1992 Cr LJ 379 (Bom).
43 Swami Harbans Chari Ji v MP, AIR 1981 MP 82 ; Vimla Bai v Hiralal Gupta, (1990) 2 SCC 22 :

1989 Supp (2) SCR 759 statements in the Gazette of Indore.
44 Public Prosecutor v Thippayya, (1949) Mad 371.
45 Onkar Nath v Delhi Admn., AIR 1977 SC 1108 : 1977 Cr LJ 940 : (1977) 2 SCC, at p 614.
46 Holland v Jones, (1917) 23 CLR 49 (Australia).
47 Particular' facts, even the judge's own personal knowledge is not to be imported into the

case: Hurpurshad v Sheo Dayal, (1876) 3 IA 259 , 286.
48 Meethun Bebee v Busheer Khan, 11 Moore Indian Appeals 213, 221.
49 Laxmi Raj Shetty v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1988 SC 1274 : (1988) 3 SC 319 .
50 State of AP v Bathu P Rao, (1976) 3 SCC 301 : AIR 1976 SC 1845 : 1976 Cr LJ 1387 .
51 Bharat Kumar K Paticha v State of Kerala, AIR 1997 Ker 291 (FB).
52 Rattan Arya v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1986 SC 1444 : 1986(3) SCC 385 : 1986 All LJ 1168.
53 Puran v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1986 P&H 305. Baldev Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2007

P&H 129, percentage of increase in the matter of acquisition has to be worked out on evidence.
54 Bhagwandas v Jiley Kaur, AIR 1991 SC 266 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 300 .
55 Chandmal Chopra v State of West Bengal, 1988 Cr LJ 739 Cal.
56 Kishanlal v Sohanlal, (1955) 5 Raj 191 . Facts reported in newspapers are not judicially

noticeable. Luxmi Raj Shetty v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1988 SC 1274 : 1988 Cr LJ 1783 .
57 Tata Chemicals Ltd, Bombay v Sadhu Singh, AIR 1994 All 66 : LNIND 1993 All 196 .
58 State of UP v Pista Devi, AIR 1986 SC 2025 : (1986) 4 SCC 251 .
59 Citizens for Democracy v State of Assam, (1995) 3 SCC 743 .
60 MDK Immigration Consultant v UOI, 2000 Cr LJ 252 (P&H).
61 Atluri Brahmanandan v Anne Sai Bapuji, AIR 2011 SC 545 : (2011) 1 Mad LJ 742 (SC), judicial

notice of the fact that in a particular community there was a custom to adopt a person as a son
even when he was of more than 15 years of age.
62 Fatehchand Himantlal v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1977 SC 1825 : (1977) 2 SCC 670 .
63 Debasish Kar Gupta v State of West Bengal, AIR 1999 Cal 300 .
64 District Bar Association v State of Haryana, AIR 1997 P&H 231 : (1998) 118 PLR 265 .
65 Gulabi v State of HP, AIR 1999 HP 9 .
66 Laxmi Kom Venkanna Nayak v Govt of India, AIR 2002 Kant 54 : 2002 (6) Kar LJ 310
67 Ass Kaur v Kartar Singh, AIR 2007 SC 2369 : (2007) 5 SCC 561 .
68 Atma S Berar v Mukhtiar Singh, AIR 2003 SC 624 at p 630, the court did not ﬁnd the

subsequent event to be relevant because no court has the right to tell the landlord how and
where he should live. See also Ram Nibas Gagau v Debojyoti Das, AIR 2003 SC 632 . The court
said here that subsequent events could be taken into account to mould relief. But notice was
not taken of such events in this case because there was no explanation for the failure on the
part of the tenant to bring the events to the notice of the trial Court and why the application was
moved belatedly for the ﬁrst time before the Appellate Court.
69 Mc Quaker v Goddard, (1940) 1 KB 687 : (1940) 1 All ER 471 (CA).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
70 In Turner v Coates, (1917) 1 KB 670 , evidence in its strict sense was admitted as to the habit

of Colts.
71 Gurubasawwa v Irawwa, AIR 1997 Kant 87 . The case referred to was Shakuntala Bai v LV

Kulkarni, AIR 1989 SC 1359 : (1989) 2 SCC 526 : ILR 1989 Kant 2323 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER III FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
[s 58] Facts admitted need not be proved.—
No fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their agents
agree to admit at the hearing, or which before the hearing, they agree to admit by any
writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved
otherwise than by such admissions.

COMMENT
Admissions by parties before suit are dealt with in section 17, et seq. This section
deals with admissions at or before the hearing.

[s 58.1] Principle.—
No proof need be given of facts which the parties or their agents agree to admit at the
hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by writing under their hands,
or which, by any rule of pleading in force at the time, they are deemed to have admitted
by their pleadings.72 Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied speciﬁcally or by
necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant,
shall be taken to be admitted. The court may in its discretion require any fact so
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admission (O VIII, rule 3, Code of Civil
Procedure). Where a document is not admitted in the pleadings but only at the trial in
evidence, the document must be proved.73 Where at the initial stage of eviction
proceedings, execution of agreement of tenancy showing the other party as
landlord/owner was admitted by the tenant, he subsequently could not take the plea
that the agreement was obtained by fraud.74 A party is bound by its initial admission
and its legal consequences.75
The law on admissions can be summarised to the effect that admission made by a
party though not conclusive, is a decisive factor in a case unless the other party
successfully withdraws the same or proves it to be erroneous. Even if the admission is
not conclusive it may operate as an estoppel. Law requires that an opportunity be given
to the person who has made admission under cross-examination to tender his
explanation and clarify the point on the question of admission. Failure of a party to
prove its defence does not amount to admission, nor can it reverse or discharge the
burden of proof of the plaintiff. Section 58 deals with admissions during trial i.e. at or
before the hearing, which are known as judicial admissions or stipulations dispensed
with proof. Documents are necessarily either proved by witness or marked on
admission. Section 58 provides that a fact may not need to be proved in any
proceeding which the parties thereto agreed to admit at the hearing or which, before
the hearing, they agreed to admit by any writing under their hands or which they
admitted by their pleading, even in that case the court may, in its discretion, even if

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
such an admission has been made by the party, require the fact admitted to be proved
otherwise than by such admission. In fact, admission by a party may be oral or in
writing. Admission is the best piece of substantive evidence that an opposite party can
rely upon, though not conclusive, is decisive of the matter, unless successfully
withdrawn or proved erroneous.76
A court, in general, has to try the questions on which the parties are at issue, not those
on which they are agreed. Admissions which have been deliberately made for the
purposes of the suit, whether in the pleading or by agreement, will act as an estoppel to
the admission of any evidence contradicting them.77 It is with the object of doing away
with the necessity of proving documents or facts admitted that admission are
obtained, and the party unreasonably refusing or neglecting to admit any documents or
facts when called upon to do so may be ordered to pay the costs of proof. Where the
defendant admitted in his written statement that his father was married to the
plaintiff's mother according to Henga custom, he was not allowed subsequently to
contradict it.78 A consent decree for possession which was based upon a compromise
in a previous case and which showed the existence of a statutory ground of eviction, it
was held that it could take the shape of evidence or an admission which is the best
proof of facts and can be made the foundation of the rights of parties.79
Sarkaria J said in this case:
Admissions in pleadings or judicial admissions, admissible under section 58 of the
Evidence Act, made by the parties or their agents at or before the hearing of the case, stand
on a higher footing than evidentiary admission. The former class of admissions are fully
binding on the party that makes them and constitute a waiver of proof. They by themselves
can be made the foundation of the rights of parties. On the other hand, evidentiary
admissions which are receivable at the trial as evidence, are by themselves not conclusive.
They can be shown to be wrong.80

This decision was relied on in Raman Pillai v Kumaran Parameswarn.81 In this case the
facts in question were admitted in written statement. In a suit for title, admissions were
made by the predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiffs in their written statement in earlier
judicial proceedings to the effect that the rights in the suit property were lost by
adverse possession and limitation and that the predecessors of the respondents had
perfected their title. Certiﬁed copy of the written statement was held to be relevant
under section 58. Admissibility could not be discarded on the ground that the
statement in question was not a public document.
Where the question was if possession had indeed been taken over from the lessee
pursuant to the termination of the lease, it was noticed by Supreme Court that lessee
had written a letter in which an unequivocal and unconditional admission was made
that possession had indeed been taken over by the appellant Port Trust and lessee had
asked for refund of the amount paid by her towards instalments and in case such a
refund was not possible to return the plot to her. It was held that such an unequivocal
admission as is contained in the letter cannot be wished away or ignored in a suit
where the question was of dispossession of lessee pursuant to the termination of the
lease. It was accordingly held on the basis of said admission contained in the letter of
lessee that dispossession of the lessee had taken place pursuant to the termination of
the lease deed in terms of panchnama.82
Where averments made in a writ petition were not controverted by the respondent, the
court said that they should be presumed to have been admitted.83
An admission must be clear and unambiguous in order that such an admission should
relieve the opponent of the burden of proof of the fact said to have been admitted.84

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Formal proof of a document even when it is required to be proved in a certain way (e.g.,
by calling a person who have attested it, see section 68, infra) may be waived by any of
the parties whose interest it may affect, although such waiver does not affect the legal
character of the document or its validity.85 When a document is marked on admission
without reservation, the contents are not only evidence, but are taken as admitted and
cannot be challenged; but where documents are marked on admission dispensing with
formal proof, the contents are evidence although the party admitting is free to
challenge the contents.86 If an agreement of discharge or satisfaction be admitted in
the pleadings and hence no question of proof by oral or documentary evidence arises
by virtue of this section, such compromise cannot be said to be inadmissible for want
of registration.87
In divorce cases the court does not usually decide merely on the basis of admissions in
the pleadings or the petition. Where, however, there is no room for supposing that
parties are colluding, there is no reason why the admissions of parties should not be
treated as evidence just as they are treated in other civil proceedings.88
The plaintiff was the registered proprietor of the trade mark "Atul". The defendant was
using the trade name "Atul" since the birth of his son. The court said that the fact that
the word "Atul" is a common proper name used in naming persons and things need not
be proved.89
In the Code of Civil Procedure provision has been made for admission of facts by
parties or their pleaders before the hearing (O XII, rules 1–9). In order that an
admission may give rise to an inference of the title of another person, it has to be clear
and explicit. Admissions, generally, cannot create any title.90 Failure to prove a defence
does not amount to an admission, nor does it reverse or discharge the burden of
proof.91 For admission in criminal cases, see the authors' Code of Criminal Procedure ,
11th Edn.
A written statement has to be read as a whole. Evasive denials and non-speciﬁc denials
may constitute an implied admission. Lawyer's incorrect instructions, omissions or
failures lead to making of an implied admission. Though it may not be allowed to be
withdrawn by an amendment of the written statement, the plaintiff can be allowed to
prove his case.92

[s 58.2] Admission that one was partner and retired.—
The court said that an admission made in an aﬃdavit, unless explained otherwise,
furnishes best evidence. The defendant in his aﬃdavit sworn before Notary Public
made an unequivocal admission that he was a member of the partnership in question
and he retired from it. This was held to be a conclusive proof of the existence of the
partnership and his retirement from it.93

[s 58.3] Unproved documents produced by the prosecution.—
The documents produced by the prosecution, though not formally proved, can be relied
upon by the defence to falsify the prosecution version.94

[s 58.4] Admission made in pleadings.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A categorical admission made in the pleadings, cannot be permitted to be withdrawn
by way of an amendment.95

[s 58.5] When further evidence may be required—
[Proviso].—If the court is satisﬁed that the admission has been obtained by fraud or that
there is other good and suﬃcient cause, it will be in its discretion, under the proviso, to
require the fact to be proved otherwise than by such admission.96

72 Markby, 50. See Maung Po Kin v Maung Shwe Bya, (1923) 1 Ran 405.
73 Maung Wala v Maung Shwe Gon, (1923) 1 Ran 472.
74 Narendra Kumar v Vishnu Kr. Nayyar, AIR 1994 Del 209 .
75 Zonal General Manager Ircon International Ltd v Vinay Heavy Equipments, (2015) 13 SCC 680 ,

para 10 : 2015 (6) Scale 103 .
76 UOI v Ibrahim Uddin, (2012) 8 SCC 148 .
77 Burjorji Cursetji Panthaki v Muncherji Kuverji, (1880) 5 Bom 143, 152.
78 Rasamani Das v Patrabalo Devi, AIR 1981 Gau 42 .
79 Nagindas v Dalpatram, AIR 1974 SC 471 : 1974(1) SCC 242 . Admission must be possible

facts. Sita Kumari v Basisth Narain, AIR 1985 Pat 158 .
80 Ibid at p 252.
81 Raman Pillai v Kumaran Parameswarn., AIR 2002 Ker 133 . Rasu v Pandidurai, AIR 2002 NOC

155 (Mad), marking of sale deed required for a collateral purposes. The case of the applicant
was that he gained title and possession on the basis of the document. The document was not
registered though it required registration. The court said that marking was not allowed.
82 Kandla Port v Hargovind Jasraj, (2013) 3 SCC 182 .
83 Naseem Bano v State of UP, AIR 1993 SC 2592 : 1993 Supp (4) 46 .
84 Joshna Gouda v Brundaban Gouda, (2012) 5 SCC 634 .
85 Baijanth Singh v Mussammat Biraj Kuer, (1922) 2 Pat 52; Arjun Sahu v Kelai Rath, (1922) 2 Pat

317. A tenant admitting in his pleadings the buyer of his original landlord's interest as his new
landlord, the latter need not produce any document in proof of this fact, Gopi Kishan v Bajrang,
1996 AIHC 4064 (Raj) parties admitted that the gift deed in question was executed with their
consent, no formal proof needed, Mada Rama Krishna Reddy v NP Reddy, 1996 AIHC 3946 (AP).
86 Lionel Edwards Ltd v State of WB, AIR 1967 Cal 191 .
87 Ramchandra Sau v Kailashchandra Patra, (1930) 58 Cal 532 .
88 Mahendra v Sushila, AIR 1965 SC 364 : 1964(7) SCR 267 .
89 Atul Products Ltd v VP Mehta, AIR 2009 Bom 84 : 2009 (111) Bom LR 796 .
90 Wakf Board v Subhan Shah, (2006) 10 SCC 696 : (2006) 10 SCC 696 .
91 Manager, RBI v S Mani, AIR 2005 SC 2179 : (2005) 5 SCC 100 : (2005) 3 Mah LJ 758 .
92 Uttam Chand Kothari v Gauri Shankar Jalan, AIR 2007 Gau 20 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
93 Broadway Centre v Gopaldas, AIR 2002 Cal 78 . The Court followed Ramji Dayawala & Sons

Pvt Ltd v Invest Import, AIR 1981 SC 2085 : (1981) 1 SCC 80 .
94 Ramaiah v State of Karnataka, (2014) 9 SCC 365 (para 14) : AIR 2014 SC 3388 .
95 Ram Niranjan Kajaria v Sheo Prakash Kajaria, (2015) 10 SCC 203 , para 23, to this extent

proposition of law that even an admission can be withdrawn as held in Panchdeo Narain
Srivastava v Jyoti Sahay, 1984 Supp SCC 594 was overruled.
96 Oriental Govt Security Life Assurance Co Ltd v Narasimha Chari, (1901) 25 Mad 183, 205.

Ammarukunhi Amma v State of Kerala, AIR 2003 Ker 33 , further proof required of the fact
whether half of the private land was really acquired.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER IV OF ORAL EVIDENCE
[s 59] Proof of facts by oral evidence.—
All facts, except the 1[contents of documents or electronic records], may be proved by
oral evidence.

COMMENT
Oral evidence has been deﬁned by the Act to be all statements which the court permits
or requires to be made before it by witnesses in relation to matters of fact under inquiry
(section 3). All facts except the contents of documents may be proved by oral
evidence. This section is not happily worded. Contents of documents may be proved by
oral evidence under certain circumstances, viz., when evidence of their contents is
admissible as secondary evidence.
Oral evidence, if worthy of credit, is suﬃcient without documentary evidence to prove a
fact or title.2 It is a cardinal rule of evidence that where written documents exist, they
must be produced as being the best evidence of their own contents.3 Where oral
testimony is conﬂicting, much greater credence is to be given to men's acts than to
their alleged words, which are so easily mistaken or misrepresented.4
Where a body was recovered from a well, but the evidence of the witnesses to the fact
of recovery could not be accepted because of the absence of their signature on the
inquest and they also did not support the recovery, it was held that in such
circumstances, the investigating oﬃcer himself becomes a direct witness and his
evidence could not be disbelieved unless there was evidence that he had a motive to
create a false evidence.5
An aﬃdavit is not "evidence" within the meaning of section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872.
Aﬃdavits are, therefore, not included within the purview of the deﬁnition of "evidence"
as has been given in section 3 of the Evidence Act, and the same can be used as
"evidence" only if, for suﬃcient reasons, the court passes an order under O XIX of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Thus, the ﬁling of an aﬃdavit of one's own statement, in
one's own favour, cannot be regarded as suﬃcient evidence for any Court or tribunal,
on the basis of which it can come to a conclusion as regards a particular fact situation.
However, in a case where the deponent is available for cross-examination, and
opportunity is given to the other side to cross-examine him, the same can be relied
upon. Such a view, stands fully aﬃrmed particularly, in view of the amended provisions
of O XVIII, rules 4 and 5 CPC.6

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1 Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–8, for "contents of documents" (w.e.f. 17-10-

2000).
2 P Ram Reddy v Land Acquisition Oﬃcer, (1995) 2 SCC 305 : (1995) 1 JT 593 , oral evidence as

to value of land produced by claimants in the context of acquisition, witnesses were not crossexamined or not effectively cross-examined, was not accepted particularly when it was based
upon unbelievable probabilities.
3 Dinomoyi Debi v Roy Luchmiput Singh, (1879) 7 IA 8 .3.
4 Meer Usd Oalah v Mussumat Beeby Imaman, (1836) 1 Moo Ind App 19 , 42, 43.
5 Radha Kant Yadav v State of Jharkhand, 2003 Cr LJ (NOC) 13 (Jhar) : (2002) 3 JLJR 135 .
6 Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan v State of Maharashtra, (2013) 4 SCC 465 : AIR 2013 SC 58 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER IV OF ORAL EVIDENCE
[s 60] Oral evidence must be direct.—
Oral evidence must, in all cases whatever, be direct; that is to say—
If it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who
says he saw it;
If it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who
says he heard it;
If it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other
manner, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or
in that manner;
If it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for
sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the
production of such treatises if the author is dead or cannot be found, or has become
incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of
delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material
thing other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks ﬁt, require the production of
such material thing for its inspection.

COMMENT
This section says that oral evidence must be direct, that is, if it refers to
(1) a fact which could be seen,

the evidence must be of a witness who says he saw it;
(2) a fact which could be heard,

the evidence must be of a witness who says he heard it;
(3) a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or manner,

the evidence must be of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or that
manner;
(4) an opinion, or the grounds on which that opinion is held,

the evidence must be of a person who holds that opinion on those grounds.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
This section, subject to the proviso excludes opinions given at second-hand. The use of
the word "must" in the ﬁrst clause of the section imposes a duty on the court to exclude
all oral evidence that is not "direct", whether the party against whom it is tendered
objects or not.7 The word "direct" is opposed to mediate or derivative or "hearsay".

[s 60.1] Direct oral evidence.—
Where a person is a witness of fact, his testimony is regarded as direct evidence, even
if he is not able to recollect the facts with precision and has to rely upon his "belief" as
to what he saw or heard. "A witness who perceived an event with his senses is not
conﬁned, when giving an account of it, to what he can swear to with complete certainty
or with complete precision. He may swear to the substance or effect of the words
used.8 And it has long been established that, in giving evidence of what he saw or
heard, he may swear, "to the best of his belief", if his recollection does not enable him
to be more positive and precise.9 Unless there is some indication to the contrary he
may be taken, when he expresses his evidence in that way, to be stating his recollection
but conceding that its quality does not enable him to swear with complete certainty
and precision. But, of course, if the context or circumstances show that the reference
to "belief" means that the witness is speaking from conjecture, from deduction or from
information regarding what was perceived by others, then the evidence will ordinarily
be rejected.10"
The reason for the laxity is that the law cannot afford to help to hold the social and
psychological reality out of the court room. People's memories are fragile and short.
Details fall out of mind rapidly with time. Subsequent publicity, discussions and
suggestive questioning all exert their inﬂuence. This may lead to the exclusion of
evidence which is superior in trustworthiness to evidence which is freely admitted. To
minimise such chances, the courts have modiﬁed the rigid rule as to direct evidence by
a number of exceptions.
The testimony of persons who saw the pitiable condition of a young woman in her inlaws' home where she met her death was held to be relevant.11
The doctrine of dying declaration is enshrined in section 32 of the Evidence Act, 1872
as an exception to the general rule contained in section 60 of the Evidence Act, which
provides that oral evidence in all cases must be direct i.e. it must be the evidence of a
witness, who says he saw it. The dying declaration is, in fact, the statement of a person,
who cannot be called as witness and, therefore, cannot be cross-examined. Such
statements themselves are relevant facts in certain cases.12

[s 60.2] Meaning of hearsay evidence.—
The term hearsay is used with reference to what is done or written, as well as to what is
spoken, and, in its legal sense, it denotes that kind of evidence which does not derive its
value solely from the credit given to the witness himself, but which rests also, in part,
on the veracity and competence of some other person. That this species of evidence is
not given upon oath, that it cannot be tested by cross-examination, and that in many
cases it supposes some better testimony which might be adduced in the particular
case, are not the sole grounds for its exclusion. Its tendency to protract legal
investigations to an embarrassing and dangerous length, its intrinsic weakness, its
incompetency to satisfy the mind of the existence of the fact, and the frauds which
may be practised with impunity under its cover, combine to support the rule that
hearsay evidence is 'inadmissible.'13 "The word 'hearsay' is used in various senses.
Sometimes it means whatever a person is heard to say; sometimes it means whatever

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
a person declares on information given by someone else; sometimes it is treated as
nearly synonymous with 'irrelevant'."14
The expressions "saw it", "heard it", and "perceived it", in clauses 2, 3 and 4 of the
section mean "saw the fact deposed to", "heard the fact deposed to", and "perceived the
fact deposed to".15
"Derivative or second-hand proofs are not receivable as evidence in causa.… Instead of
stating as maxim that the law requires all evidence to be given on oath we should say
that the law requires all evidence to be given under personal responsibility; i.e., every
witness must give his testimony, under such circumstances as expose him to all the
penalties of falsehood, which may be inﬂicted by any of the sanctions of truth…The true
principle therefore appears to be this—that all second-hand evidence, whether of the
contents of a document or of the language of a third person, which is not connected by
responsible testimony with the party against whom it is offered, is to be rejected."16 The
witnesses deposed that they had personally seen and observed that the deceased wife
was extremely unhappy and complained of incessant cruelty and that they had also
seen injury marks on her person. They referred to the statements made to them
personally and not to third parties. Her letters beseeched the witnesses for their help in
order to save herself from committing suicide. It was held that such evidence is
admissible and not hit by the rule of hearsay.17 The father of the accused made a
statement to the Sarpanch that his son had informed him that the deceased had died
after consuming pesticide. The medical report disclosed a different cause of death.
The statement of the father of the accused was held to be not admissible.18
The court has jurisdiction to order examination of an overseas witness by means of a
live-television link.19

[s 60.2.1] Rationale behind exclusion of hearsay.—
Derivative or second-hand evidence is excluded owing to its inﬁrmity as compared with
its original source. Thus, where a witness told a material fact to another but himself
resolved from it in the witness box, narration of the other was rejected as hearsay.20

[s 60.2.2] Select Committee report.—
The Select Committee in their Report observed: This provision taken in connection with
the provisions of relevancy contained in Chapter II will, we hope, set the whole doctrine
of hearsay in a perfectly plain light, for their joint effect is that:—(1) the sayings and
doings of third persons are, as a rule, irrelevant, so that no proof of them can be
admitted; (2) in some excepted cases they are relevant; (3) every act done or word
spoken which is relevant on any ground must (if proved by oral evidence) be proved by
someone who saw it with his own eyes or heard it with his own ears.

[s 60.2.3] Written or newspaper information.—
A written information is not evidence. If it is desired to make the matter contained in it
evidence, a person who can directly testify to such matter must be produced.21 A news
item without any further proof of what had actually happened through witnesses is of
no value. It is at best a second-hand secondary evidence. Such news item cannot be
said to prove itself although it may be taken into account with other evidence if the
other evidence is forcible.22

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 60.2.4] Statements in public documents.—
Statements in Acts of Parliament, oﬃcial books and registers, can be proved by the
production of the document and it is not necessary to produce before the court the
draftsmen of the document. Lord Ellenborough observed23:
Public Acts of Parliament are binding upon every subject, because every subject is, in
the judgment of law, privy to the making of them, and, therefore, supposed to know
them.
Similarly, the Calcutta High Court observed:24 The rule of hearsay may not stand in the
way of proving public documents because once it is proved that the documents are
oﬃcial records or oﬃcial correspondence, the court has to raise the presumption under
section 114.

[s 60.2.5] Computerised information.—
"One of the great revolutions of our generation has been brought about by computer
use. Today a great deal of information is processed and stored by computers.
Computer printouts containing factual statements fall foul, however, of the hearsay
prohibition. But, as Steyn J has observed in R v Minors25 if 'computer output cannot
relatively readily be used as evidence in criminal cases, much crime … will in practice be
immune from prosecution."'26 The court held in this case that a computer record was
hearsay and, therefore, was not relevant all by itself. Either the person feeding the
information must appear in person to testify to his sources of information or it must be
proved that the supplier of information was unavailable for one of the reasons
recognised by the law of evidence for admitting absentee statements or cannot
reasonably be expected to have any recollection of the matter. This decision has been
described as logically sound. "If it were otherwise, all hearsay will become admissible
provided it has been entered into a computer. For instance, it would be admissible for
the prosecution to adduce evidence of what witnesses told the police provided that the
police entered the witnesses' statements into a word processor."27

[s 60.3] Opinions expressed in treatises—
[Proviso 1].—The ﬁrst proviso is a departure from the rule of English law, under which
medical and other treatises are not admissible, whether the author is alive or not. Any
scientiﬁc textbook commonly offered for sale is admissible in evidence under the
circumstances mentioned in the proviso. Section 45 refers to the evidence of expert
witnesses who may be examined in court. Section 38 refers to books on law.
The quality of the literary work which can be relied upon was thus explained by Kirpal J
of the Supreme Court:28
Every article published or a book written cannot ipso facto be regarded as conclusive or
worthy of acceptance. What is stated therein may only be a view of the author and may not
be based on a data which is scientiﬁcally collected from a reliable source.

[s 60.4] Production of material thing may be required—
[Proviso 2].—This proviso enables the court to require the production of a material thing
for its inspection. Under section 165 the court has power to direct the production of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
any document or thing in order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts.

7 Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes,Vol II, 889, fn 7.
8 Hylife v Murray, (1740) 2 All 58 at 60 : 26 ER 433, 434.
9 Lord Melvillie's case, (1806) 29 St. Tr. 549 at p 740 : Taylor on Evidence, 1st Edn, p 94; 12th

Edn, p 899; Starkie on Evidence, 4th Edn, p 172; Kenny, Outlines of Criminal Law, 19th Edn, p 482;
Wigmore on Evidence, 3rd Edn, sections 685, 726, 728, 729, 1280.
10 See Phipson on Evidence, 10th Edn, section 1528. The quotation is from judgment of Smith J

at p 852 in Atherton v Jackson Corio Meat Packing, Supreme Court of Victoria, Australia, (1967)
UR 850. Achutananda Baidya v Prafullya Kumar Gayen, AIR 1997 SC 2077 (SC) : (1997) 5 SCC 76 ,
witnesses saying that they had heard talks between the parties but not that they had seen any
agreement being made, was held to be not direct evidence.
11 Birdichand Sarda v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 Cr LJ

1738 .
12 Lakhan v State of MP, (2010) 8 SCC 514 : (2010) 8 SCC 514 .
13 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 570, p 363.
14 Stephen's Introduction.
15 See Shard Bircichand Sarda v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1938 ,

evidence of witnesses who spoke from personal knowledge of the mental state of the deceased
housewife was allowed, but not their opinion as to her nature etc. Muni Lal Gupta v State, 1988
Cr LJ 627 (Del), evidence of what the witness heard on the spot the accused saying to his wife,
held direct. Satish Chandra v State of UP, AIR 1986 SC 313 : 1985 Supp SCC 596 : 1985 Cr LJ
1921 , the fact that after ﬁling the FIR at the instance of the deceased's companion, the witness
went to the spot and heard people talk the same thing as was scribed in the FIR was held to be
not a direct evidence.
16 Best, 12th Edn, sections 493, 494, pp 415, 416. See Sharad Birdichand Sarda v State of

Maharashtra, AIR 1984 SC 1622 : 1984 Cr LJ 1738 : (1984) 4 SCC 116 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 487 ,
where the evidence of a person who was never mentioned by the deceased housewife in her
letters, nor she had written any letter to him, but who heard her tales of woe from other only, was
rejected. Munir Ad. v State of Rajasthan, 1989 Cr LJ 845 : AIR 1989 SC 705 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC
377 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 455 , living person to give evidence by personal appearance unless
exempted by lower court order.
17

State of Maharashtra v Vasant Shankar Mhasane, 1993 Cr LJ 1134 (Bom); Mukul Rani

Varshnei v DDA, (1995) 6 SCC 120 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 1049 , rejection of hearsay evidence, a
witness who could have been called but not called, fatal to the prosecution case.
18 State of AP v Patnam Anandam, AIR 2005 SC 764 : (2005) 9 SCC 237 : 2005 Cr LJ 894 ; Ram

Kishan v State of UP, AIR 2004 SC 4678 : (2005) 2 SCC 736 : 2004 Cr LJ 4236 , evidence of
investigating oﬃcer based on the evidence of another witness recorded u/s 161, CrPC, notadmissible.
19 Garcin v Amerindo Investment Advisors, (1991) 1 WLR 1140 .
20 Yasin Gulam Haider v State of Maharashtra, (1979) 4 SCC 600 : AIR 1980 SC 878 .
21 Mi Hauk v King Emperor, (1907) 4 LBR 121; Lal Singh v The Crown, (1924) 5 Lah 396.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
22 SN Balakrishna v Fernandez, AIR 1969 SC 1201 : 1969(3) SCC 238 ; Luxmi Raj Shetty v State

of TN, AIR 1988 SC 1274 : 1988 Cr LJ 1783 ; Ramesh v UOI, AIR 1988 SC 775 : (1988) 1 SCC 668
: 1988 SCC (Cri) 266 , newspaper report of an interview with the author of a book (Tamas). See
also under section 63.
23 R v Sutton, (1816) 4 MNS 532.
24 Octanious Steel Co v Enlegram Tea Co, AIR 1980 Cal 83 , in this case certain papers were

produced from the custody of CBI which contained communications between RBI and Controller
of Capital Issue (CCI, now replaced by SEBI). The information was necessary for ascertaining
the value of the property of a sterling company. The court relied upon Kanwar Lal Gupta v
Amarnath Chawla, AIR 1975 SC 308 : (1975) 3 SCC 646 .
25 R v Minors, (1989) 2 All ER 208 at 210.
26 See comment by AAS Zuckerman in 1989 All ER Annual Review, 140.
27 Ibid at p 141.
28 Hashamatullah v State of MP, (1996) 4 SCC 391 at 401 : AIR 1996 SC 2076 : (1996) Supp 2

SCR 755.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 61] Proof of contents of documents.—
The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary
evidence.

COMMENT
Documentary evidence means all documents produced for the inspection of the court
(section 3). Documents are of two kinds: public and private. Section 74 gives a list of
documents which are regarded as public documents. All other documents are private.
The production of documents in courts is regulated by the Code of Civil Procedure and
the Code of Criminal Procedure.

[s 61.1] Principle.—
The contents of documents must be proved either by the production of the document
which is called primary evidence, or by copies or oral accounts of the contents, which
are called secondary evidence. Where there is documentary evidence oral evidence is
not entitled to any weight.1
Where a document was not required to be registered, it was admissible in evidence,
even though unregistered.2
An ex parte aﬃdavit without affording an opportunity to the other party to test the
veracity of its contents by cross-examination, cannot be a proof of its contents.3 Where
the executant of a document admitted its execution, the same could be received in
evidence.4 Where the execution of a promissory note was denied, it was held that proof
would be needed through the scribe and also that of an expert as to the thumb
impression.5 Where the truth of the facts stated in a document is in issue, the mere
proof of the handwriting and execution of the document would not furnish evidence of
the truth of the facts stated in the document or its contents. The truth or otherwise of
the facts or contents so stated would have to be proved by admissible evidence, i.e. by
the evidence of persons who can vouchsafe for the truth of the facts in issue.6
Primary evidence is evidence which the law requires to be given ﬁrst. Secondary
evidence is evidence which may be given in the absence of the better evidence which
the law requires to be given ﬁrst, when a proper explanation is given of the absence of
that better record. Primary evidence is deﬁned in section 62 and secondary evidence in
section 63. Certiﬁed copy of a written statement has been held to be admissible under
section 63(1).7
Mere marking of an exhibit does not dispense with the proof of document.8

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 61.2] Admissibility of documents.— Generalia specialibus non derogant.—
Where there is a speciﬁc provision covering the admissibility of a document, it is not
open to the court to call into aid other general provisions in order to make a particular
document admissible. If a judgment is not admissible as not falling within the ambit of
sections 40–42, it must fulﬁl the conditions of section 43 otherwise it cannot be
relevant under section 13 of the Evidence Act. The words "some other provision of this
Act" cannot cover section 13 because this section does not deal with judgments at all.
Therefore, section 13 cannot be used to aid the admissibility of a judgment as coming
under the provisions of section 43. A judgment in rem, like judgments passed in
probate, insolvency, matrimonial or guardianship or other similar proceedings, is
admissible in all cases whether such judgments are inter partes or not. But a judgment
in personam which is not inter partes is inadmissible in evidence except for the limited
purpose of proving as to who the parties were and what was the decree passed and the
properties which were the subject-matter of the suit. Therefore, the recitals in a
judgment, like ﬁnding given in appreciation of evidence made or arguments or
genealogies referred to in the judgment, would be wholly inadmissible in a case where
neither the plaintiffs nor the defendants were parties.9 A document produced by the
Electricity Board was regarded as one produced by an organised establishment and
therefore enjoying the presumption that the Board must have kept its documents in
regular course. The allegation of fabrication was held to be not tenable in the absence
of any supporting evidence.10
Where none of the documents on record was self-explanatory, nor explained by any
competent witness on either side, it was not open to the special court to come up with
its own explanations and decide the suit on the basic of its own inference based on
assumed explanations, especially when the inferences ran contrary to the oral evidence
of a witness.11
A demand notice was held to be not admissible in evidence because they were
photocopies of typed documents without signature of any advocate who might have
issued it. Also, no evidence was produced to show either the despatch or receipt of the
notice.12

1 Murarka Properties Pvt Ltd v Beharilal Murarka, AIR 1978 SC 300 : 1978(1) SCC 109 .
2 Purnabashi Mishra v Raj Kumari Mishra, AIR 1995 Ori 284 .
3 Kripa Shankar v Gurudas, AIR 1995 SC 2152 .
4 DB Thakur v State of Gujarat, 1995 Cr LJ 3751 (Guj).
5 PM Veeravu v K Moiudeen, 1996 AIHC 3847 (Ker); Shail Kumari v Saraswati Devi, AIR 2002 NOC

167 (Del), questions of and objections to admissibility of documents or any other evidence
should be decided before the case is put up for ﬁnal arguments. The order of the trial judge that
the matter of admissibility would be decided along with the ﬁnal arguments was held to be not
proper. Mulji Mehta and Sons v C Mohan Krishna, AIR 1997 AP 153 , under stamp duty,
admissibility of unstamped assignment of promissory note.
6 Ramji Dayawala & Sons Pvt Ltd v Invest Import, AIR 1981 SC 2085 : (1981) 1 SCR 899 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
7 Raman Pillai v Kumaran Parameswaran, AIR 2002 Ker 133 . The court noted that this was a

common practice in suits and distinguished the case from the decision to Kannu Asan v Trav
Forward Bank Ltd, 1956 Ker LT 203 .
8 Somappa v Mahadevappa, 2016 AIR CC 929, para 15 : 2016 (2) KCCR 1389 (Kar).
9 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 3 SCC 118 ; Pammi v Govt of

MP, 1998 Cr LJ 1617 : AIR 1998 SC 1185 : (1998) 2 SCC 700 , a copy of the deposition of a
witness in another case was relied upon to disbelieve the presence of an eyewitness at the
place of occurrence in the present case. The person whose deposition was relied on was not
examined. It was held that this was not proper for the purpose of disbelieving an eyewitness in
the present case. R Venkatakrishnan v CBI, AIR 2010 SC 1812 : (2009) 11 SCC 737 , the Reserve
Bank constituted a committee for the limited purpose of inquiring into a securities scam. It was
held to be not a court but merely a fact ﬁnding authority. It did not render any decision. The
contents of its report could not have been taken into without formal proof.
10 Umiya Glass Industries v MPSEB, AIR 2006 MP 105 .
11 Standard Chartered Bank v Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd, (2006) 6 SCC 94 : AIR 2006

SC 3626 .
12 Bank of Baroda v Shri Moti Industries, AIR 2008 Bom 201 . The plaintiff bank had not ﬁled

extracts of the bank account, nor any other document from which amount due could be
ascertained, computerised extracts, though available, were not produced.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 62] Primary evidence.—
Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court.
Explanation 1.—Where a document is executed in several parts,[s 62.1] each part is
primary evidence of the document.
Where a document is executed in counterpart, [s 62.2] each counterpart being executed
by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against
the parties executing it.
Explanation 2.—Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process,[s
62.3] as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of

the contents of the rest; but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are
not primary evidence of the contents of the original.
ILLUSTRATION
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at
one time from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents
of any other, but no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.

COMMENT
This section deﬁnes the meaning of primary evidence which means the document itself
produced for the inspection of the court. Where a document is executed in several
parts, each part is primary evidence of the document. Where a document is executed in
counterpart, each counterpart is primary evidence, as against the party executing it.
Where a number of documents are made by printing, lithography, or photography, each
is primary evidence of the contents of the rest. Where they are copies of a common
original they are not primary evidence of the contents of the original. Two wills in
identical language were prepared by the process of typing in which the second copy
was obtained by carbon impression. Both were duly executed and attested. Both were
held to be original and not one a copy of the other. The fact that the testator inserted a
remark on one of them "true copy" would not alter their character.13
Primary evidence is the evidence which the law requires to be given ﬁrst.

[s 62.1] "Document is executed in several parts".—
Sometimes each party to a transaction wishes for the sake of convenience to have a
complete document in his own possession. To effect this, the document is written out
as many times over as there are parties, and each document is executed, i.e., signed or
sealed, as the case may be, by all the parties. Any one of them may be produced as
primary evidence of the contents of the document. The duplicates of partition deed

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
executed and registered along with it whereby properties are created in favour of
several persons are to be treated as original itself having the same operation and effect
as that of the other.14

[s 62.2] "Document is executed in counterpart" [Explanation 1].—
Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart being executed by one
or some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties
executing it, and secondary evidence as against other parties (see section 63, clause
4).
A document was executed in two parts. The plaintiff was left with the carbon copy
which was executed in the very same process but was in fact a counterpart of the
original. It was held that the carbon copy was to be regarded as a primary evidence
under the section and produced as such. The party against whose interest the
document was sought to be produced could challenge its genuineness or disprove the
same.15

[s 62.3] One uniform process [Explanation 2].—
Where a carbon copy was made by one uniform process of the certiﬁcate of a doctor
(as to the condition of a rape victim) given in the performance of professional duty, it
was held to be a primary evidence within the meaning of the Explanation 2.16
A police station diary contained duplicate pages. A carbon copy was prepared by the
same process by which the ﬁrst copy was prepared. Each was held to be the primary
evidence of the contents of the rest.17
The accused was charged for allegedly giving fake visa after charging money, it was
pleaded on behalf of the accused that he is entitled to discharge as the document of
visa was a photocopy and thus secondary evidence. It was held by Delhi High Court
that in a given case where photocopy is used as the primary offending article, the same
would be a primary evidence for the purposes of trial of the said case.18

[s 62.4] Application for grant of probate.—
Section 276 of the Succession Act, 1925 requires that an application for probate or
letters of administration should be made with the "will" annexed. Since this does not
necessarily mean the "original will", a copy certiﬁed by the sub-registrar was allowed to
be annexed.19

[s 62.5] Video evidence.—
The provision of copies, though the norm, is not an absolute entitlement of the defence,
and it is not appropriate to draw a line between entitlement to copies as against
facilities for and conditions of inspection. There is at most a strong presumption in
favour of provision to the defence in good time of copies of all capable exhibits, which
was for the prosecution to displace. That was especially so where the exhibits were an
important part of the prosecution case and were likely to warrant close examination to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
enable the defence to prepare properly for trial. Furthermore, although Article 6 of the
Convention referred only to the defendant's and not the prosecutor's right to a fair
hearing, the notion demanded some consideration as to whether it could be achieved
whilst nevertheless paying proper regard to the public interest in prosecuting serious
offenders to conviction. It would be a matter for the trial judge, at an early stage after
committal, to determine whether in the particular circumstances of each case a fair
hearing could be achieved by the prosecution permitting the defence to inspect
originals or copies of capable exhibits rather than providing it with copies. It could not
be said, in the light of the present statutory and common law regime governing the
prosecution of criminal offences, that the CPS's refusal to provide copies of the tapes
and its offer to arrange inspection were unlawful as a matter of principle. Protection of
the safety and future usefulness of undercover police oﬃcers was clearly a valid
consideration in the making of such a decision. There was an onus on the CPS to
justify its departure from the norm, but whether it could do so was a task for the trial
judge and not for the High Court on an application for judicial review. It followed that
the CPS's stance had not been irrational, unlawful or contrary to Article 6. and,
accordingly, the application was dismissed.20

[s 62.5.1] CCTV footage.—
The court has the power to view CCTV footage and video recordings, be it primary or
legally admissible secondary evidence, in the presence of the accused for satisfying
itself as to whether the individual seen in the footage is the accused in the dock.21

13 Kamala Rajamanikham v Sushila Thakur Das, AIR 1983 All 90 .
14 State Bank of Travancore v Velayudhan Pillai Bhaskaran Nair, AIR 1996 Ker 32 .
15 Bhagwanji and Kalyanji v Punjabhai Hajabhai Rathod, AIR 2007 Guj 88 .
16 Prithi Chand v State of HP, AIR 1989 SC 702 : 1989 Cr LJ 841 .
17 Rajesh Rai v State of Sikkim, 2002 Cr LJ 1385 (Sik).
18 Nakul Kohli v State, 2010 Cr LJ 4536 (Delhi).
19 Rajrani Sehgal v Parshottam Lal (Dr), AIR 1992 Del 134 .
20 The court distinguished R v Central Criminal Court, ex parte Behbehani, (1994) Crimes LR

352.
21 K Ramajayam v Inspector of Police, Chennai, 2016 Cr LJ 1542 , para 8 (Mad-DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 63] Secondary evidence.—
Secondary evidence means and includes—
(1) certiﬁed copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves

ensure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has

himself seen it.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the

two have not been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the
original.
(b) A copy, compared with a copy of a letter, made by a copying machine is

secondary evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy
made by the copying machine was made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original is

secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of
the original, although the copy from which it was transcribed was compared with
the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral

account of a photograph or machine copy of the original, is secondary evidence
of the original.

COMMENT
This section describes what constitutes "secondary evidence". "Secondary evidence",
evidence which may be given under certain circumstances in the absence of that better
evidence which the law requires to be given ﬁrst.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Secondary evidence means and includes—
(1) certiﬁed copies;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes, and copies compared

with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document by a person who has seen it.

Clauses 1 to 3 deal with copies of documents. Where a copy of a document is admitted
in evidence in the trial court without objection, its admissibility cannot be challenged in
the Appeal Court. Because omission to object to its admission implies that it is a true
copy and, therefore, it is not open to the Appeal Court to say whether the copy was
properly compared with the original or not.22

[s 63.1] Certiﬁed copies—
[Clause 1].—Section 76 deﬁnes the expression "certiﬁed copies". See also sections 77,
78, 79 and 86.
The correctness of certiﬁed copies will be presumed under section 79; but that of other
copies will have to be proved. This proof may be afforded by calling a witness who can
swear that he has compared the copy tendered in evidence with the original or with
what some other person read as the contents of the original and that such is correct.23
Certiﬁed copies of money lenders licences are admissible in evidence.24
Certiﬁed copies of sale deeds were held to be admissible as secondary evidence. The
court, however, said that they could not be relied upon unless the vendor or vendee was
examined to prove the consideration for the transaction and other circumstances, such
as nearness to land.25

[s 63.2] Copies made by mechanical process—
[Clause 2].—Reading clause 2 and illustrations (b) and (c) together it will appear that a
copy of a copy, i.e. a copy, transcribed from, and compared with, a copy, is inadmissible
unless the copy with which it was compared was a copy made by some mechanical
process which in itself ensures the accuracy of such copy. See Illustration (b).
Copies of copies kept in a registration oﬃce, when signed and sealed by the registering
oﬃcer, are admissible for the purpose of proving the contents of the originals (section
57(5), Act XVI of 1908). Letter-process copies and photographs of writings are
secondary evidence (vide Illustration (a)). Photostatic copies of document should be
accepted in evidence only after examining original records.26 Photostatic copy of the
power of attorney executed by competent authority and authenticated by a notary
public and proved from original is admissible in evidence.27 In absence of any evidence
that the originals were delivered to the addressee, the copy of the letters carry little
evidentiary value.28
A photostat copy of a rent note which was proved to be the photostat of the originals,
though not compared with the original, was held to be admissible.29

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
While it is true that the xerox copy of a certiﬁcate may not be evidence by itself
especially when the respondent producing the same had stated that the original was
with him, but had chosen not to produce the same, yet the document was allowed to be
marked at the trial. Strict rules of evidence, it is fairly well-settled, are not applicable to
the proceedings before the Labour Court. That being so, it was held that the admission
of the xerox copy of the certiﬁcate without any objection from the opposite party could
not be faulted at that belated stage.30

[s 63.3] Copies made from original—
[Clause 3].—Copies made from the original or copies compared with the original are
admissible as secondary evidence. A copy of a copy, when compared with the original,
would be receivable as secondary evidence of the original [Illustration (b)].
Illustration (c) lays down in express language that "a copy transcribed from a copy, but
afterwards compared with the original, is secondary evidence; but a copy not so
compared is not secondary evidence of the original, although the copy from which it
was transcribed was compared with the original". An entry in a deed-writer's register
which contains all the essential particulars contained in the document itself and is also
signed or thumb-marked by the person executing the document amounts to a copy and
is admissible in evidence.31 A copy of a certiﬁed copy of a document, which has not
been compared with the original, cannot be admitted in evidence, such a copy being
neither primary nor secondary evidence of the contents of the original.32
Documents which are merely copies of copies, the originals not having been
satisfactorily accounted for, are inadmissible in evidence and must be rejected.33
An abstract translation or a complete translation of a document is not "copy made from
and compared with the original" within the meaning of this clause.34
True copy of the document incorporating facts of amicable partition, supplied from the
oﬃce of Sub-Registrar bearing his seal and signature can be relied upon for its
contents.35 Newspaper reports, advertisements or messages are not admissible in
evidence unless the original manuscripts are produced or they are proved by the person
concerned.36
A draft of a document cannot be treated as secondary evidence;37 but the Kerala High
Court has held that a draft can be accepted in evidence only if there is proof that the
original has been prepared without any corrections and that it is exactly a true copy of
the draft.38 The Allahabad High Court has similarly held that section 63 is not
exhaustive of all types of secondary evidence. It, therefore, allowed the draft notice
from which the ﬁnal notice was prepared to be produced as secondary evidence.39 The
statement as to the contents of a document by a witness, who has not himself read the
document, is not secondary evidence of the contents of the document.40
A photograph is a copy prepared from the negative, the original document. Hence
where neither the original was produced nor the photographer was examined, the eyewitnesses were not allowed to be contradicted by photographs of the happening.41
In a criminal proceeding for contempt of court, the contemnor was alleged to have
made a speech calculated to scandalise judiciary in general and the order restraining
the bandh in particular. The petitioner adduced evidence of xerox copies of newspapers
and the tape of the edited version of his speech telecast on TV No primary evidence of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the speech was produced. It was held that a charge under section 2(c) of the Contempt
of Courts Act, 1971 could not be framed on the basis of such evidence.42

[s 63.4] Counterparts—
[Clause 4].—When a document is executed in counterpart, each party signing only the
part by which he is bound, each counterpart is the best evidence against the party
signing it and his privies. As to the other party it is only secondary evidence. A
landlord's counterfoil was held to be not relevant for the purpose of showing that the
arrangement was a month-to-month tenancy.43

[s 63.5] Oral statements—
[Clause 5].— But a written statement of the contents of a copy of a document, the
original of which the person making the statement has not seen, cannot be accepted
as secondary evidence.44 This clause does not necessarily mean that a witness who is
called to give evidence as to a lost document must have himself read the document.
He would be a competent witness if, having physically seen the document, the contents
thereof had been read out or explained to him.45 Secondary evidence of a document
which is lost or diﬃcult to trace can be adduced in two ways; (1) by oral evidence of
persons who were present when the document was executed; (2) by a certiﬁed copy of
the original document.46 Copies of registered documents are admissible as secondary
evidence where the person in whose custody the original should be swears that they
are not with him though there is no evidence as to the loss or otherwise of the
original.47 The original dying declaration was lost. A head constable who maintained a
copy testiﬁed to its accuracy. This was allowed as corroborative evidence.48 A taped
conversation not compared with the voice was not allowed to be used as evidence.49
The newspaper report of an interview with the author of a book is not admissible to
prove the nature and contents of the book (on the basis of which Tamas serial was
produced) but the court agreed to look at it in view of the urgency of deciding the case
on a matter of public importance.50 Letters written by a police oﬃcer to his
administrative superior were not allowed to be proved. The writer of the letters should
have appeared in person so as to enable the opposite party to cross-examine him as to
the contents of the letter.51
Where the report of accidental electrocution was based on the information given by
another person who was not examined nor original report was produced, no reliance
could be placed on the version of that person and the said report.52
A witness can be shown xerox copy of a document which is already on record. The
statements of the witness as to the document would not mean the admission of the
document in evidence.53

[s 63.6] Repeat application for permitting secondary evidence.—
An application was made by the plaintiff bank for permission for ﬁling photocopy of the
"acknowledgement of debt" as the original happened to be misplaced. The application
was dismissed without hearing the plaintiff's contention. Neither party had argued the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
matter, nor was it decided by the court. It was held that the ﬁling of another application
for producing secondary evidence was not barred by res judicata.54

[s 63.7] List not exhaustive.—
The Allahabad High Court55 held that section 63 is not exhaustive of all the categories
of secondary evidence. The court allowed evidence of draft notes from which the ﬁnal
notice was prepared. The court said:
The scope of Sec. 63 is not restricted to its ﬁve clauses but leaves enough scope for
cases, which do not strictly fall within any of those enumerated therein. The term
'includes' leaves some scope for a case like the present one. The court must, however,
be satisﬁed that the document sought to be introduced as secondary evidence is a
faithful and accurate reproduction or draft of the ﬁnal document whose copy it
purports to be.

[s 63.8] A document insuﬃciently stamped.—
A document insuﬃciently stamped can be admitted in evidence on payment of penal
stamp duty.56

[s 63.8.1] Secondary evidence of document insuﬃciently stamped, unregistered
or unstamped.—
An application seeking permission for producing secondary evidence was not allowed
because the document was unstamped and was also not registered and, therefore, the
original itself would not have been admissible. This approach was held to be not
justiﬁed. It was premature for the trial court to go into that question at the application
stage.57

[s 63.9] Recorded tape.—
Where the cassette was carefully sealed and kept in judicial custody, voice of the
parties were clearly audible and possibility of tampering was ruled out, the taped
statements were admissible.58
In has been said that there is "no reason in principle why the recording in some
permanent or semi-permanent manner of human voice (or other sounds) which are
relevant to the issue to be determined, provided that it furnishes information, cannot be
a document."59 In reference to the reception into evidence of models, maps, diagrams
and photos, it is observed in Wigmore60 "that for evidentiary purposes they are nothing
except so far as they have a human being's credit to support them. Then they become
media of communication as a superior substitute for words." An Australian Court
observed:61 If it should be established by oral evidence that there was a mechanical
electronic recorder in operation at a material time which was capable of and did record
accurately sounds as they occurred, and other oral evidence of identiﬁcation, and noninterference, it appears that the material containing such recording is properly
admissible in evidence. There is no distinction in principle from the reception into
evidence of a photograph of a street accident taken at the time of its occurrence which
is sworn to by an eye-witness as being a true representation of the scene at the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
relevant time. In that case light waves, and in the case of a recording, sound waves,
have been captured and preserved by scientiﬁc means.
These principles have been followed by the Supreme Court of India. Tape recorded
conversations came before the Supreme Court mostly in cases of oﬃcials in receiving
or attempting to receive bribes. In RM Malkani v State of Maharashtra,62 The accused
was the coroner of Bombay. A doctor operated upon a patient who afterwards died.
Being a post-operation death, it became the subject of post-mortem and inquest. The
coroner persuaded the doctor to pay him a sum of money if he wanted the report to be
favourable to him. The payment was arranged to be made through another doctor and
the date and timing of the ﬁnal meeting was to be settled by telephone call from the
house of the other doctor. The Police Commissioner was called with the tape recording
mechanism. This was connected to the doctor's telephone and thus the most
incriminating conversation was recorded in the presence of the police oﬃcer. The
Bombay High Court held that the testimony of two doctors required corroboration and
that the tape amply corroborated it. This decision was upheld by the Supreme Court.
Ray J (afterwards CJ) looked into the previous authorities.
This Court in N Sri Rama Reddy v VV Giri,63 Yusufalli Esmail Nagree v State of
Maharashtra,64 and Pratap Singh v State of Punjab,65 accepted conversion of dialogue
recorded on tape-recording machine as admissible evidence. In Nagree's case,66 the
conversation was between Nagree and Sheikh Nagree and Nagree was accused of
offering bribe to Sheikh.
In the Presidential Election case questions were put to a witness that he had tried to
dissuade the petitioner from ﬁling an election petition. The petitioner had recorded on
tape the conversation that took place between the petitioner and the witness. The
Court admitted the recording to contradict the witness. The tape itself becomes the
primary and direct evidence of what has been said and recorded.67 "Tape recorded
conversation is admissible provided, ﬁrst, the conversation is relevant to the matters in
issue; secondly, there should be identiﬁcation of the voice; and thirdly, the accuracy of
the tape recorded conversation is proved by eliminating the possibility of erasing the
tape record. A contemporaneous tape record of a relevant conversation is a relevant
fact and is relevant under section 8 of the Act. It is also res gestae (part of the same
transaction) and therefore, relevant under section 6. It is also comparable to a
photograph of a relevant incident and is, therefore, a relevant fact under section 7 of
the Act."68
In another case before the Supreme Court, the question was whether the tenant had
granted a sub-tenancy. The ﬁnding of the Rent Controller was that there was subtenancy based upon a tape recorded conversation between the tenant and the husband
of the landlady. The court said that the tape recorded conversation could be used in
corroborating the deposition in the court by one of the parties. In the absence of any
such deposition, the tape was not allowed to be used as evidence in itself.69 The
Supreme Court subsequently tightened the rule to this extent that it must be shown
that the tape was kept in proper custody. In that case the Deputy Commissioner had
left the tape with the stenographer. That was held to be suﬃcient to destroy its
authenticity.70 How the cassette came into existence has been held by the Supreme
Court to be an important consideration. The Court rejected the tape recorded evidence
of an election speech because the tape was prepared by a police oﬃcer who was not
able to explain why he had done so. The candidate had denied that the tape was in his
voice.71

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 63.10] Newspaper reports.—
In the words of the Supreme Court a newspaper report is a hearsay-secondary
evidence. It cannot be relied upon unless proved by evidence aliunde. Even where
nobody has opposed the report, the party citing the report would not be absolved of his
obligation to prove the truth of its contents. The court said: In the present case, no
evidence has been let in proof of the statement of facts contained in the newspaper
report. The absence of any denial by the maker of the statement, viz., the Minister, will
not absolve the applicant from discharging his obligation of proving the statement of
facts as appeared in the press report. The Minister in his counter-aﬃdavit had taken a
stand that the statements attributed to him based on the newspaper report are mere
hearsay and cannot in law be relied upon for the purpose of initiating such proceeding.
Therefore, in the absence of required legal proof, the court will not be justiﬁed in
issuing a suo motu notice for contempt of court. Moreover, the news item does not
spell out any reference to the case of corruption or its proceeding pending before the
Supreme Court. In the alleged contemptuous statement only the view of the reporter
was mentioned as if the Minister had been provoked about the proceedings of the case
before the Supreme Court. There is no reason much less compelling reason to issue
suo motu notice to the Minister for contempt of court.72
Where the death of a prisoner was alleged to be due to the negligence of jail authorities
and the information to that effect was collected wholly from newspaper items, the
court said that facts published by way of news could not ex facie be taken to be of such
authenticity which could warrant initiation of proceedings under Article 226.73
A PIL can be entertained on the basis of newspaper report if the Chief Justice or his
designate ﬁnds that the information reveals gross violation of fundamental rights
guaranteed under the Constitution.74

[s 63.11] Matters to be decided by the judge recording evidence.—
The matters of secondary evidence are to be decided by the judge who is recording
evidence. Objections to the secondary evidence have also to be decided by him. In the
case of evidence before a Commissioner, objections, if any, can only be recorded by
him. The decision has to be made only by the judge.75
Proof by secondary evidence has been allowed to provide relief to a party who is
genuinely unable to produce the original through no personal fault. The election
candidate in question was not able to produce the original certiﬁcate issued to her by
the Arya Samaj reaﬃrming her faith in the Hindu religion. It was lying with her uncle
who had lost it. She had a copy. The Supreme Court said that the refusal for production
of secondary evidence was not proper. The court must see that the secondary evidence
actually produced is authenticated by foundational evidence that the copy is a true
copy of the original.76

22 Chimnaji Govind Godbole v Dinkar Dhondev Godbole, (1886) 11 Bom 320; Lakshman v Amrit,

(1900) 24 Bom 591 : 2 Bom LR 386; Kishori Lal Goswami v Rakhal Das Banerjee, (1903) 31 Cal

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
155 ; Ram Lochan Misra v Pandit Harinath Misra, (1922) 1 Pat 606.
23 A copy of Municipal record not issued in accordance with the requirements of the Municipal

Act is not relevant. Ganesh Pd v Badri Pd, AIR 1980 All 361 . Certiﬁed copy of a registered deed
is provable, but not a copy which was prepared while the deed was presented for registration.
Kalyan Singh v Chhoti, AIR 1990 SC 396 ; 1990 ALR 155 : 1990(1) SCC 266 ; Land Acquisition
Oﬃcer v N Venkata Rao, AIR 1991 AP 31 , copies issued by sub-registrar, secondary evidence.
24 K Shivalingaiah v BV Chandrashekara Gowda, AIR 1993 Kant 29 : 1992 (2) Kar LJ 536 ; Bidhan

Paul v Paresh Chandra Ghose, AIR 2002 Gau 46 , a power of attorney registered with the subregistrar has been held to be not a public document. A certiﬁed copy of such record is
secondary evidence.
25 Kummari Veeraiah v State of AP, (1995) 4 SCC 136 . See also Gopinath Educational and

Welfare Society v Rajendra Singh Shekhawat, AIR 2016 Raj 106 , (para 12). Manda Laxmi Rajam v
Kanaparthi Laxmi Bai, AIR 2008 AP 255 , an unregistered and unstamped sale deed cannot be
admitted even as a secondary evidence. Sushila Devi v ADJ, AIR 2007 Raj 241 .
26 Govt of AP v Karri Chinna Venkata Reddy, AIR 1994 SC 591 : 1995 Supp (1) SCC 462 .
27 Northland Traders v Bank of Baroda, AIR 1994 All 381 .
28 J Patel & Co v National Federation of Industrial Co-op Ltd, AIR 1996 Cal 253 ; Ramesh Verma v

Sajesh Saxena, AIR 1998 MP 46 , on admissibility of photocopies. Rajasthan Golden Transport Co
v Amritlal, AIR 1998 Raj 153 , photocopy of an assessment order produced, neither any
opportunity was given to the witness to prove the original, nor there was anything to show that
the photocopy was made from the original, the order permitting photocopy to be produced was
held to be not proper.
29 Ratan Sharma (Smt) v Ambesedar Dry Cleaners, AIR 1997 Raj 75 .
30 Bhavnagar Municipal Corp v Jadeja Govubha Chhanubha, (2014) 16 SCC 130 , para 8 : AIR

2015 SC 609 .
31 Sant Ram v Ghasita Ram, (1956) 9 Pun 193.
32 Ram Prasad v Raghunandan Prasad, (1885) 7 All 738 , 743; Narasimham v Babu Rao, (1939)

Mad 333. Sattamma v Ch. Bhikshapati Goud, AIR 2010 AP 166 , in a suit for speciﬁc performance
of an agreement to sell, original document containing the agreement was lost. Permission was
granted for ﬁling a photocopy of the agreement attested by Notary as secondary evidence,
being covered by section 63(3), illustration (c).
33

Mahadeva Royal v Virabasava Royal, (1948) 50 Bom LR 638 PC; Badrunnisa Begum v

Mohamooda Begum, AIR 2001 AP 394 , a copy of a copy of a document not compared with the
original document was held to be not admissible in evidence. A decree based on such a copy of
a copy was held liable to be set aside.
34 Muhammad Suleman v Hari Ram, (1936) 21 Lah 363.
35 Monoranjan Paul v Narendra Kumar Paul, AIR 1994 Gau 64 .
36 Quamarul Islam v SK Kanta, AIR 1994 SC 1733 : 1994 Supp (3) SCC 5 .
37 Devi Chand v Har Kishan Das, (1954) 2 All 531 .
38 P Kunhammad v V Moosankutty, AIR 1972 Ker 76 .
39 Lachcho v Dwari Mal, AIR 1986 All 303 . See also Balbir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1987

SC 1053 : 1987 Cr LJ 853 : (1987) 1 SCC 533 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 193 , where a police report was
prepared on the basis of rough notes which were not produced, no importance given to the
report.
40 Dalu v Juhar Mal, (1951) 1 Raj 166 .
41 State of Gujarat v Bharat, 1991 Cr LJ 978 (Guj).
42 All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v LK Tripathi, AIR 2009 SC 1314 : (2009) 5 SCC

417 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
43 Idandas v Anant Ram Chandra, AIR 1982 SC 127 : 1982 (1) SCC 27 : (1982) 1 SCR 1197 ;

Minati Sen v Kalipada Ganguly, AIR 1997 Cal 386 , counterfoil of a rent payment receipt did not
show any sub-tenancy, even otherwise there was no proof of sub-tenancy.
44 Kanayala v Pyarabai, (1882) 7 Bom 139.
45 Mehi Lal v Ramji Das, (1924) 47 All 13 .
46 Veerappa v Md. Attavullah, (1951) Hyd 74.
47 Hutchegowda v Chenningegowda, (1952) Mys 49.
48 Aher Ram Goa v Gujarat, 1979 Cr LJ 1081 .
49 Joginder Kaur v Surjit Singh, AIR 1985 P&H 128.
50 Ramesh v UOI, AIR 1988 SC 912 : 1988 Cr LJ 936 : (1988) 1 SCC 668 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 266 .
51 Vinod Chaturvedi v State of MP, AIR 1984 SC 911 : 1984 Cr LJ 814 : (1984) 2 SCC 350 : 1984

SCC (Cri) 250 .
52 Asa Ram v MCD, AIR 1995 Del 164 .
53 Ahmedabad New Textile Mills v Rajubhai Dalechandbhai, AIR 1999 Guj 148 .
54 Ram Pal Singh v Syndicate Bank, AIR 2000 P&H 296 : (2000) 126 PLR 135 .
55 Lachcho v Dwari Mal, AIR 1986 All 303 , 306.
56 Kundan Mal v Nand Kishore, AIR 1994 Raj 1 .
57 Swaran Singh v Narinder Kaur, AIR 2002 P&H 40. A similar approach was adopted in Bihari

Lal v Ram Piari, (1999) 2 Punj LJ 213 and Sinnu v Pali, (1992) 1 Punj LR 378 : 1992 Punj LJ 74;
Mukhtiar Singh v Baint Singh, (1991) 1 Punj LR 15 : 1991 Punj LJ 143, a photocopy of the original
will be permitted as secondary evidence. The same view was taken in Raj Kumari v Shri Lal
Chand, (1994) 1 Punj LR 190 . The decision in Roman Catholic Mission v State of Madras, AIR
1966 SC 1457 : (1966) 3 SCR 283 was held to be not applicable at this stage.
58 KS Mohan v Sandhya Mohan, AIR 1993 Mad 59 .
59 Darling J in R v Daye, (1908) KB 333 and Humphreys J in R v Hill, (1945) KB 329 , at p 334.
60 Wigmore on Evidence, para 790 (3rd Edn 1940,Vol 3).
61 Holt, Ch of QS in Travers, (1958) SR (NSW) 87 at p 96 : reported, in Edwards, Cases on

Evidence in Australia, p 317 (1968). Also see Harry Parker Ltd v Mason, (1940) 5 KB 590 ; R v Mills
and Rose, (1952) 1 WLR 1152 : 42 Cr. App. R. 336 and R v Maqsood Ali, (1966) 1 QB 686 , in both
these cases tape-recorded statements were received in evidence.
62 RM Malkani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1973 SC 157 : (1973) 1 SCC 471 .
63 N Sri Rama Reddy v VV Giri (1970) 2 SCC 340 : (1971) 1 SCR 339 .
64 Yusufalli Esmail Nagree v State of Maharashtra, (1967) 3 SCR 720 : AIR 1968 SC 147 : (1968)

1 SCJ 51 .
65 Pratap Singh v State of Punjab,, AIR 1964 SC 72 : (1964) 4 SCR 733 .
66 Nagree's case, AIR 1968 SC 147 : (1967) 3 SCR 730 : (1968) 1 SCJ 51 .
67 Pratap Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 72 .
68 Ibid
69 Mahabir Prasad v Surinder Kaur, AIR 1982 SC 1043 : (1982) 2 SCC 258 . To the same effect,

State v Ravi, 2000 Cr LJ 1125 (Del).
70 Ram Singh v Col Ram Singh, (1985) Supp SCC 611 : AIR 1986 SC 3 .
71 Quammaral Islam v SK Kanta, AIR 1994 SC 1733 : 1994 Supp (3) SCC 5 .
72 SA Khan v Ch. Bhajan Lal, (1993) 3 SCC 151 : 1993 Cr LJ 1042 : AIR 1993 SC 1348 : (1993) 1

Serv LR 392. AV Amarnathan v HD Kumaraswamy, AIR 2007 NOC 1382 (Kar) : (2007) 3 AIR Kar R
150, contempt proceedings not entertained on the basis of mere paper publication.
73 Sudha Gupta v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 1742 (MP).
74 SP Anand v Registrar General, MP, AIR 2009 MP 1 (FB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
75 Indian Overseas Bank v Trioka Textiles Industries, AIR 2007 Bom 24 : 2007 AIHC 437 : (6)

Bom CR 85.
76 M Chandra v M Thangmuthu, AIR 2011 SC 146 : (2010) 9 SCC 712 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 64] Proof of documents by primary evidence.—
Documents must be proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter
mentioned.

COMMENT
[s 64.1] Principle.—
A written document can only be proved by the instrument itself. It is a general rule that
if a person wants to get at the contents of a written document the proper way is to
produce it if he can. "Where the contents of any document are in question, either as a
fact directly in issue or a subalternate principal fact, the document is the proper
evidence of its own contents. But where a written instrument or document of any
description is not a fact in issue, and is merely used as evidence to prove some fact,
independent proof aliunde is receivable. Thus although a receipt has been given for the
payment of money, proof of the fact of payment may be made, by any person who
witnessed it... So, although where the contents of a marriage register are in issue,
verbal or other evidence of those contents is not receivable, the fact of the marriage
may be proved by the independent evidence of a person who was present at it."77 Once
a document is properly admitted, the contents of that document are also admitted in
evidence, though those contents may not be conclusive evidence.78 By the mere ﬁling
of a document, its contents do not stand proved. A certiﬁcate issued by an expert
should be brought on record by examining him.79 Where the report of the Central
Forensic Science Laboratory expert was admitted in evidence without objection
regarding its mode of proof, the same could not be objected to at any later stage of the
case or in appeal.80 For proving the contents of a sale deed, the executant was not
examined, though proof of his signature was offered. The sale deed was not allowed to
be admitted.81 Where the witness merely identiﬁed the person who had allegedly
signed the document but did not state that it was signed in his presence, it would not
prove the contents of the document.82 No materials, which are not spoken to by
persons who are competent to speak about them and are subjected to crossexamination, can be relied upon. The executant of a document must be produced or his
aﬃdavit ﬁled.83
Mere admission of a document in evidence does not amount to its proof. Therefore, it
is the obligation of the court to decide the question of admissibility of a document in
secondary evidence before making endorsement thereon.84 It is the duty of the court to
examine whether the documents produced in the court or contents thereof have any
probative value.85
Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant, unless and until the
party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the contents of such document, or unless the genuineness of a document produced is
in question.86
The tape recorded conversation of wife was lodged as a proof of her mental disorder.
She was sitting in the court as a respondent. No effort was made to compare her voice
with the tape. The tape was not allowed to be used as evidence or for shaking her
credit in cross-examination.87 A deed of adoption was produced before the trial court
without any objection by the opposite party as to its mode of proof. Objections cannot
be raised in appeal.88
A matter of title was settled by a settlement which was entered into the revenue record.
A copy of the settlement was produced in evidence. The Court rejected it. The
settlement had to be proved either by its primary evidence which was the original
document containing the settlement or by its secondary evidence wherever
permissible. There was no permission in this case for production of a copy in
evidence.89
The Supreme Court observed in a case:
It is true that ordinarily if a party to an action does not object to a document being taken on
record and the same is marked as an exhibit, he is estopped and precluded from
questioning its admissibility at a later stage. But it is trite that a document becomes
inadmissible in evidence unless the author is examined as to contents and also subjected to
cross-examination.90

In the absence of original documents being produced, the plea that there was a
mistake in respect of some particulars in the copy was rejected.91

[s 64.2] Carbon copy.—
The carbon copy of a suicide note was sought to be produced as secondary evidence.
The original copy was with the opposite party and he failed to produce the same. The
suicide was not within the knowledge of the appellant prior to the receipt of carbon
copy. The court said that the provisions of sections 64, 65 were complied with. The
order of the court to allow the appellant to lead secondary evidence was proper.92

[s 64.3] Registered document preferred.—
When the probative value of documents is to be assessed, especially those dealing
with the creation of any interest in property or its transfer of a value exceeding Rs 100,
obviously documents which have been duly registered regardless of whether or not that
was legally mandatory, would score over others.93
The production of a registered sale deed is suﬃcient to prove it, unless its executor
denies its execution.94

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
77 Best, 12th Edn, section 223, p 209; Balbahadar Prasad v The Maharajah of Betia, (1887) 9 All

351 , 356; K Anjaneya Setty v KH Rangiah Setty, AIR 2002 Kant 387 , where a document is not
admissible for one reason or another, the court can decide at the ﬁnal hearing as to whether it
can be looked at for collateral purposes.
78 PC Purushothama v S Perumal, AIR 1972 SC 608 : 1972(1) SCC 9 .
79 Subhash Maruti Avasare v State of Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 631 : 2006 (4) Crimes 304

(SC).
80 Amarjit Singh v State (Delhi Admn), 1995 Cr LJ 1623 (Del), following Phool Kumar v Delhi

Admn, AIR 1975 SC 905 : 1975 Cr LJ 778 and overruling Heera Lal v State (Delhi), (1994) 2
Chand Cri C 300 (HC), Nizamuddin v The State, 1994 IV AD (Delhi) 50, Attar Singh v State (Delhi
Admn), 1994 III AD (Del) 626 and Islam v State (Delhi Admn.), 1994 III AD (Del) 1495.
81 Prakash Cotton Mills v M Commr, AIR 1982 Bom 387 .
82 Nandkishore Lalbhai Mehta v New Era Fabrics Pvt Ltd, (2015) 9 SCC 755 , para 40.
83 Ram Jawai v Shakuntala Devi, AIR 1993 Delhi 330 .
84 U Sree v U Srinivas, (2013) 2 SCC 114 . Also see, Joseph John Peter Sandy v Veronica Thomas

Rajkumar, (2013) 3 SCC 801 .
85 H Siddiqui v A Ramalingam, (2011) 4 SCC 240 .
86 Where there is documentary evidence, oral evidence is not entitled to any weight, Murarka

Properties Pvt Ltd v Beharilal Murarka, AIR 1978 SC 300 : 1978(1) SCC 109 .
87 Joginder Kaur v Surjit Singh, AIR 1985 P&H 128.
88 Amar Singh v Tej Ram, AIR 1982 P&H 382.
89 Butu Naik v Saraswati Devi, AIR 1998 Ori 119 . Sunil Kumar v Anguri Choudhari, AIR 2003 NOC

105 (MP) : 2002 AIHC 3869 , the document was neither photocopy, nor true copy of the original,
nor compared with the original, not a secondary evidence as deﬁned in section 63.
90 Malay Kumar Ganguly v Sukumar Mukherjee, AIR 2010 SC 1162 : (2009) 9 SCC 221 .
91 Shivanandam Vivekanand Babu v State of Maharashtra, (2005) 10 SCC 587 .
92 Mohit Batra v Balu, AIR 2007 DOC 74 P&H : (2006) 4 Ren CR (Civil) 452.
93 Maya Devi v Lalta Prasad, (2015) 5 SCC 588 , para 16.
94 Syed Basheer Malik v Jameela Begum, AIR 2016 NOC 395 (Kar).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 65] Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.
—
Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition or contents of a
document in the following cases:—
(a) When the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power— of the

person against whom the document is sought to be proved, or of any person
out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court, or of any person
legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 66, such person does not
produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to

be admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his
representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering

evidence of its contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own
default or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily moveable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;
(f) when the original is a document of which a certiﬁed copy is permitted by this

Act, or by any other law in force in 95[India], to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which

cannot conveniently be examined in Court and the fact to be proved is the
general result of the whole collection.
In cases (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the
document is admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In case (e) or (f), a certiﬁed copy of the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible.
In case (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents by
any person who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of
such documents.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
[s 65.1] Scope.—
This section enumerates the seven exceptional cases in which secondary evidence is
admissible. Under it secondary evidence may be given of the contents of a document in
civil as well as in criminal proceedings.
Secondary evidence of the contents of a document cannot be admitted without the
non-production of the original being ﬁrst accounted for in such manner as to bring it
within one or other of the cases provided for in the section.96 It is incumbent on the
person who tenders secondary evidence to show that it is admissible; the question of
admissibility is ordinarily for the court of ﬁrst instance.97 Secondary evidence cannot
be accepted unless suﬃcient reason is given for the non-production of the original.98
"Document" means a document admissible in evidence. If a document is inadmissible
in consequence of not being registered or not being properly stamped, secondary
evidence cannot be given of its existence.99 If the original document is inadmissible in
evidence owing to it being unstamped or unregistered, secondary evidence is
inadmissible. Secondary evidence cannot be given to establish a fact, proof whereof by
primary evidence is forbidden. Under no circumstances can secondary evidence be
admitted as a substitute for inadmissible primary evidence.
Where permission was sought for producing secondary evidence of certain receipts on
ground that the original receipts were lost, the court said that two things would have to
be proved: there must be evidence of the existence of original receipts and there must
be evidence of their loss. In this case, there was no evidence on record even of the
existence of the original receipts. The permission granted was held to be improper.100
Section 65 of the 1872 Act provide for permitting the parties to adduce secondary
evidence. However, such a course is subject to a large number of limitations. In a case
where the original documents are not produced at any time, nor has any factual
foundation been laid for giving secondary evidence, it is not permissible for the court to
allow a party to adduce secondary evidence. Thus, secondary evidence relating to the
contents of a document is inadmissible, until the non-production of the original is
accounted for, so as to bring it within one or other of the cases provided for in the
section. The secondary evidence must be authenticated by foundational evidence that
the alleged copy is in fact a true copy of the original. Mere admission of a document in
evidence does not amount to its proof. Therefore, the documentary evidence is
required to be proved in accordance with law. The Court has an obligation to decide the
question of admissibility of a document in secondary evidence before making
endorsement thereon. In this case, the main issue was that whether the power of
attorney had been executed by the respondent in favour of Defendant No. 2 enabling
him to alienate the suit property and even if there was such power of attorney whether
the same had been proved in accordance with law. The trial court decreed the suit
observing that as the parties had deposed that the original power of attorney was not
in their possession, the question of laying any further factual foundation could not
arise. It was held by Supreme Court that the trial court cannot proceed in such an
unwarranted manner for the reason that the respondent had merely admitted his
signature on the photocopy of the power of attorney and did not admit the contents
thereof. The court should bear in mind that admissibility of a document or contents
thereof may not necessarily lead to drawing any inference unless the contents thereof
have some probative value. It was further held that it is the duty of the court to examine
whether the documents produced in the court or contents thereof have any probative
value.101

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where a party comes into court resting his claim on a written title which the law
requires to be registered, he cannot, when he has failed to register, and is, in
consequence unable to use his title deed, turn round and say that he could prove his
title by secondary evidence. Therefore, the oral evidence of the terms of an
unregistered deed of mortgage, required by law to be registered, is inadmissible.102
Secondary evidence was allowed where the defendant did not deny the registered
deed.103 Where the defendant-petitioner sought to produce secondary evidence in
respect of certain documents without showing his entitlement to produce it, the trial
court committed no irregularity in rejecting his application.104

[s 65.1.1] Suit for permanent injunction.—
The plaintiff alleged that he was the bhumidhar owner of the land and in possession for
more than 12 years. The Court said that these were crucial facts which were essential
to prove ownership and possession. The certiﬁed copy of the sale deed which had
been ﬁled was admissible for that purpose. The plaintiff could not be non-suited for
non-compliance of O VI, rule 2, CPC105.
The section deals with the proof of the contents of documents tendered in evidence.

[s 65.2] Original in possession of opposite party—
[Clause (a)].— When the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power
of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved and when, after
notice mentioned in section 66, such person does not produce it, then, the secondary
evidence relating to these documents can be permitted.106 The document need not be
in the actual possession of the party; it is enough if it is in his power. A tenant alleged
that the original rent note was in the landlord's possession. He applied for leave for
production of a copy of the note. It was held that the rejection of his application
without giving him an opportunity to explain his justiﬁcation for permission for
production of secondary evidence was not proper.107
Where the original power of attorney was not produced by the defendant in whose
possession the same was and the xerox copy of the said power of attorney was
produced by the plaintiff in evidence and the signature and the contents of the said
xerox copy of the power of attorney were admitted by the defendant, there was no
question of proving the said document as required under the Evidence Act, 1872.108
This expression "not subject to" seems intended to include the case of a person not
legally bound to produce the document, who refuses to produce it.109

[s 65.2.1] "Legally bound to produce it."—
The wording of this clause has given rise to considerable doubt. Secondary evidence of
a document is admissible when the original appears to be in the possession of any
person legally bound to produce it. But if a person summoned to produce a document
objects to do so and his objection is upheld by the court, it seems equally clear that
such a document does not fall within the words of this section. It may be, however, that
the courts will admit secondary evidence in such a case upon the general principles of
the English law and the decisions, of the English Courts upon the subject.110 Under this
clause secondary evidence in the form of an authenticated copy of a document
becomes admissible if a person cannot be legally compelled to produce the original in
his possession and refuses to produce it.111

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The provisions of section 65 of the 1872 Act provide for permitting the parties to
adduce secondary evidence. However, such a course is subject to a large number of
limitations. In a case where the original documents are not produced at any time, nor
has any factual foundation been laid for giving secondary evidence, it is not
permissible for the court to allow a party to adduce secondary evidence. Thus,
secondary evidence relating to the contents of a document is inadmissible, until the
non-production of the original is accounted for, so as to bring it within one or other of
the cases provided for in the section. The secondary evidence must be authenticated
by foundational evidence that the alleged copy is in fact a true copy of the original.
Mere admission of a document in evidence does not amount to its proof. Therefore, the
documentary evidence is required to be proved in accordance with law. The Court has
an obligation to decide the question of admissibility of a document in secondary
evidence before making endorsement thereon.112
Where the existence of the mortgage deed was not speciﬁcally denied by the
mortgagee and therefore, it was not necessary for the plaintiff to call attesting
witnesses and the defendant (mortgagee) was refusing to ﬁle the original deed in the
court, it was held that the ﬁling of a certiﬁed copy of the deed by the plaintiff as
secondary evidence was a suﬃcient proof of the existence and execution of the
deed.113
The documents in question were admittedly photocopies. There was no possibility of
comparing them with the original as the same were with another person. Thus, the
requirement of section 65(a) was not satisﬁed. The Court did not accept them as
secondary evidence.114 The original arrangement between the landlord and tenant was
changed for reducing accommodation and rent. A new agreement was made to that
effect. The landlord ﬁled suit for eviction. The tenant applied for production of the
original deed and the changed rent deed. The landlord did not produce the changed
rent deed. The defendant sought permission for producing photocopy of the same. The
Court said that it could not be tendered in evidence without any revelation of the source
from which it was obtained.115

[s 65.2.2] "When after the notice mentioned in section 66 such person does not
produce it."—
If a person who is legally bound to produce the document refuses to produce it
notwithstanding notice to do so, the existence and contents of the original document
can be proved under this clause by proof of the authenticated copy.116 The original Will
was in possession of the plaintiff. The defendant applied for permission for producing
secondary evidence on the ground that the plaintiff was deliberately not producing the
original. The trial court formed the opinion about the veracity of the document without
giving an opportunity to the defendant to adduce his evidence on the point. This was
held to be improper.117

[s 65.3] Documents admitted by opposite party—
[Clause (b)].—This clause must be read with section 22. Under it the written admission
may always be proved. The oral admission can only be proved under the circumstances
mentioned in clauses (a), (c) and (d). But secondary evidence by means of a written
admission under this clause cannot be given of the contents of a document, which is
inadmissible for want of registration118 or of stamps.119 Admission of documents

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
amounts to admission of contents thereof but not its truth. Truth or correctness is to
be ascertained from evidence.120 Where the defendant himself admitted the payment
under the cheque, absence of cheque as primary evidence would not vitiate the suit.121

[s 65.4] Original lost or destroyed—
[Clause (c)].—Secondary evidence is admissible when the party offering evidence of the
contents of a document cannot for any reason not arising from his own default or
neglect produce the original document in reasonable time.122 Secondary evidence of
the contents of a document cannot be admitted without the non-production of the
original being ﬁrst accounted for.123
Where an original book of accounts is in a very tottering condition and is also wormeaten, secondary evidence of such accounts cannot be given.124 It is not permissible
to go to other evidence for the purpose of indicating what the contents of the
document may prove to be if once it were examined.125 There must be evidence on the
record to show that the document has been lost.126
It must, therefore, be established that the party has exhausted all resources and means
in search of the document which were available to him.127 If a registered sale-deed is
lost a certiﬁed copy can be put in as secondary evidence,128 but the reception of other
evidence must always be of a very weak character in place of registered document
evidencing the transaction.129 Where the loss of the original award was proved by
examining one of the Arbitrators, its photocopy bearing not only that Arbitrator's
signature but also of both the parties was admissible in evidence.130
Secondary evidence of a lost public document, other than a certiﬁed copy, is
admissible upon proof of loss or destruction of the original, and further proof that no
certiﬁed copy of the original is available to the party seeking to prove the contents of
the original. So long as the original is in existence, no secondary evidence other than a
certiﬁed copy is admissible.131 Where the record in a case has been destroyed and is
not available for the purpose of proving previous convictions, secondary evidence
under this clause is admissible.132 Secondary evidence was allowed where the plaintiff
stated on aﬃdavit that the original was lost,133 and also where the sale deed was
handed over to a patwari and the same was not returned by him.134 In an election
petition, the photocopy of the manuscript of a leaﬂet was not allowed because it was
not shown where the original was. There must be some explanation as to the
original.135
Secondary evidence of the contents of a document cannot be given by a party who is in
custody of the original document.136
In a case before the P&H High Court,137 a suit was ﬁled for recovery of money on the
basis of an agreement. The plaintiff produced only the photostat copy of the
agreement and not the original. The defendant argued that the photocopy was
produced deliberately to suppress the fact that the agreement was fabricated. The
plaintiff pleaded that the original was in the custody of the defendant. He applied for
permission to produce secondary evidence. It was held that a summary dismissal of
such application was not proper. Opportunity should have been given to the plaintiff to
make out his case. The Court then explained the basic principles as follows:
A perusal of clause (c) of Section 65 of the Act would show that secondary evidence of
existence, condition or contents of a document can also be adduced when the party
offering evidence of its contents cannot produce the original in reasonable time. But such a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
delay in production of the document should not have arisen from the fault or neglect of the
party who wish to adduce secondary evidence of the document. To succeed in getting
permission to adduce secondary evidence it must be shown that the document was in
existence which was capable of being proved by secondary evidence and secondly proper
foundation must be laid to establish the right to adduce secondary evidence. This view has
been taken by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Roman Catholic
Mission v State of Madras.138

Another well-known principle with regard to proof of facts is that the best evidence
must come before the court because the best evidence which is, of course, the original
document, would furnish an opportunity to the court to examine various surrounding
facts attached with the original alone like the veraciousness of the signatures of the
parties, the age of the document and other host of factors depending on the facts of
each case. It is in the absence of the best evidence that the secondary evidence is
allowed to be adduced because the object of judicial investigation by Court is to
fathom the truth. Therefore, the law although insists upon production of the best
evidence, i.e., the original document yet it permit with proper safeguards the production
of the secondary evidence of the original if certain conditions are satisﬁed, namely, the
existence of the document which might have been lost or destroyed or the party in
whose possession the original is shown or appears to be—have refused to produce it
before the court despite notice or its existence, condition or contents have been proved
to be admitted in writing so on and so forth. The rule regarding secondary evidence is
not an open rule allowing any piece of photostat copies or an oral account of the
original and the likewise to be tendered as secondary evidence.
It is suﬃcient to say that the document in question is not available at the relevant time
and its whereabouts were unknown. It is not necessary to plead that the document has
been lost. The words "lost" or "not traceable" both enable invocation of secondary
evidence.139

[s 65.5] Original not easily movable
[Clause (d)].—This clause covers things not easily moved, as in the case of things ﬁxed
in the ground or a building; for example, notices painted on walls, tablets in buildings,
tombstones, monuments, or marks on boundary stones or trees. Secondary evidence is
admissible on account of the great inconvenience and impracticability of producing the
original.
The principle of law is that where you cannot get the best possible evidence, you must
take the next.

[s 65.5.1] Rule Restricted to Written Documents.—
The courts have declined to extend the best evidence rule to documents consisting of
ﬁlm, tape and the like. There is little reason to burden these categories with a restrictive
and formalistic rule conceived in the days before technology had begun to spawn new
forms of storing information which give a new meaning to the term "original".

[s 65.6] Public document
[Clause (e)].—This clause is intended to protect the originals of public records from the
danger to which they would be exposed by constant production in evidence. Secondary
evidence is admissible in the case of public documents mentioned in section 74. What
section 74 provides is that public records kept in any state of private documents are
public documents, but private documents of which public records are kept are not in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
themselves public documents. A registered document, therefore, does not fall under
either clause (e) or clause (f). The entry in the register book is a public document, but
the original is a private document. A certiﬁed copy of the original cannot be given in
evidence. The Gujarat High Court held that a copy of a registered sale deed certiﬁed by
the registration oﬃcer is a public document within the meaning of section 74 and is,
therefore, admissible for the purpose of proving the contents of the original
document.140 No true copy or private copy of any public document is admissible as
secondary evidence. The party has to produce a certiﬁed copy of the public document
which should have been issued by the competent authority whose oﬃce is in
possession of the original record.141
The rule that a certiﬁed copy is the only secondary evidence admissible when the
original is a public document, does not apply where the original has been lost or
destroyed.142
A charge was levelled against an election candidate alleging that he appealed to voters
on communal lines. The petitioner produced a cassette to prove the charge. There was
no cogent evidence regarding the source and manner of acquisition of the tape. The
petitioner did not prove that cassette was true reproduction of the original speeches
made by the candidate or his agent. The petition was rejected.143
The certiﬁed copy of a Will has been held to be not a public document within the
meaning of section 74. It is not admissible in evidence per se. It cannot be accepted as
primary evidence. It could be proved as secondary evidence under permission of the
court by showing loss or destruction, etc. of the original.144

[s 65.7] Certiﬁed copies permitted by law
[Clause (f)].—Certiﬁed copies are admissible as secondary evidence under this clause.
Sections 76, 78 and 86 may be read along with it. Where an original document cannot
be given in evidence owing to a statutory ban, its certiﬁed copy cannot be admitted in
evidence, e.g. certiﬁed copy of the income tax return.145
Where a case falls under clause (a) or clause (c) and also under clause (f) any
secondary evidence may be received.146
Where both the original and the certiﬁed copy of a public document were proved to
have been lost, the court allowed secondary evidence in the form of an ordinary
copy.147
The entry of a private document i.e. a sale deed made in the book maintained by the
registering authority, comes within the purview of a public document and the certiﬁed
copy of the document is admissible in evidence.148
Xerox copies certiﬁed by the designated Public Information Oﬃcer under the RTI Act
are not certiﬁed copies as envisaged by section 65 of the Evidence Act. They are
merely true copies of private documents in the records of a particular department. Only
true copies of public documents certiﬁed by the said Oﬃcer can be taken as certiﬁed
copies.149
An application for production of a particular document was ﬁled after eight years of
institution of the suit. The document sought to be produced was also a copy of the
original document. The Court said that such a document could not be accepted in
evidence without showing any of the exceptional situations.150

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
An instrument of partition was insuﬃciently stamped. It was therefore held not
admissible in evidence. The Court said that once an original itself is not admissible, the
question of taking xerox copy of the same into evidence does not arise.151

[s 65.8] Documents which cannot be conveniently examined
[Clause (g)].—This provision is meant for saving public time. Where the fact to be
proved is the general result of the examination of numerous documents and not the
contents of each particular document and the documents are such as cannot be
conveniently examined in court, evidence may be given, under this section, as to the
general result of the documents by a person who has examined them and who is
skilled in the examination of those documents, although they may be public within the
meaning of this section and section 74.152

[s 65.9] Call records of cellular telephones
[Clause (g)].—The call records of cellular phones are stored in large servers that cannot
be easily moved and produced in court. The court allowed secondary evidence of such
matter regardless of compliance with section 65B(4). It has to be shown that there was
no misuse of the computer and that it was performing properly. Such evidence would
vary from case to case. It will be very rarely necessary to call an expert. The burden can
be discharged by calling a witness who is familiar with the operation of the computer
concerned.153

[s 65.10] Objection to reception of secondary evidence in Appeal Court.—
The objection as to admission of secondary evidence should be taken when it is
tendered in evidence and not subsequently. Once the document is admitted without
any objection, its contents are also taken to have been proved though not
conclusively.154 If a copy of a document is admitted in evidence in the ﬁrst court
without any objection no objection can be allowed to be taken in the appeal court as to
its admissibility.155 Where no objection was raised when the certiﬁed copy of the Will
was admitted, non-production of the original Will cannot subsequently be urged as a
ground to invalidate the Will.156 When an objection that the document which is sought
to be proved is itself inadmissible in evidence, is raised, the court can give a tentative
exhibit number to such a document and deal with the admissibility thereof at the ﬁnal
stage of judgment; however, where the objection which is raised does not dispute the
admissibility of the document in evidence but is directed towards the mode of proof,
alleging the same to be irregular or insuﬃcient, such objection has to be decided at the
same time when it is raised, as the same would enable the party tendering the evidence
to cure the defect and resort to such mode of proof as would be regular.157 The
question of proof of a document is a question of procedure and can be waived. But a
question of relevancy of document is a question of law, and can be raised at the
appellate stage as well.158 The object of the rule is obvious, for, if objection is taken in
the ﬁrst court, the party producing the copy can ask for an adjournment in order to get
the original or else to give evidence justifying the admission of secondary evidence.

[s 65.11] Uncertiﬁed copies.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
It is a basic principle of our jurisprudence that if any uncertiﬁed document is produced
on record, then it should be self-attested as true copy and should be supported by an
aﬃdavit that it is a genuine document and need to be relied upon as such.159

95 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "the States".
96 Krishna Kishori Chowdhrani v Kishori Lal Roy, (1887) 14 Cal 486 : 14 IA 71.
97 Abdul Rasack v Ma U (1898) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 382. Secondary evidence was not allowed

where the primary was on record. Kirpal Singh v Kartaro, AIR 1980 Raj 213 . Oriental Fire &
General Ins Co v Chandrawali, AIR 1989 P&H 300, a copy of the original policy produced without
making out any exception, held liable to be rejected. Hari Singh v Shish Ram, AIR 2003 P&H 150,
a photostat copy of the original deed of family settlement was ﬁled. The Court said that it was
sine qua non for party to show that the original was in existence and could not be produced and
that photo evidence was allowable under one or the other exceptions.
98 State Bank of India v Allibhoy Mohammed, AIR 2008 Bom 81 .
99 Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes,Vol II, p 892 f.n. 2.
100 Gurdial Kaur v Registrar of Co-op Societies, AIR 2000 P&H 82. The Court relied upon Ved

Prakash v Kartar Kaur, (1994) 1 QRR 361 wherein it was held that in order to enable a party to
produce secondary evidence it is necessary for the party to prove the existence and execution
of the original document; Krishna Kumar v Pal Singh, (1989) 95 Pun LR 55 , it was incumbent
refer the respondent to lead evidence to prove existence of the original civil petition; Gurditta v
Balkar Singh, (1989) 95 Pun LR 418 , where the agreement to sell was never pleaded in the
written statement, an application to lead secondary evidence by way of photostat copy was ﬁled
after more than two years, there was no occasion for the trial court to allow the defendant to
lead secondary evidence particularly when the existence of the original document was not
proved.
Sobha Rani v Ravi Kumar, AIR 1999 P&H 21, permission for secondary evidence was sought on
the ground of loss of the document, the existence of the original was proved from the fact
stated in the plaint and reply of the defendant. Order was granted for ﬁling secondary evidence.
101 H Siddiqui v A Ramalingam, (2011) 4 SCC 240 , AIR 2011 SC 1492 .
102 Sawa v Kuka, (1951) 1 Raj 69 ; Champalal v Pannalal, (1951) 1 Raj 190 .
103 Ranjit Kumar v Kamal Kumar, AIR 1982 Cal 493 . See also Shiola Singh v Shankar, AIR 1984

Bom 19 , where execution could not be proved.
104 Dropadi v Mahagraha Bhagwat Singh, AIR 1995 Raj 138 .
105 Ved Prakash Rastogi v Nagar Palika, Budaun, AIR 2008 All 27 .
106 Rajendra Mahadev Todkar v Paranjpe Schemes (Construction) Co Ltd, WP No. 1385 of 2017,

decided on 5 January 2018 (Bombay High Court).
107 Nawab Singh v Inderjit Kaur, AIR 1999 SC 1668 : (1999) 4 SCC 413 .
108 Zarina Siddiqui v A Ramalingam, (2015) 1 SCC 705 (para 22).
109 Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol, II, p 892 fn 30. LS Sadapopan v KS Sabarinathan, AIR 2002

Mad 278 , in an agreement to sell immovable property, the original deed was with the vendor

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
whereas only a copy was given to the plaintiff vendee and that was also lost. Only a photocopy
was produced in the suit for speciﬁc performance. The court admitted it as secondary evidence.
The court said that clauses (a) and (c) of section 65 are independent of clause (f) and even an
ordinary copy, not necessarily certiﬁed copy would be admissible. The court cited the following
cases as making detailed interpretation of sections 63 and 65 : Marwari Kumhar v Bhagwanpuri
Guru Ganeshpuri, AIR 2000 SC 2629 : (2000) 6 SCC 735 ; Ratan Sharma v Ambesedar Drycleaners,
AIR 1997 Raj 75 ; Harijiwan Sahu v Jairam Sahu, AIR 1989 Pat 96 ; Sabarna Barik v State, AIR
1970 Ori 236 ; Arunkumar v Ramanlal, AIR 1975 Guj 73 and Santanan Mohanty v Baldhar Rout, AIR
1986 Ori 66 ; Gopal Krishna Jeevan Kumar v Puran Singh, AIR 1998 P&H 144, best evidence was
in possession of the opposite party who had not produced it, secondary evidence was allowed.
110 Field, 8th Edn, p 436.
111

Muniammal v Govindarajan (1958) Mad 415. Hindustan Engineering Co v Bhagwanlal

Agarwal, AIR 2003 Raj 198 , a civil suit was ﬁled by the Electricity Board against its consumer.
The latter sought permission to produce a photostat copy of the application ﬁled by him before
the Electricity Board. The Board denied the existence of any such application. It made no inquiry
before expressing its denial. This was held to be not proper.
112 H Siddiqui v A Ramalingam, (2011) 4 SCC 240 : 2011 (1) CLR 761 : 2011 (3) Scale 290 .
113 Ishwar Das Jain v Sohan Lal, AIR 2000 SC 426 : (2000) 1 SCC 434 .
114 J Yashoda v K Shobha Rani, AIR 2007 SC 1721 : (2007) 5 SCC 730 .
115 Haji Md Islam v Asgar Ali, AIR 2007 MP 157 : LNIND 2001 AP 155 .
116 Muniammal v Govindarajan, (1958) Mad 415.
117 Rajesh Kumar Bhati v ADJ, Jodhpur, AIR 2009 Raj 137 .
118 Varada v Krisnasami, (1882) 6 Mad 117.
119 Damodar Jagannath v Atmaram Babaji, (1888) 12 Bom 443.
120 Life Insurance Corp of India v Narmada Agarwalla, AIR 1993 Ori 103 .
121 Sharda Talkies (Firm) v Madhulata Vyas, AIR 1996 MP 68 .
122 Surendra Krishna Roy v Mirza Mahammad Syed Ali Matwali, (1935) 63 IA 85 . 38 Bom LR

330. Akshara Nand v State of HP, 1996 AIHC 1894 (HP).
123 Muhammad Zafar v Zahur Husain, (1926) 49 All 78 ; Womesh Chunder Ghose v Shama

Sundari Bai, (1881) 7 Cal 98 ; Mt Hana v Lokumal, (1943) Kar 420 ; Harshvardhan Singh v Ranveer
Singh, AIR 1997 Raj 211 , an unstamped and unregistered document, containing family
settlement, created rights in immovable property, the original was not produced before the
court, nor its absence accounted for, order allowing a copy of the settlement to be ﬁled was held
to be illegal.
124 Amrita Devi v Sripat Rai, AIR 1962 All 111 ; Chandan v Longabai, AIR 1998 MP1 , the

document containing a will was shown to be eaten by rats, secondary evidence allowed. Loss
and non-production of original will, reasonably explained, Leela Rajagopal v Kamala Menon
Cocharan, 2014 (15) SCC 570 , para 15.
125 KS Bonnerji v Sitanath, (1921) 24 Bom LR 565 : 49 IA 46 : 49 Cal 325.
126 Mohammad Khan v Sheo Bikh Singh, (1929) 5 Luck 377 .
127 Parekh Bros. v Kartick Chandra, AIR 1968 Cal 532 .
128 Entisham Ali v Jamna Prasad, (1921) 24 Bom LR 675 : 48 IA 365.
129 Nani Bai v Gita Bai, AIR 1958 SC 706 : 1959 SCR 479 .
130 Om Prakash v Dev Raj, AIR 1995 P&H 349.
131 Syad Pir Shan v Gulab Shah, (1878) PR No. 63 of 1878 (Civil).
132 Pokar v Crown, (1941) Kar 308 .
133 Sanatan Mohanty v Baidhar Rout, AIR 1986 Ori 66 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
134 Krishna Devi v Gain Kaur, AIR 1981 P&H 224.
135 Ashok v Madhav Lal, AIR 1975 SC 1748 : 1975(4) SCC 664 .
136 Hira Lal v Ganesh Prasad, (1882) 4 All 406 PC.
137 PK Gupta v Varinder Sharma, AIR 2002 P&H 342.
138 Roman Catholic Mission v State of Madras, AIR 1966 SC 1457 ; Referred to in H Siddiqui v A

Ramalingam, (2011) 4 SCC 240 .
139 Prem Chandra Jain v Ram, AIR 2010 NOC 424 (Del).
140 Jagdishchandra Chandulal Shah v State of Gujarat, 1989 Cr LJ 1724 (Guj), a copy of the

plaint certiﬁed by the court where it is ﬁled was also held to be a public document for purposes
of evidence. M Madasamy Thevar v AM Arjuna Raja, AIR 2000 Mad 465 , certiﬁed copies
obtained from the oﬃce of the Registrar of Documents are secondary evidence and admissible
as such. Rekha Rana v Ratnashree Jain, AIR 2006 MP 107 , to the same effect. The court added
that such document does not dispense with the need for proof of execution of the document.
141 Chalasani Satyanarayana Murthy v Chalasani Rama Koteswara Rao, AIR 2011 NOC 35 (AP).
142 Chandreshwar Prasad Narain Singh v Bisheshwar Pratap Narain Singh, (1926) 5 Pat 777.
143 Tukaram S Dighole v Manikrao Shivaji Kokate, AIR 2010 SC 965 : (2010) 4 SCC 329 .
144 Sampat Singh v Bhagwanti, AIR 2010 NOC 701 (P&H).
145 Devidatt v Shriram, (1931) 34 Bom LR 236 : 56 Bom 324.
146 In the Matter of a Collision between the "Ava" and the "Brenhilda", (1879) 5 Cal 568 , 573,

approved by the Supreme Court in Bibi Aisha v Bihar SSM Waqaf, AIR 1969 SC 253 : 1969(1) SCR
417 . A copy of the Municipal record not issued in accordance with the requirements of the
Municipal Act is not relevant. Ganesh Pd v Badri Pd, AIR 1970 All 361 .
147 Marwari Kumhar v Bhagwanpuri Guru Ganeshpuri, AIR 2000 SC 2629 : (2000) 7 SCC 333 .
148 Hemlata Devi v Ramautar Sao, 2016 AIR CC 686 (Jhar).
149 Datti Kameshwari v Singam Rao Sarath Chandra, AIR 2016 AP 112 , para 8.
150 Arati Bhargawa v Ravi Kumar Bhargava, AIR 1999 Del 280 . Ganpat Pandurang Ghongade v

Nivrutti Pandurang Ghongade, AIR 2008 NOC 2571 (Bom), it is well known that the process of
making xrox copies is open to manipulations, hence it is not safe to act upon such copies.
151 Obelisetty Ramanadhan v Oblesetti Bhaskar Rao, AIR 2008 NOC 1154 (AP).
152 Sundar Kaur v Chandreshwar Prasad Narain Singh, (1907) 34 Cal 293 .
153 State (NCT of Delhi) v Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600 : AIR 2005 SC 3820 .
154 V Subramaniam v T Krishnan, AIR 2007 NOC 1547 (Mad).
155 Kishori Lal Goswami v Rakhal Das Banerjee, (1903) 31 Cal 155 ; Akbur Ali v Bhyea Lal Jha,

(1880) 6 Cal 666 ; Bacharam Mundul v Peary Mohun Banerjee, (1883) 9 Cal 813 ; Narendra Narain
Rai v Bishun Chundra Das, (1885) 12 Cal 182 ; Chimnaji Govind Godbole v Dinkar Dhondev
Godbole, (1886) 11 Bom 320; Thet She v Moung Ba, (1905) 3 LBR 49. Amar Singh v Tej Ram, AIR
1982 P&H 382. Dayamathi Bai v KM Shaﬃ, (2004) 7 SCC 107 : AIR 2004 SC 4082 , objection to
be taken at the stage of admission and not at a later stage.
156 SA Quddus v S Veerappa, AIR 1994 Kant 20 : 1993 (2) HinduLR 383 : LNIND 1993 Kant 64 .
157 Ramniklal Shivlal Bavishi v Tulsidas Chakubhai Gorvadiya, AIR 2016 NOC 54 (Guj).
158 Subbarao v Venkata Rama Rao, AIR 1964 AP 53 : LNIND 1963 AP 63 .
159 Swati Abhishek Binaykia v Abhishek Madanlal Binaykia, 2016 AIR CC 1730, para 46 (Guj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
160[[s 65A] Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record.—

The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions
of section 65B.

160 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch II–9 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
160[s 65B] Admissibility of electronic records.—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any information contained in

an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in
optical or magnetic media produced by a computer (hereinafter referred to as
the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions
mentioned in this section are satisﬁed in relation to the information and
computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without
further proof or production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the
original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be
admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output

shall be the following, namely:—
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the

computer during the period over which the computer was used regularly
to store or process information for the purposes of any activities
regularly carried on over that period by the person having lawful control
over the use of the computer;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the

electronic record or of the kind from which the information so contained
is derived was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of
the said activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was

operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was
not operating properly or was out of operation during that part of the
period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy of
its contents; and
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is

derived from such information fed into the computer in the ordinary
course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information for

the purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period as
mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by
computers, whether—
(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over

that period; or
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
in whatever order, of one or more computers and one or more
combinations of computers,
all the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single
computer; and references in this section to a computer shall be
construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue

of this section, a certiﬁcate doing any of the following things, that is to say,—
(a) identifying

the electronic record containing the statement and
describing the manner in which it was produced;

(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that

electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that
the electronic record was produced by a computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in

sub-section (2) relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible oﬃcial
position in relation to the operation of the relevant device or the
management of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) shall
be evidence of any matter stated in the certiﬁcate; and for the purposes
of this sub-section it shall be suﬃcient for a matter to be stated to the
best of the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied

thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or
(with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment;
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any oﬃcial information

is supplied with a view to its being stored or processed for the purposes
of those activities by a computer operated otherwise than in the course
of those activities, that information, if duly supplied to that computer,
shall be taken to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;
(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer

whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without human
intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section any reference to
information being derived from other, information shall be a reference to
its being derived therefrom by calculation, comparison or any other
process.]

COMMENT
[s 65B.1] Information Technology Act, 2000—Proof of contents of electronic
records

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[Sections 65A, 65B].—The new section, namely section 65A, says that the contents of
electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 65B.
This section is also a new provision. It prescribes the mode for proof of contents of
electronic records. The primary purpose is to sanctify proof by secondary evidence.
This facility of proof by secondary evidence would apply to any computer output, such
output being deemed as a document. A computer output is a deemed document for the
purposes of proof. The section says in sub-section (1) that any information contained
in an electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical
or magnetic media produced by a computer and to be referred to as computer output,
shall also be deemed to be a document. The section lays down certain conditions
which have to be satisﬁed in relation to the information and the computer in question.
Where those conditions are satisﬁed, the electronic record shall become admissible in
any proceedings without further proof or production of the original as evidence of any
contents of the original or of any fact stated in it.
With the advancement of information technology, scientiﬁc temper at the individual and
the institutional level is to pervade the methods of investigation. With the increasing
impact of technology in everyday life, and as a result, the production of electronic
evidence in cases, has become relevant to establish the guilt of the accused or the
liability of the defendant. Electronic documents stricto sensu are admitted as material
evidence. Such evidence is of great help to the investigating agency and also to the
prosecution.161

[s 65B.2] Conditions as to relevancy of computer output [Section 65B(2)].—
The conditions which have to be satisﬁed so as to make a computer output as
evidence are stated in sub-section (2). They are as follows:
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer

during the period over which the computer was used regularly to store or
process the information for the purposes of any activities regularly carried on
over that period by the person having lawful control over the use of the
computer;
(b) the information contained in the electronic record is of the kind which was

regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of its activities;
(c) the computer should have been operating properly during the period of the data

feeding, or, if it was not operating properly during that period or was out of
operation, that gap was not such as to affect the electronic record or the
accuracy of its contents;
(d) the information contained in the electronic record was derived or is reproduced

from the information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of its
activities.
Where the information was processed or fed into the computer on interlinked
computers or one computer after the other in succession, all the computers so used
shall be treated as one single computer. The references to a computer have to be
construed accordingly [section 65B(3)]:
When a statement has to be produced in evidence under this section, it should be
accompanied by a certiﬁcate which should identify the electronic record containing the
statement and describe the manner in which it was produced, give the particulars of
the device involved in the production of the electronic record showing that the same
was produced by a computer and showing compliance with the conditions of sub-

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
section (2) of this section. The statement should be signed by a person occupying a
responsible oﬃcial position in relation to the operation or management of the relevant
activities. Such statement shall be evidence of the matter stated in the certiﬁcate. It
should be suﬃcient for this purpose that the statement is made to the best of
knowledge and belief of the person making it [section 65B(4)].
For the purposes of this section an information shall be taken to be supplied to a
computer, if it is done in any appropriate form whether this is done directly with or
without human intervention by means of any appropriate equipment, or if the
information is supplied by any oﬃcial in the course of his activities with a view to
storing or processing the information even if the computer is being operated outside
those activities.
An explanation to the section declares that for the purposes of section 65B any
reference to information being derived from other information is to be taken to mean
derived by calculation, comparison or any other process [section 65B (Explanation)].

[s 65B.3] Proof of electronic record.—
Any documentary evidence by way of an electronic record under the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, can in view of sections 59 and 65A, be proved only in accordance with the
admissibility of the electronic record. The purpose of these provisions is to sanctify
secondary evidence in electronic form, generated by a computer. Section 65B starts
with a non obstante clause, viz. notwithstanding anything contained in the Evidence
Act, any information contained in an electronic record which is printed on a paper,
stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a computer shall
be deemed to be a document only if the conditions in sub-section (2) are satisﬁed,
without further proof or production of the original.162
The Evidence Act does not contemplate or permit the proof of an electronic record by
oral evidence, if the requirements under section 65B of the Evidence Act are not
complied with.163
Proof of electronic record, is a special provision introduced by the Information
Technology Act, 2000 amending various provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872. The very
caption of section 65A of the Evidence Act read with sections 59 and 65B of the
Evidence Act is suﬃcient to hold that the special provisions on evidence relating to
electronic record shall be governed by the procedure prescribed under section 65B,
which is a complete code in itself. Being a special law, the general law under sections
63 and 65 has to yield.164

[s 65B.4] Admissibility of electronic record.—
The very admissibility of an electronic record which is called as computer output,
depends upon the satisfaction of the four conditions under section 65B(2), enumerated
as below:—
(i) The electronic record containing the information should have been produced by

the computer during the period over which the same was regularly used to store
or process information for the purpose of any activity regularly carried on over
that period by the person having lawful control over the use of that computer;
(ii) The information of the kind contained in electronic record or of the kind from

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
which the information is derived was regularly fed into the computer in the
ordinary course of the said activity;
(iii) During the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly

and that even if it was not operating properly for some time, the break or breaks
had not affected either the record or the accuracy of its contents; and
(iv) The information contained in the record should be a reproduction or derivation

from the information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said
activity.165
Where an electronic record is used as primary evidence the same is admissible in
evidence, without compliance with the conditions in section 65B.166
Irrespective of the compliance with the requirements of section 65B, which a special
provision dealing with admissibility of the electronic record, there is no bar in adducing
secondary evidence under sections 63 and 65 of the Evidence Act, 1872, of an
electronic record.167

[s 65B.5] Giving statement in any proceeding pertaining electronic record.—
If it is desired to give a statement in any proceeding pertaining to an electronic record,
it is permissible provided the following conditions enumerated under section 65B(4)
are satisﬁed:—
(a) There must be a certiﬁcate which identiﬁes the electronic record containing the

statement;
(b) The certiﬁcate must describe the manner in which the electronic record was

produced;
(c) The certiﬁcate must furnish the particulars of the device involved in the

production of that record;
(d) The certiﬁcate must deal the applicable conditions mentioned under section

65B(2) of the Evidence Act; and
(e) The certiﬁcate must be signed by a person occupying a responsible oﬃcial

position in relation to the operation of the relevant device.168
It is further clariﬁed that the person need only to state in the certiﬁcate that the same is
to the best of his knowledge and belief. Most importantly, such a certiﬁcate must
accompany the electronic record like computer printout, compact disc (CD), video
compact disc (VCD), pen drive etc., pertaining to which a statement is sought to be
given in evidence, when the same is produced in evidence. All these safeguards are
taken to ensure the source and authenticity, which are the two hallmarks pertaining to
electronic record sought to be used in evidence. Electronic records being more
susceptible to tampering, alteration, transposition, excision, etc. without such
safeguards, the whole trial based on proof of electronic records can lead to a travesty
of justice.169

[s 65B.5.1] Electronic Evidence.—
Certain unlawful acts were alleged to have been committed by the petitioner by an
illegal mining operation encroaching into forest area in violation of the conditions of
lease agreement entered into with Forest Authorities. Satellite sketches based in

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
support of the allegations were held to be admissible in evidence. But they had to be
substantiated by evidence in the court. The petitioner could rebut the same.170

[s 65B.5.2] ATM—
Money was withdrawn from the account without there being suﬃcient balance. The
bank ﬁled a case for recovery. The claim was based on extracts of ATM machine and
ledger entry. The bank admitted mal-functioning of the machine which snapped the link
between the ATM and Ledger. The claim was not allowed. Ledger entries were
supposed to be independent of ATM Certiﬁed copy of the ledger entries was held to be
not admissible.171

[s 65B.5.3] Audio CD—
In a matrimonial proceeding for dissolution of marriage, the wife was alleged to have
abused and threatened the husband on his cell-phone and the same was recorded in
the phone. The husband re-recorded the matter in an audio CD. The cell-phone was not
produced. Only the audio CD was exhibited. The wife objected that the audio CD was
not admissible as it was fabricated. The audio CD was marked by the court as an
exhibit with this condition that when it was displayed, an opportunity would be given to
the wife for cross-examining the husband.172

[s 65B.5.4] Video-Conferencing.—
The facility of producing evidence by recording it through the process of videoconferencing has been permitted in criminal cases. The Court expressed the view that
there cannot be any plausible objection for adopting the same procedure in civil cases
also. But necessary precautions must be taken as to both identifying of witnesses and
the accuracy of the equipment used.173
Where a witness or a party requests that the evidence of a witness may be recorded
through video conferencing, the court should be liberal in granting such a prayer.174

[s 65B.5.5] Tape recorded evidence.—
A tape recorded cassette is clearly a primary and direct evidence of what has been said
and recorded.175

[s 65B.5.6] Oﬃcial website.—
In the instant case, the information as to the balance sheet of the party concerned
available on its oﬃcial website was relied upon.176

[s 65B.5.7] Voice recorder.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the only evidence as to demand of bribe by the accused was the conversation
recorded by the voice recorder, the same was sent to the Forensic Laboratory which
stated that the conversation was not in an audible condition and hence, the same could
not be considered for spectrographic analysis. It was submitted that the conversation
was translated and veriﬁed by the panch witnesses. It was observed that admittedly the
panch witnesses had not heard the conversation since they were not present in the
room and as the voice recorder itself could not be subjected to analysis, there was no
use in placing reliance on the translated version. Without source there is no authenticity
for the translation. Source and authenticity are the two key factors for an electronic
evidence.177
Where a husband had tape recorded the conversation of his wife with a third person for
the purpose of seeking divorce on that ground, it was held that the submitted
conversation was recorded without the knowledge of the wife, thus infringing her right
to privacy, hence the tapes produced by the husband were not admissible in
evidence.178

[s 65B.6] Non-production of electronic evidence.—
Production of scientiﬁc and electronic evidence in court is of great help to the
investigating agency and also to the prosecution, therefore, in a murder case nonproduction of CCTV footage, non-collection of call records (details) and SIM details of
mobile phones seized from the accused cannot be said to be mere instances of faulty
investigation but amount to withholding of best evidence. It is not the case of the
prosecution that CCTV footage could not be lifted or a CD copy could not be made.
Adverse inference was drawn against the prosecution.179

[s 65B.7] Secondary evidence in the form of printed copy of call details of a
cell phone [Section 65B(4)].—
Secondary evidence in the form of call details of a cell phone is inadmissible in
evidence in the absence of production of the certiﬁcate under section 65B(4).180

161 Tomaso Bruno v State of UP, (2015) 7 SCC 178 , paras 24 and 25.
162 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 14).
163 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 18).
164 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 20).
165 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 14).
166 Vikram Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2017 SC 3227 : 2017 CriLJ 4305 .
167 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 21).
168 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 15).
169 Anvar PV v PK Basheer, 2014 (10) Scale 660 : (2014) 10 SCC 473 (para 16).
170 VS Lad & Sons v State of Karnataka, 2009 Cr LJ 3760 : 2009 (6) Kar LJ 430 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
171 P Padmanabh v Syndicate Bank Ltd, AIR 2008 Kar 42 .
172 G Shyamal Rajini v MS. Tamizhnathan, AIR 2008 NOC 476 (Mad).
173 Bodala Murali Krishna v Bodala Prathima, AIR 2007 AP 43 .
174 International Planned Parenthood Federation v Madhu Bala Nath, AIR 2016 Del 71 , paras 14,

15 and 16.
175 Sunil Panchal v State of Rajasthan, 2016 Cr LJ 4238 , para 39 (Raj-DB).
176 Subrata Roy Sahara v UOI, (2014) 8 SCC 470 .
177 Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan v Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke, (2015) 3 SCC 123 (para 16), relying

on Anvar PV v PK Basheer, (2014) 10 SCC 473 .
178 Anurima v Sunil Mehta, AIR 2016 MP 112 , para 6 and 7. See also Preeti Jain v Kunal Jain,

AIR 2016 Raj 153 , paras 8 and 9.
179 Tomaso Bruno v State of UP, 2015 Cr LJ 1690 (para 24 to 29) (SC).
180 Harpal Singh v State of Punjab, 2017 Cr LJ 551 , para 11 (SC) relying on Anvar PV v PK

Basheer, (2014) 10 SCC 473 : AIR 2015 SC 180 . See also Mohammad Akbar v Ashok Sahu, 2016
AIR CC 1665, para 39 (Chh).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 66] Rules as to notice to produce.—
Secondary evidence of the contents [s 66.1] of the documents referred to in section 65,
clause (a), shall not be given unless the party [s 66.2] proposing to give such secondary
evidence has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the
document is, 181[or to his attorney or pleader,] such notice to produce it as is
prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court
considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court
thinks ﬁt to dispense with it:—
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be

required to produce it;
(3) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of

the original by fraud or force;
(4) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(5) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not

subject to, the process of the Court.

COMMENT
This section lays down that a notice must be given before secondary evidence can be
received under section 65(a). Notice to produce a document must be in writing. O XI,
rule 15. of the Code of Civil Procedure, prescribes the kind of notice to produce a
document.
Notice is required in order to give the opposite party a suﬃcient opportunity to produce
the document, and thereby to secure the best evidence of its contents.182 Such notice
may be dispensed with if it is not necessary on the pleadings,183 or the court thinks ﬁt
to dispense with it.184

[s 66.1] "Secondary evidence of the contents".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
"Secondary evidence of the contents" means apparently "not ... of the existence or
condition" of the documents.185

[s 66.2] "Party".—
This word means not only adversary in the cause, but also a stranger "legally bound to
produce" the document.186

[s 66.3] Cases in which notice not required—
[Proviso].—The proviso enumerates six cases in which a notice is not required to be
given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, in order to render
secondary evidence admissible.
The procedure for the production of documents in criminal cases is laid down in
sections 94-98 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Section 175 of the Indian Penal Code punishes the person who omits to produce a
document required by a public servant.

181 Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, section 6.
182 Surendra Krishna Roy v Mirza Mahammad Syed Ali Matwali, (1935) 63 IA 85 : 38 Bom LR

330. See also Oriental Fire & General Ins. Co v Chandrawali, AIR 1989 P&H 100, the insurer saying
that the original policy was in possession of the other party but not requiring him to produce,
held disentitled from producing the secondary evidence.
183 Dinanath Rai v Rama Rai, (1926) 6 Pat 102.
184 Surendra Krishna Roy v Mirza Mahammad Syed Ali Matwali, supra.
185 Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes,Vol II, p 893, f.n. 6.
186 Ibid, fn 7.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 67] Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or
written document produced.—
If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any
person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to
be in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.

COMMENT
This section merely requires proof of signature and handwriting of the person alleged
to have signed or written the document produced.187 Mere admission of execution of a
document is not suﬃcient. Proof that the signature of the executant is in his
handwriting is necessary.188
Where merely the signature of a person to a type-written document was identiﬁed by a
witness, it was held that what was formally proved was the signature and not the body
of the document.189
The Evidence Act permits secondary evidence to be given with regard to the attestation
of an attesting witness who is either dead or cannot be brought to Court. The signature
of the attesting witness when proved in evidence is proof of everything on the face of
the document and that he saw the executant make his mark.190
As to the method of proof, see sections 47 and 73.
Besides the question which arises as to the contents of a document (see sections 61–
66), there is always the question when the document is used in evidence—Is it what it
purports to be? In other words, is it genuine? The evidence upon this point is dealt with
in sections 67–73. The nature of the evidence will depend to a large extent on the
nature of the document. If it is a mere memorandum, such as the entry in a diary
mentioned in section 32(b), it must be proved that the diary was really that of the
person whose statements it is said to contain. If it is a letter it must be shown who
wrote it, or at any rate who signed it, for a signature to a document turns the whole
document into a statement by the person who signs it. If it is an agreement it must be
shown who executed it.191 In the case of a money suit for goods sold on credit, the
plaintiff examined his accountant who prepared the documents such as ledgers,
challans, and corresponding bills, but who, in his cross-examination categorically
stated that he did not know who prepared the documents. It was held that the
documents in question could not be said to have been proved.192 In the case of a
document executed by the thumb impression of an illiterate person, the party putting
forth the document has to prove that the document was read over and explained to the
executant.193

[s 67.1] Execution of document.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Execution means signing, sealing and delivery of a document. The term may be deﬁned
as a formal completion of a deed. It is the last act or series of acts which completes
it.194
Mere registration of a document is not in itself suﬃcient proof of its execution.195
Where a mere photostatic copy of the registered sale deed was placed on record, it was
held that the mere proof of registration was not the proof of due execution. Where
there is a failure to produce the original sale deed or its certiﬁed copy and nonexamination of an attesting witness or scribe of the document, it would have to be held
that execution of the document was not proved.196
The mere production of a registered deed is not suﬃcient to prove it. The identity of the
executant has to be established by oral evidence before the deed can be taken to have
been proved.197 In the case of a will, the burden lies upon its propounder to prove its
genuineness, the deceased testator being no longer available to speak to its
genuineness. Accordingly where the evidence produced by him was contradicting his
claim and there was also inconsistency in the opinion of the handwriting expert, the will
was held to be not proved.198

[s 67.2] CASES.—
A deed of conveyance was tendered in evidence which purported to bear the mark of G,
as vendor, and which was duly attested by four witnesses. G, however, denied that she
had ever executed the deed, and said that the mark was not hers. All the attesting
witnesses were dead. A witness was called who knew the handwriting of one of the
attesting witnesses, and who swore that the signature of that witness to the attestation
clause of the deed was genuine. It was held that the deed was admissible in evidence,
its execution by G being suﬃciently proved.199
A suit for recovery of loan amount was ﬁled by a bank. The demand notice was sent by
an advocate. The photocopy of the demand notice which was ﬁled carried no signature
of the advocate who was supposed to have issued it. Nobody proved the contents of
the demand notice. There was no evidence showing despatch or receipt of the notice.
The notice was held to be not admissible as legal evidence.200
Merely because the mahzar/recovery memo executed at the time of recovery, was
attested by two independent witnesses, that would not lend credibility to the same.
Such credibility would attach to it only if the said two independent witnesses are
produced as witnesses and the accused is afforded an opportunity to cross-examine
them, which was not done in the instant case.201

[s 67.2.1] Non-examination of Executant.—
Section 67 mandates that the signature and handwriting of a person on a written
document can be proved only by examining the person concerned. When the person is
very much available and alive, an attempt to prove his signature and handwriting by
examining a third person as a witness would have its own drawback. An inference of
the type indicated in section 114 [clause (e)] would become applicable.202

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
187 Abdool Ali v Abdoor Rushman, (1874) 21 WR 429 ; Madholal Sindhu v Asian. Assu. Co Ltd,

(1945) 56 Bom LR 147 .
188 Bulakidas v Shaikh Chhotu, (1942) Nag 661; Bhanwaria v Ramratan, (1953) 4 Raj 145 ;

Ramkrishna Girischandra Dode v Anand Govind Kelkar, AIR 1999 Bom 89 , executants of rent
receipt/receipts were not examined by the party about whom the court felt had launched
obstructionist proceedings. An opportunity of examining the signatory was given to the party
Refusal to admit the receipts in evidence was held to be proper. Bank of India v Alibhoy
Mohammed, AIR 2008 Bom 81 , a document produced either as a primary or secondary
evidence, has to be proved in the manner laid down in sections 67 to 73.
189 In the matter of Mr D & Mr S, (1961) 68 Bom LR 228 ; but see contra the view expressed by

Vimadalal J, in Bhima Tima v Pioneer Chemicals, (1967) 70 Bom LR 683 . Madholal v Asian Assu.
Co Ltd, (1945) 56 Bom LR 147 .
190 Ponnuswami Goundan v Kalyanasundara Ayyar, (1934) 57 Mad 662.
191 Markby 60.
192 Rukmanand Ajitsaria v Usha Sales P Ltd, AIR 1991 NOC 108 (Gau).
193 Ramjan Khan v Baba Raghunath Das, AIR 1992 MP 22 ; Ram Singh v Col. Ram Singh, AIR

1986 SC 3 , a document the contents of which were not proved nor the maker of the document
examined was held to be irrelevant.
194 Bhawanji Horbhum v Devji Punja, (1894) 19 Bom 635.
195

Salimatul-Fatima Alias Bibi Hossaini v Koylashpoti Narain Singh, (1890) 17 Cal 903 ;

Bulakidas v Shaikh Chhotu, (1942) Nag 661. KK Thankaappan v KS. Jayan, AIR 2003 Ker 114 , only
a certiﬁed copy of the registered document of dissolution of marriage was available on record.
There was no other evidence of due execution of the deed. Signature and handwriting on the
deed were not proved to be that of the husband and wife. The Court said that the fact of
dissolution of marriage was not proved.
196 Khushi Ram v Findhi, AIR 2003 HP 23 .
197 Prem Raj v Mishrimal, (1959) 9 Raj 573 .
198 A Chandrabati v Laxmi Dei, AIR 1991 Ori 289 .
199 Abdulla Paru v Gannibai, (1887) 11 Bom 690; Babban v Shiv Nath, AIR 1986 All 185 ,

attesting witnesses duly produced. Pankhothang Haokip v Dozakhup Paite, AIR 2003 Gau 44 ,
sale deed, execution by the seller proved by the buyer, the seller made no plea of cancellation
that of denial of his signature. He was bound by the document.
200 Bank of India v Alibhoy Mohammed, AIR 2008 Bom 81 .
201 A Tajudeen v UOI, (2015) 4 SCC 435 (para 31).
202 Muddasani Savojana v Muddasami Venkat Narsaiah, AIR 2007 AP 50 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
203[s 67A] Proof as to 204[electronic signature].—

Except in the case of a secure 204 [electronic signature], if the 204 [electronic
signature] of any subscriber is alleged to have been aﬃxed to an electronic record the
fact that such 204 [electronic signature] is the 204 [electronic signature] of the
subscriber must be proved.]

COMMENTS
This section was initially inserted vide Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2000.205
Thereafter, in 2008, an amendment206 was made in this section, whereby the word
"digital signature" was substituted by the word "electronic signature" at three places in
this section. This substitution is a part of the entire scheme under which the digital
signature regime is being switched over to the electronic signature regime in the ﬁeld
of e-commerce and e-governance. This switching over of regime is meant to broaden
the spectrum and follow the global trend.207
After the entire regimen of "digital signature" having been shifted to "electronic
signature", a digital signature is treated as a secured electronic signature, whereas an
electronic signature is a proprietary format with no standard for security. For example,
even a typed name or a digitized image of a handwritten signature. Consequently, the
integrity, sanctity and security of electronic signatures are a big issue since nothing
prevents one individual from typing another individual's name. Therefore, a party to
litigation, who asserts on the basis of an electronic signature of a subscriber, has been
put under an obligation to prove before the court that the electronic signature actually
belonged to that subscriber. A Court is no longer entitled to take an electronic signature
on its face value without the party harping upon such electronic signature on a
document having proved the same by leading cogent evidence.

203 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–10 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
204 Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(d), for "digital signature" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
205 Ins. by the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), section 52 & Schedule, (w.e.f.

17.10.2000).
206 (10 of 2009), section 52 [w.e.f. 27-10-2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O. 2689(E) dated 27-10-

2009].

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
207 For difference between "digital signature" and "electronic signature", please see section 3

(ante).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 68] Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.—
If a document is required by law [s 68.2] to be attested, [s 68.3] it shall not be used as
evidence [s 68.4] until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of
proving its execution, [s 68.5] if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the
process of the Court and capable of giving evidence:
208 [Provided [s 68.6] that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof

of the execution [s 68.8] of any document, not being a will, which has been registered in
accordance with the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, unless its
execution by the person by whom it purports to have been executed is speciﬁcally
denied.]

COMMENT
This section applies to cases where an instrument required by law to be attested bears
the necessary attestation. What the section prohibits is a proof of execution of a
document otherwise than by the evidence of an attesting witness if available.209
This section applies only where the execution of a document has to be proved or when
the allegation is that the executant was not in a ﬁt state of mind to know the real nature
of the document.210 Where, however, the execution is not to be proved, it is not
necessary to call any attesting witness, unless it is expressly contended that the
attesting witness has not witnessed the execution of the document.211
The object of placing more attestations than one upon a document whether at the
party's voluntary instance or by requirement of law, is ordinarily not to demand the
combined testimony of all at the trial, but merely to provide by way of caution a number
of witnesses; so that the contingencies of death, removal of residence, and the like,
may be guarded against, and one witness at least may be available. But the main object
in statutes requiring attestation as an element of validity is to surround the act of
execution with certain safeguards; the object of securing evidence for litigation is a
secondary one.212
A mere general denial of a mortgage or not admitting it cannot be regarded as a
speciﬁc denial of its execution within the meaning of the proviso to this section. When
there is only a general denial of execution and there is no cross-examination regarding
attestation of a witness who comes forward to swear to execution then it can be
presumed that there was due attestation.213

[s 68.1] Proof of Will.—
This section is not permissive or enabling. It lays down the necessary requirements
which the court has to observe in order that a document can be held to be proved. The

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
principle underlying the section is that execution of the will must be proved by at least
one attesting witness, that it is only an attesting witness who is entitled to prove the
execution of the will. It is a concession that the legislature has made. If that
concession does not result in complying with the mandatory requirements of this
section the only proper method is to call the other attesting witness, so that both the
attesting witnesses are before the court, and the due execution of the will is proved by
the two attesting witnesses which are necessary before a will can become a valid
document.214 To prove a will it is not necessary that the attesting witness should
depose that the other attesting witness had signed the will in the presence of the
testator and after seeing the testator signing the will as both the attesting witnesses
need not be present at the same time.215 "A plain perusal of section 68 of the Evidence
Act shows that the requirement of examining at least one attesting witness is to be
fulﬁlled "if there be an attesting witness alive". Where the attesting witnesses are dead
the will can certainly be proved in the manner provided for proof of a document".216
Where the executant and attesting witnesses of a will were not alive, identiﬁcation of
their signature by another witness, present at the time of its execution was not
necessary to prove the will.217 The mode of proving a will does not ordinarily differ
from that of proving any other document except in the special circumstances as
incorporated in section 63 of the Act.218 Merely from the vague evidence of the
attesting witness and without taking all circumstances into consideration, the court
should not conclude that the will was not duly executed.219 However, where the
attesting witness had signed the document, without knowing its nature, as his evidence
was that he only signed the document and went away and he was unable to say
whether the document was a will or gift, in such circumstances, the will could not be
said to be duly executed.220
The fact of the testator giving instruction for the making of a will was proved. He
himself presented the will for registration and acknowledged its due execution. No
vitiating circumstances were made out to rebut the presumption arising out of
registration or to create any doubt about the presence of testators at the time of
registration. The ﬁnding of the court below that the will was regularly executed did not
call for any interference.221 Where the scribe of the will had deposed on oath that he
had scribed the Will and had read it over and explained to the testatrix under whose
instructions it was so written and his evidence showed that the testatrix was clearly in
a sound state of health and mind at that point of time, it was held that the due
execution of the will was proved.222 Where the attesting witness identiﬁed the thumb
impression of the testatrix and also the scribe of the will and the other attesting
witness and withstood the test of cross-examination; besides the will was not kept a
secret from the beneﬁciaries. It was held that execution of the will was duly proved
despite a minor discrepancy of variance in the date of dictation of will.223
Where the execution of a Will is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, the
propounder must offer reasonable explanation to remove such suspicious
circumstances.224
An unprobated Will has been held to be admissible in evidence for collateral purposes
in any other proceedings except probate proceedings.225
Where at the time of execution of the will, the thumb impression over the alleged will
was taken by beneﬁciaries, the document writer was shown to be the scribe of the will,
whereas the same was scribed by him and the defendant testatrix who expired during
the litigation, did not whisper anything about its execution in her written statement
though it was executed earlier, it was held that the will was not proved.226
The execution of a will being 30 years old does not absolve from the requirement of
statutory proof. A presumption regarding documents being 30 years old under section

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
90 does not apply to a will.227

[s 68.2] "Required by law".—
This means required by the law of the country where the property is situate. The rule as
to the law of domicile is not extended to immovable property.

[s 68.3] "Attested".—
"Attested" means that a person has signed the document by way of testimony to the
fact that he saw it executed.228 An attesting witness is one who signs the document in
the presence of the executant after seeing the execution of the document or after
receiving a personal acknowledgment of the execution of the document by the
executant.229 A document cannot be attested by a party to it. The object of attestation
is that some person should verify that the deed was signed voluntarily. Knowledge of
the contents of a document ought not to be inferred from the mere fact of
attestation.230
"Attested", in relation to an instrument, means attested by two or more witnesses each
of whom has seen the executant sign or aﬃx his mark to the instrument, or has seen
some other person sign the instrument in the presence and by the direction of the
executant, or has received from the executant a personal acknowledgment of his
signature or mark or of the signature of such other person, and each of whom has
signed the instrument in the presence of the executant; but it is not necessary that
more than one of such witnesses should be present at the same time, and no particular
form of attestation is necessary (see section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
and section 63(c) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925).
Where a document is written, executed and attested in one ink the presumption of due
attestation is permissible under the maxim Omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse
acta donec probetur in contrarium.231
"Personal acknowledgment" is not the equivalent of "express acknowledgment" by
words and an acknowledgment may be inferred from gestures or conduct.232
According to the Allahabad, the Patna and the Bombay High Courts, the scribe of a
mortgage deed cannot be counted as an attesting witness merely because he has
signed the deed, even though the deed may in fact have been executed in his
presence,233 but the Madras234 and Calcutta,235 Orissa236 and Punjab and Haryana237
High Courts have held to the contrary. The Rangoon High Court has held that the writer
of a document may perform a dual role; he may be an attesting witness as well as the
writer. When a man places his signature upon a document and at the same time
describes himself as the writer thereof, the inference is that he signs as the writer and
nothing else, but, as a matter of fact, it can be shown that he signed not only as the
writer but also as a witness of the fact that he saw the document executed or received
a personal acknowledgment from the executant that he had executed it.238 The
Bombay High Court has further held that where the writer has signed not as a scribe
but as an attesting witness the attestation is good.239 Where the only available
attesting witness to a mortgage deed denies his attestation, it is permissible to prove
the deed by calling its writer under section 71 to depose to the execution of the deed by
the mortgagor and to its attestation by the two witnesses.240

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The direct evidence of the attestor will be "primary evidence". If there is no attesting
witness alive, then the document must be proved in the manner provided by sections
47 and 73. Should there be any doubt about the genuineness of the signature of an
attesting witness, the same can be resolved through the opinion of an expert under
section 45.241
When attestation is not speciﬁcally challenged and when an attesting witness is not
cross-examined regarding the details of attestation his evidence that the deed was
attested by the other attesting witnesses and by him is suﬃcient proof of attestation
under this section. The law will then assume that when the witness swears that it was
attested the witness means that it was attested according to the forms required by
law.242

[s 68.3.1] Documents requiring attestation.—
(1) A will (sections 57 and 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925); (2) a mortgage, the
principal money secured by which is Rs 100 or upwards (Transfer of Property Act, 1882,
section 59); (3) a gift of immovable property (Transfer of Property Act, 1882, section
132). Any such document which is not attested is not valid.243 Where the document
was that of reconveyance, it did not require attestation.244
The proper mode of attesting is that the witness should either sign or aﬃx his thumb
impression himself. The section does not permit the delegation of that function, if he
does so, he is not an attesting witness.

[s 68.4] "It shall not be used as evidence".—
These words means that the document cannot be used in a suit for enforcement of the
document, leaving the ordinary provisions of law in section 67 to apply where the
document is to be used for any other purpose. Although a document cannot be used in
evidence as a mortgage deed, which requires attestation, yet this section does not
prevent it from being used in evidence for the purpose of proving it as an
acknowledgment saving limitation.245

[s 68.5] "Until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of
proving its execution".—
The word "called" means tendered for the purpose of giving evidence.246 It is not used
in the sense of summoned.247 It is not necessary for the attesting person, in order to
prove execution, to point to the signature or mark made by the executant. It does not
therefore follow that because a witness is unable to point to the signature on a
document of the person whose signature he purports to have attested, he has failed to
prove that signature.248
This section provides that a document cannot be held to have been proved unless one
of the attesting witnesses is called where it is not established that all of them are dead
or were incapable of giving evidence.249 The words "at least" presuppose that more
evidence may be required and it can only be by reference to the circumstances of each
case that the quantum of evidence necessary to discharge the onus of proof can be
measured. A will duly signed by the testator and attested by two witnesses, who attest
not in the presence of each other but at different times on the acknowledgment by the
testator of his own signature, cannot be admitted to proof on the evidence of only one

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the attesting witnesses.250 There is no requirement that attesting witnesses should
identify each other.251 Where the attesting witnesses proved the execution, it was
immaterial that their names were not mentioned in the will.252 Where the sole evidence
of title was a "will" and the attesting witness failed to prove it, it would not be said that
the will had been legally proved.253 It would not be necessary to call an attesting
witness where execution of a deed was not denied, only its validity was questioned on
the ground of undue inﬂuence.254
Where all the attesting witnesses had died, the Sub-Registrar, who had registered the
will was examined on commission set out the circumstances in which the attesting
witnesses as well as the testator had signed the document, the execution of the will
was held to be proved.255
There is no legal bar in a scribe himself being an attesting witness, provided he has
actually seen the executant signing or aﬃxing his mark or has received a personal
acknowledgement from the executant and consciously aﬃxed his signature as an
attesting witness, as a token of having witnessed the executants signing or aﬃxing his
mark. Evidence should prove that the scribe, apart from being so, had signed for the
purpose of testifying to the signature of the executant and had the animo attestandi.256
However, where the scribe puts his signature in the document in the discharge of his
statutory duty, he cannot be treated as an attesting witness. His evidence cannot be
taken as a substitute for the evidence of an attesting witness.257 Simply because the
signature of a person appeared on the will, the said person cannot be termed as an
attesting witness, in absence of evidence to substantiate that he had put his signatures
on the document for the purpose of attesting it.258
Where the opposite party took no steps to produce any attesting witness and he could
not be cross-examined, it was held that his statement that he saw the executant sign
the document and then he himself attested it remained unrebutted. The requirement of
section 68 was satisﬁed. The Court further said that no qualiﬁcation is prescribed for
anybody being an attesting witness.259

[s 68.6] Registered documents—
[Proviso].—The proviso was added by Act XXXI of 1926. It simpliﬁes the diﬃculty of
calling attesting witnesses where the document to be proved is a registered one and is
not a will and its execution is not speciﬁcally denied by the person executing it.260 If
the attestation is not speciﬁcally denied it is not necessary to call any attesting
witness.261 What has to be speciﬁcally denied is the execution of the document and a
mere denial of the genuineness of the document is not enough to indicate that the
execution of the document was denied.262
The words "speciﬁcally denied" means speciﬁcally denied by the party against whom it
is sought to be used and not only by the executant. Where, therefore, a party against
whom a document is sought to be used denied its execution, even though the
executant does not do so, it is necessary to call an attesting witness to prove it.263 A
third party who is a party to a mortgage suit but not to the mortgage deed can deny
execution and require proof of attestation when the executant of the deed admits
execution.264 Where the plaintiff alleged that the executant of the gift deed was so old
and inﬁrm that he could not understand the nature of the document, the court said that
it was not "a speciﬁc denial".265 Where the execution of a registered gift deed was not
denied by the executant, proviso to section 68 was not attracted.266 The proviso to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
section 68 is not applicable to the sale deed of immovable property. Even if the sale
deed has been attested by witnesses, they need not be examined.267
A registered deed of gift of immovable property was signed by the donor and attested
by the witnesses. The donor also admitted execution of the gift in favour of the
appellant. It was held that the deed was duly proved even if one of the attesting
witnesses was not called upon to testify to the execution.268
The Madras High Court has held that the proviso has a retrospective effect as it relates
to procedural law and not to substantive law. If the execution of a deed required to be
attested by law is not denied by the executant, it need not be proved by any attesting
witness, though it might have been executed before the enactment of the proviso.269

[s 68.7] Will.—
To prove the execution of a will, mere examination of its writer or proof of his
signature270 or the fact that the will was registered one was held to be not
suﬃcient.271
Examination of at least one attesting witness is mandatory. Where only one attesting
was alive but he could not be produced despite best efforts and an application for ﬁling
additional evidence was made at the late stage of arguments, it was held that the
application was to be allowed since proof of registered will was not possible without
examining at least one attesting witness.272 Even where the sole attesting witness
produced denies the Will, it can be accepted if it is proved by other evidence that there
was proper attestation. The requirement of proof that the Will was duly executed is on
the propounder. The mere proof of the signature of the testator is not enough.273 Proof
of will stands in a higher degree in comparison to other documents. There must be
clear evidence of the attesting witnesses or other witnesses, that the contents of the
will were read over to the executant and he, after admitting the same to be correct, put
his signature in the presence of witnesses. It is only after the executant puts his
signature, that the attesting witnesses shall put their signatures in the presence of the
executant.274
Where the will in question was a registered document and was more than 50 years old,
and all the attesting witnesses and scribe were dead and, therefore, the question of
their examination did not arise, it was held that, in the absence of any suspicious
circumstances, the presumption of genuineness of the will prevailed.275 Registration of
a will is a piece of evidence conﬁrming its genuineness and can confer it a higher
degree of sanctity.276
The scribe of a will stated that the will was scribed by him at the instance of the
testator who was in a ﬁt state of health and mind and that the will was signed by him
after it was read over to him. This statement of the scribe, the court said, amounted to
the statement of an attesting witness. The marginal witness also corroborated the
statement of the scribe. It was immaterial that the attesting witness did not say that he
signed the will in the presence of the executant.277
The defendant categorically deposed that he was in possession of the suit property by
virtue of the Will. It was held that he was estopped from disputing due execution of the
Will as regards bequeathing of the suit property to the plaintiff. He was not allowed to
say that no attesting witness was examined by the plaintiff.278

[s 68.7.1] Unregistered Partition and Will.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
It was a case of an unregistered partition deed and Will, but it was given the
nomenclature of Will. The predecessor of the parties gave the suit properly by way of
family partition to the plaintiff, defendant and their missing brother. The document
required registration because the property apparently was of more than Rs 100 in
value. The document being not admissible in evidence, it was held that decreeing the
plaintiff's claim on the strength of such document was not valid.279

[s 68.8] "Execution".—
"Execution" means not only signing by the person executing the document but also the
attestation of his signature by witnesses where it requires such attestation.280
The expression "execution" does not merely mean signature. It also means that the
executant or the person who puts the signature has done so after understanding the
contents of the document. It has to be proved that the testator had put his signature
after understanding the contents of the document. The fact of registration is not a
conclusive evidence of due execution. Since oﬃcial acts are presumed to be regularly
done, the fact of registration creates the presumption of due execution.281

[s 68.8.1] Gift Deed.—
The attesting witnesses of the gift deed was not examined. The person examined
denied that he was an attesting witness. He denied any knowledge about signature on
the gift deed. The Court held that it could not be said that the gift deed was proved.282
Where the executant of the gift deed, an illiterate lady, pleaded that her signature on the
gift deed was taken without explaining its contents to her and no evidence was given to
prove that the same was read out and explained to her, besides its attestation was not
proved, it was held that the gift deed was invalid.283

[s 68.9] Effect of non-denial of attestation and/or execution.—
The prevalent view that the court will always insist on proof of will irrespective of a plea
denying it speciﬁcally was itself put to challenge in Kerala High Court that was noticed
by the Delhi High Court. This was by reading section 58 as overriding section 68 of the
Evidence Act, 1872. In Neelam Sahgal alias Nellu Sahgal v Seema Mehra,284 the Delhi
High Court recounted:
In Thayyullathil Kunhikannan v Thayyullathil Kalliani,285 a Division Bench of the Kerala High
Court held that section 58 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 has to be read as overriding
section 68 and as obviating the necessity for calling an attesting witness, unless the
execution of the will or the attestation is in dispute. Section 68 states that if a document is
required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one attesting witness at
least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting
witness alive. The proviso to the section which was introduced by the amending Act 31 of
1926 makes an exception in the case of any document, not being a will, which has been
registered, unless its execution by the persons by whom it purports to have been executed,
is speciﬁcally denied. The fact that the proviso is not applicable to wills, and that it does not
make an exception in the case of registered wills, does not lead to any inference that a will
cannot be acted upon or used as evidence, unless it has been proved by an attesting
witness. The only effect of the proviso is that registration of the will by itself does not
obviate the necessity of calling an attesting witness to prove it, if it is otherwise required to
be proved. The proviso does not speak of a case where a will is not in dispute. Section 68
relates to those documents which require to be proved at the trial of a suit. If by any rule of
law or of pleadings, such proof is not required, section 68 cannot operate to insist on formal
proof by calling an attesting witness. Section 58 has to be read as overriding section 68 and
as obviating the necessity for calling an attesting witness, unless the execution of the will or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the attestation is in dispute. In the absence of any such plea in the written statement, it will
be the height of technicality and waste of judicial time to insist on examination of an
attesting witness, before a will could be used as evidence. Order VII rule 5 CPC deems the
execution of the will to be admitted in the absence of any denial thereof in the written
statement. Examination of an attesting witness is therefore unnecessary when the parties
have not joined issue on the validity or genuineness of the will.

208 Ins. by Act 31 of 1926, section 2.
209 Veerappa Kavundan v Ramasami Kavundan, (1907) 30 Mad 251; Ram Gopal Lal v Aipna

Kunwar, (1922) 44 All 495 : 49 IA 413.
210 Radhamohan v Haribandhu, AIR 1991 NOC 109 (Ori).
211 Komalsing Kuwarsing v Krishnabai, (1945) 48 Bom LR 83 : (1946) Bom 146.
212 Wigmore, section 1304.
213 Dashrath prasad v Laloosingh, (1951) Nag 873.
214 Bishnu Ram Krishan v Nathu Vithal, (1948) 51 Bom LR 245 . Ram Rattan v Bittan Kaur, AIR

1980 All 395 , where the attesting witness though alive was not produced. State of Haryana v Raj
Kaur, AIR 2001 P&H 322, the original will was not produced, only one attesting witness produced
who stated that he was not aware whether the testator had executed any will or he had thumb
marked any will. The testator had excluded his daughters from succession and preferred his
nephews. The propounder of will did not produce any evidence to show that the testator was
free from extraneous inﬂuence and used or was capable of using his free mind. The subRegistrar who registered the will was not produced. The court said that the will was not proved
to the satisfaction of the court so as to exclude natural heirs. N Kamalam v Ayyaswamy, AIR
2001 SC 2802 , signature of the subscribe cannot be equated with that of an attesting witness.
Attestation is a legal requirement. Sundariya Bai Choudhary v UOI, AIR 2008 MP 227 (DB), will
shown to be properly executed and attested.
215 KM Varghese v KM Oommen, AIR 1994 Ker 85 , dissenting from Road Fromroze v Kanta

Varjvandas, AIR 1946 Bom 12 , Vishni Ram Krishna v Nathu Vithal, AIR 1949 Bom 266 , K
Nookaraju v P Venkatarao, AIR 1974 AP 13 and Pattammal v Kanniammal, AIR 1981 Mad 252 .
216 Balwant v Mainabai, AIR 1991 MP 11 ; A Chandrabati v Laxmi Dei, AIR 1991 Ori 289 .
217 Haradhan Mahatha v Dukhu Mahatha, AIR 1993 Pat 129 .
218 Bhagya Wati Jain v General Public, AIR 1995 P&H 201, the court surveyed a large number of

cases at pp 204-209.
219 KM Varghese v KM Oommen, AIR 1994 Ker 85 ; Madhukar D Shende v Tarabal Aka Shedage,

AIR 2002 SC 637 , the validity of a will could not be questioned on the basis of suspicion and
conjectures with no foundation in evidence and having no relevance to the facts of the case.
There was no challenge by any relative of the testatrix. The court set aside the ﬁnding. C.
Ananda Sundaraman v C. Thirupunasundari, AIR 2008 NOC 2658 (Mad—DB) will proved by proper
evidence, not allowed to be shaken off by mere allegations of undue inﬂuence, those who were
supposed to have inﬂuenced were abroad.
220 Laxminarayan Panigrahi v Panchanana Panda, AIR 2016 NOC 20 (Ori).
221 Baburajan v Parukutty, AIR 1999 Ker 274 , signature and attestation were put at the end of

the document after the schedule of property. The failure of the testator to sign one of the pages
was held as not making any difference. S Kaliyammal v K Paliammal, AIR 1999 Mad 40 ,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
execution of the will was not denied, but the allegation was that the execution was under fraud
and under inﬂuence. No evidence was produced in support of the allegation. The court said that
an inference of the validity of the will was warranted. Janardan Badrinarayan Patel v Sheth
Ambalal Himatlal, AIR 1999 Guj 162 , the propounders did not produce the draft of the will and
there was no evidence to show the happenings prior to the ﬁnalisation of the will.
222 P Arakhita Senapati v P Sabitri Senapati, 2016 AIR CC 359 (Ori).
223 Ved Prakash v Buta Singh, 2016 AIR CC 1861, para 10 (P&H).
224 Bharpur Singh v Shamsher Singh, AIR 2009 SC 1766 : (2009) 3 SCC 687 ; Basanta Kumar

Ghosh v Bimal Kumar Nayak, AIR 2009 NOC 2677 (Cal—DB) suspicious circumstances about
civil, not clariﬁed. Babu Singh v Ram Sahai, AIR 2008 SC 2485 : (2008) 14 SCC 754 , suspicious
circumstances have to be clariﬁed. Party has to take steps to bring forth attesting witnesses. JT
Surappa v Satchidhanandendra, AIR 2008 NOC 2433 (Kar), will came into being six hours before
testator's death, it could not be said that he must have been in proper state of time, signature on
side margin of ﬁrst two sheets, not at bottom, doubts about presence of attesting witnesses.
Afoline D'Souza v John D'Souza, AIR 2007 SC 2219 : (2007) 7 SCC 225 , 96 years old testatrix
lady, many suspicious circumstances like nothing to show that the Will was read over to her and
understood by her, not accepted. Niranjan Umeshchandra Joshi v Mrudula Jyoti, AIR 2007 SC 614
: (2006) 13 SCC 433 , will executed while in ICU, one of his sons was attending doctor, whole
legacy left to him, no reason stated, doubtful circumstances, denial of probate was held proper.
Sham Singh v Rano Devi, AIR 2007 NOC 621 (HP), suspicious circumstances, not explained.
225 Commr v Mohan Krishna Abrol, AIR 2004 SC 2060 : (2004) 7 SCC 505 .
226 Dhannulal v Ganeshram, AIR 2015 SC 2382 (para 20).
227 Prem Devi v Bholanath Gattani, AIR 2015 Raj 200 , paras 10 and 12.
228 Alagappa Chettiyar v Ko Kala Pai, (1940) Ran 199; Shamu Patter v Abdul Kadir Ravuthan,

(1912) 35 Mad 607 : 39 IA 218 : 14 Bom LR 1034.
229 Lachman Singh v Surendra Bahadur Singh, (1932) 54 All 1051 FB Benga Behera v Braja

Kishore Nanda, AIR 2007 SC 1975 : (2007) 9 SCC 728 , a person signing a Will in performance of
a statutory duty is not an attesting witness. A certifying witness (an advocate in this case) was
not treated as an attesting witness. The certiﬁcate was that the Will was dictated by him to his
clerk.
230 Nainsukhdas Sheonarayan Shop v Goverdhandas, (1947) Nag 510.
231 Rao Bhimsing v Fakirchand, (1947) Nag 649.
232 Amir Husain v Abdul Samad, (1937) All 723 .
233 Badri Prasad v Abdul Karim, (1913) 35 All 254 ; Ram Bahadur Singh v Ajodhya Singh, (1916)

20 Cal WN 699 (Patna); Dalichand v Lotu, (1919) 22 Bom LR 136 : 44 Bom 405; Amardas
Mangaldas v Haramanbhai Jethabhai, (1942) 44 Bom LR 643 .
234 Paramasiva Udayan v Krishna Padhyachi, (1917) 41 Mad 535.
235 Jagannath Khan v Bajrang Das Agarwala, (1920) 48 Cal 61 ; Abinash Chandra Bidyanidhi

Bhattacharya v Dasarath Malo, (1928) 56 Cal 598 .
236 Dhruba Sahu v Nalumoni Sahu, AIR 1983 Ori 24 , the Court adding that it is not necessary for

the attesting witness to add that he signed in the presence of the executant.
237 Ujagar Singh v Parmesh Knitting Works, AIR 1986 P&H 230.
238 Alagappa Chettiyar v Ko Kala Pai, (1940) Ran 199.
239 Yacubkhan v Guljarkhan, (1927) 52 Bom 219 : 30 Bom LR 565.
240

Lakshman v Krishnaji, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1425 ; Thakkar Vrajlal Bhimjee v Thakkar

Jamnadass Valjee, (1994) 4 SCC 723 , no attesting witness to a mortgage deed was produced.
Its execution was not deemed to have been proved. The admission by the guarantor of his

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
signature upon the mortgage deed was not a substitute for proof by attesting witnesses. The
court followed Kunwar Surendra Bahadur Singh v Thakur Behari Singh, AIR 1939 PC 117 .
241 Sumangala T Pai v Sundaresa Pai, AIR 1991 Ker 259 .
242 Kuwarlal v Rekhlal, (1950) Nag 321.
243 Chand Bee v Hameedunisa, AIR 2007 AP 150 .
244 HS Rudrappa v HY Shivlingappa, AIR 2000 NOC 42 : 1999 AI HC 4543.
245 Shyam Lal v Lakshmi Narain, (1939) All 366 .
246 Moti Chand v Lalta Prasad, (1917) 40 All 256 .
247 Ruprao v Ramrao, (1952) Nag 189.
248 Raizulnisa Begam v Lala Puran Chand, (1943) 19 Luck 443 .
249 Ananta Raghuram v Rajah Bommaderara, AIR 1958 Andhra 418 .
250 Roda Framroze v Kanta Varjivandas, (1945) 47 Bom LR 709 : (1946) Bom 295; Ruprao v

Ramrao, (1952) Nag 189.
251 Krishna Kumar v Kayastha Pathsala, AIR 1966 All 570 .
252 Beni Chand v Kamla Kunwar, AIR 1977 SC 63 : 1977(4) SCC 554 .
253 Rameshwari Devi v Shyam Lal, AIR 1980 All 292 .
254 Engineers (Overseas) Corpn. v WB Fin. Corp, AIR 1986 Cal 132 ; Chandrashekhar v Rahul

Shikshan Prasarak Mandal Sansar Nagar, 2017 (6) Andh LD 121, unless the execution of a
document, not being a Will, is denied by the executant, it would not be necessary to call an
attesting witness in proof of execution of any document which otherwise is required by law to
be attested.
255 Ved Mitra Verma v Dharam Deo Verma, (2014) 15 SCC 578 para 13 : 2014 (9) Scale 219 .
256 CG Raveendran v C.G Gopi, AIR 2015 Ker 250 , para 17 (DB).
257 Laxminarayan Panigrahi v Panchanana Panda, AIR 2016 NOC 20 (Ori).
258 Narotam v Laxmi Devi, AIR 2016 HP 160 , para 17, relying on Punni v Sumer Chand, AIR 1995

HP 74 .
259 Peddavandla Narayanamma v Peddasani Venkata Reddy, AIR 2007 AP 137 .
260

The following cases are affected by this proviso; Veerappa Kavundan v Ramasami

Kavundan, (1907) 30 Mad 251; Satish Chandra Mitra v Jogendranath Mahalanabis, (1916) 44 Cal
345 ; Rosammal Issethenammal Fernandez v Joosa Marlyan Fernandez, AIR 2000 SC 2857 :
(2000) 7 SCC 189 , denial must not be vague, pleadings of the parties must also be considered
while recording a ﬁnding as to denial.
261 Yacubkhan v Guljarkhan, (1927) 52 Bom 219, 30 Bom LR 565; Hari Nath Ghosh v Nepal

Chandra Ray Chaudhuri, (1937) 1 Cal 507 , Sheo Ratan Singh v Jagannath, (1936) 12 Luck 681 ;
Bhagwandas Dhondidas v Basawwa, (1956) 58 Bom LR 809 .
262 K Narasimhappa v Lokkanna, AIR 1959 Mys 148 .
263 Chandra Kali v Bhabuti Prasad, (1943) 19 Luck 365 .
264 Syed Zaharul Hussain v Mahadeo, (1948) Nag 621.
265 Chuttan Lal v Shanti Pd, AIR 1981 All 50 .
266 Shyama Devi v Premvati, AIR 1996 All 57 .
267 Hans Raji v Yosodanand, AIR 1996 SC 761 : 1996 (7) SCC 122 ; Bayanabai Kaware v

Rajendra, 2017 (13) Scale 644 : (2018) 1 SCC 585 : (2018)1 SCC 585 , section 68 is not
applicable to sale deed which is governed by section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act.
268 Surendra Kumar v Nathulal, AIR 2001 SC 2040 : (2001) 5 SCC 46 .
269 Thayammal v Mutukumaraswami Chettiar, (1929) 53 Mad 119.
270 Janki Narayan Bhoir v Narayan Namdeo Kadam, AIR 2003 SC 761 , when one attesting

witness is produced, the examination of the other attesting witness can be dispensed with.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
271 Asia Bi v SA Abdul Gaffor, 1996 AIHC 1332 (Mad); Mohanlal Dungarmal Furmani v Vishanji

Dungarmal Furmani, AIR 2001 Cal 122 , construction of an unprobated will has to be according
to the agreement as it is and not by adding to or varying its terms.
272 Rajinder Singh v Hari Singh, AIR 2000 P&H. 257. Mathew Jacob v Salestine Jacob, AIR 1998

Del 320 , examination of only one witness is suﬃcient.
273 Joseph v KV Ippunny, AIR 2007 NOC 2517 (Ker—DB); Josephrise Jerome v S. Santiago, AIR

2007 NOC 2486 (Mad—DB).
274 Dhannulal v Ganeshram, (2015) 12 SCC 301 , para 19.
275 Kesarapu Manikyalu v Venna Pertimallaya, AIR 2000 NOC 20 (AP).
276 CG Raveendran v CG Gopi, AIR 2015 Ker 250 DT, para 15 (DB).
277 Dhyam Chand v Savitri Devi, AIR 1998 HP 37 . Chandan Longa Bai, AIR 1998 MP 1 , attesting

witness denied attestation by him. Other evidence became permissible. The scribe testiﬁed to
scribing the will and attestation by two witnesses. The document was also registered. The
statement of scribe comes under section 71. A subsequent will referred to the earlier will. The
execution of the will was taken to be proved. Madhab Bohora v Braja Kishore Nanda, AIR 2003 Ori
107 , attesting witnesses became hostile, the scribe was also avoiding but he was arrested and
produced, he admitted he did the scribing service and attested the thumb impression of the
executant. Evidence accepted that the will was duly attested in accordance with the law. One of
the copies carried a certiﬁcate from the party's advocate which was not there on the original.
Since there was no legal requirement of such endorsement, its absence on the original was
immaterial. Pt AK Misra v Pt Ram Chandra Sharma, AIR 2003 All 96 , of the two wills, the second
was found to be genuine and natural.
278 Minor Mani v Ammakannu, AIR 2008 NOC 2434 (Mad).
279 Mohinder Lal v Tule Ram, AIR 2008 HP 103 .
280 Hari Nath Ghosh v Nepal Chandra Ray Chaudhuri, (1937) 1 Cal 507 .
281 J Mathew v Leela Joseph, AIR 2007 NOC (Mad—DB).
282 K Laxmanan v Thekkayil Padmini, AIR 2009 SC 951 : (2009) 1 SCC 354 .
283 Sushama Rani Roy Chowdhury v Bani Roy, AIR 2017 NOC 34 (Cal).
284 Neelam Sahgal alias Nellu Sahgal v Seema Mehra, 2017 SCC OnLine Del 8743 : (2017) 245

DLT 404 : (2018) 184 AIC (Sum 5) 2.
285 Thayyullathil Kunhikannan v Thayyullathil Kalliani, AIR 1990 Kerala 226 : (1990) 1 Hindu LR

235 : 1990 (1) KLJ 114 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 69] Proof where no attesting witness found.—
If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the document purports to have been
executed in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation of one
attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person
executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.

COMMENT
An attesting witness, if available, should be called in evidence. If the attesting witness
is dead, or is living out of the jurisdiction of the court or cannot be found after diligent
search,286 or if the document purports to have been executed in the UK of Great Britain
and Ireland, two things must be proved:
(1) the signature of one attesting witness, and
(2) the signature of the executant.

Section 69 applies when no attesting witness is found. In the absence of any other
provision dealing with cases wherein the presence of witnesses cannot be procured for
various other reasons, like death of both the attesting witnesses, out of jurisdiction,
physical incapacity, insanity, etc., this section should apply.287
Section 69 imposes a twin fold duty on the propounder. It provides that if no such
attesting witness can be found, it must be proved that attestation of one attesting
witness at least is in his handwriting and also that the signature of the person
executing the document is in the handwriting of that person. Both of these will have to
be cumulatively proved by the propounder. Evidently, the section demands proof of
execution in addition to attestation and does not permit execution to be inferred from
proof of attestation. However, section 69 presumes that once the handwriting of the
attesting witness is proved, he has witnessed the execution of the document. The
provings have to be in accordance with section 67 of the Act.288
Where the executant of, and all the marginal witnesses to, a mortgage deed were dead,
it was held that the mortgage deed was suﬃciently proved by evidence that the
signature of the mortgagor was in his handwriting and that the signatures of two of the
marginal witnesses were in their handwriting.289
Where no attesting witness of a Will could be found, the court said that there must be
proof of the signature of at least one attesting witness and that of the executant.
Identiﬁcation of the signature of the scribe would not be suﬃcient.290
Where none of the attesting witnesses is alive, the will can be proved by a person who
is acquainted with the signature/handwriting of any attesting witness by giving

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
evidence that the signature in the will is that of the attesting witness as was done in the
instant case.291

286 Mussammat Shahzamdi Begum v Sud Mahammad Qasim, (1928) 7 Pat 312. In this case the

effect of the proviso to section 68 was not brought to the notice of the Court.
287 CG Raveendran v CG Gopi, AIR 2015 Ker 250 , para 18 (DB).
288 CG Raveendran v CG Gopi, AIR 2015 Ker 250 , para 19 (DB).
289 Uttam Singh v Hukam Singh, (1916) 39 All 112 .
290 Giddamma v Venkatamma, AIR 2010 NOC 626 (Kar).
291 Silvy George v Anna Joseph, 2014 AIR CC 2515, (paras 23 & 24) (Ker-DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 70] Admission of execution by party to attested document.—
The admission [s 70.2] of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself
shall be suﬃcient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document
required by law to be attested.

COMMENT
This section serves as a proviso to section 68.
The effect of this section is to make the admission of the executant a suﬃcient proof
of the execution of a document as against the executant himself,292 even though it
may be a document attestation of which is required by law.293 The document is not for
that reason binding on other persons.294 An attested document means a duly attested
one, and the execution that is contemplated in this section is a due execution or
execution in accordance with what the law requires for a particular document; so, if a
question of attestation is put in issue, it is incumbent on the plaintiff to prove that the
document has been duly attested before this section can be relied on.295

[s 70.1] Scope.—
This section operates only where the person relying on a document has not given any
evidence at all of the due execution of the document by the executant but relies on an
admission of execution by the latter. So that if a mortgagor admits execution of a
document in the written statement, it is wholly unnecessary for the mortgagee to
adduce any evidence as to the execution of the document. It is only in cases where it
appears on the face of a document or it is positively made out by the evidence on
record that a document required by law to be attested has not been attested in
accordance with law that this section cannot be made applicable in spite of the
admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself for the simple
reason that a court cannot shut its eyes to obvious facts appearing on the face of a
document or on the record.296

[s 70.2] "Admission".—
The admission here spoken of relates only to the execution. It must be distinguished
from the admissions mentioned in sections 22 and 65B which relate to the contents of
a document.
The Calcutta and the Allahabad High Courts have held that the word "admission"
relates only to the admission of a party in the course of the trial of a suit, and not to the
attestation of a document by the admission of the party executing it. In other words, it
has no relation to any admission of execution made before an attesting witness

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
without reference to any suit or proceeding.297 But the Patna and the Rangoon High
Courts have laid down that an admission under this section is admissible in evidence
even though it be an admission not made in the course of legal proceedings pending
before a court of Justice, but is an admission made antecedent to the institution of
legal proceedings.298 The Madras High Court has adopted the view of the Calcutta and
the Allahabad High Courts and held that the admission within the meaning of this
section must be an admission made for the purpose of or having reference to the
cause either in the pleadings or during the course of the trial.299

292

Jagannath v Ravji, (1922) 24 Bom LR 1296 : 47 Bom 137; Bhagwandas Dhondidas v

Basawwa, (1956) 58 Bom LR 809 .
293 Asharﬁ Lal v Musammat Nannhi, (1921) 44 All 127 ; Raja Ram v Thakur Rameshwar Bakhsh

Singh, (1936) 12 Luck 109 .
294 Arjun Sahu v Kelai Rath, (1922) 2 Pat 317.
295 Davood Rowther v Ramanathan Chettiar, (1938) Mad 523.
296 Raja Ram v Thakur Rameshwar Bakhsh Singh, (1936) 12 Luck 109 .
297 Abdul Karim v Salimun, (1899) 27 Cal 190 ; Raj Mangal Misir v Mathura Dubain, (1915) 38 All

1 . See Asharﬁ Lal v Musammat Nannhi, (1921) 44 All 127 .
298 Nageshwar Prasad v Bachu Singh, (1919) 4 PLJ 511 , doubted in Musammat Hira Bibi v

Ramdhan Lal, (1921) 6 PLJ 465 ; Aung Rhi v Ma Aung Krwa Pru, (1923) 1 Ran 557.
299 Davood Rowther v Ramanathan Chettiar, (1938) Mad 523, 532. Interpolation of words in a

receipt for payment of rent does not make it inadmissible. Kuri Lal Rungta v Banarsi Devi, AIR
1986 All 94 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 71] Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.—
If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document, its
execution may be proved by other evidence.

COMMENT
[s 71.1] Principle.—
Where an attesting witness has denied all knowledge of the matter, the case stands as
if there was no attesting witness, and the execution of the document may be proved by
other independent evidence.300 This section only operates if the attesting witness
denies or does not recollect the execution of the document or has turned hostile.301 If
the evidence of the witnesses produced by the propounder is inherently worthless and
lacking in credibility, section 71 cannot be invoked to bail him (the propounder) out of
the situation, to facilitate a roving pursuit. In the absence of any touch of truthfulness
and genuineness in the overall approach, this provision, which is not a substitute of
section 63(c) of Indian Succession Act, 1925 and section 68 of the Evidence Act, 1872,
cannot be invoked to supplement such failed speculative endeavour.302 Under it
execution of a document includes attestation.303
The attestation of a document does not amount to an admission of its contents by the
attesting person unless it can be proved that the document was read over to him and
that he made the attestation conscious of the statement made in the document.304
This section is a sort of a safeguard introduced by the legislature to the mandatory
provisions of section 68, where it is not possible to prove the execution of the will by
calling attesting witnesses, though alive. This section can only be requisitioned when
the attesting witnesses who have been called fail to prove the execution of the will by
reason of their either denying their own signatures, or denying the signature of the
testator, or having no recollection as to the execution of the document. The section has
no application when one attesting witness has failed to prove the execution of the will
and other attesting witnesses are available who could prove the execution if they were
called.305 Section 71 cannot be so used to as to allow a party to give a go-buy to the
mandate of section 68 qua the requirement of calling an attesting witness. Where one
attesting witness could not recollect and the other attesting witness, though available,
was not called, it was held that the will was not proved as the mandatory requirement
of section 68 was not satisﬁed.306

[s 71.2] Principle as applied to will.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The requirement of calling at least one attesting witness to prove attestation is laid
down under section 68 of the Evidence Act, 1872. This section constitutes an
exception, as it were to section 68 but the conditions laid down for invoking the
exception are strict. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution
of the document, its execution may be proved by the other evidence. The interplay of
the above statutory provisions and the underlying legislative objective would be of
formidable relevance in evaluating the materials on record and recording the
conclusions, as held in Jagdish Chand Sharma v Narain Singh Saini.307 The two
contingencies permitting the play of this provision, namely, denial or failure to recollect
the execution by the attesting witness produced, thus a fortiori has to be extended a
meaning to ensure that the limited liberty granted by section 71 of the 1872 Act does
not in any manner efface or emasculate the essence and eﬃcacy of section 63 of the
Indian Succession Act, 1925 and section 68 of the 1872 Act. The distinction between
failure on the part of an attesting witness to prove the execution and attestation of a
will and his or her denial of the said event or failure to recollect the same, has to be
essentially maintained. Any unwarranted indulgence, permitting extra liberal ﬂexibility
to these two stipulations, would render the predication of section 63 of the Act and
section 68 of the 1872 Act, otiose. The propounder can be initiated to the beneﬁt of
section 71 of the 1872 Act only if the attesting witness/witnesses, who is/are alive and
is/are produced and in clear terms either denies/deny the execution of the document or
cannot recollect the said incident. Not only this witness/witnesses has/have to be
credible and impartial, the evidence adduced ought to demonstrate unhesitant denial of
the execution of the document or authenticate real forgetfulness of such fact. If the
testimony evinces a casual account of the execution and attestation of the document
disregardful of truth, and thereby fails to prove these two essentials as per law, the
propounder cannot be permitted to adduce other evidence under cover of section 71 of
the 1872 Act. Such a sanction would not only be incompatible with the scheme of
section 63 of the Act read with section 68 of the 1872 Act but also would be extinctive
of the paramountcy and sacrosanctity thereof, a consequence, not legislatively
intended. If the evidence of the witnesses produced by the propounder is inherently
worthless and lacking in credibility, section 71 of the 1872 Act cannot be invoked to
bail him (the propounder) out of the situation to facilitate a roving pursuit. In absence
of any touch of truthfulness and genuineness in the overall approach, this provision,
which is not a substitute of section 63(c) of the Act and section 68 of the 1872 Act,
cannot be invoked to supplement such failed speculative endeavour.

300 See Lakshman v Krishnaji, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1425 . See also Brundaban Nayak v Gobardhan

Biswal, AIR 1990 Ori 232 , where the attesting witness denied that he attested the gift deed and
other evidence was allowed.
301 Chaitan Charan Parida v Maheshwar Parida, AIR 1991 Ori 125 . Maria Sheilla v T Joseph

Catherine, AIR 2003 Mad 270 , the propounder was allowed to prove execution of the will where
either the attesting witness was not available or was unable to recollect facts. The will was
proved by showing that the testatrix had admitted her signature in the presence of the witness
who had deposed to that fact and also that she was in sound disposing state of mind.
302 Jagdish Chandra Sharma v Narain Singh Saini, (2015) 8 SCC 615 , para 45.1.
303 Laksman Sahu v Gokul Maharana, (1921) 1 Pat 154. Ram Ratan v Bittan Kaur, AIR 1980 All

395 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
304 Roop Lal v Shanker, (1951) 1 Raj 597 .
305 Vishu Ramkrishna v Nathu Vithal, (1948) 51 Bom LR 245 .
306 Janki Narayan Bhoire v Narayan Namdeo Kadam, AIR 2003 SC 761 , evidence of other

witnesses, for example, the person (respondent) who claimed the suit property and that of the
scribe could have been considered if the requirement of section 68 had been satisﬁed.
307 Jagdish Chand Sharma v Narain Singh Saini, (2015) 8 SCC 615 : 2015 SCC OnLine SC 415.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 72] Proof of document not required by law to be attested.—
An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it was
unattested.

COMMENT
[s 72.1] Principle.—
Where the law does not require attestation for the validity of a document, it may be
proved by admission or otherwise, as though no attesting witnesses existed.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 73] Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.
—
In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by
whom it purports to have been written or made, [s 73.2] any signature, writing or seal
admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by
that person [s 73.3] may be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that
signature, writing or seal has not been produced or proved for any other purpose.
The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or ﬁgures [s 73.4]
for the purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or ﬁgures so written with
any words or ﬁgures alleged to have been written by such person.
308[This

section applies also, with any necessary modiﬁcations, to ﬁnger
impressions.]

COMMENT
[s 73.1] Principle.—
The provisions of this section will apply only when a matter is pending before the court
and not otherwise.309 The Court may compare the disputed signature, writing, or seal
of a person with signatures, writings or seals which have been admitted or proved to
the satisfaction of the court to have been made or written by that person. A Court may
rely upon its own comparison of the signature, writing, or seal, unaided by expert
evidence.310 The rule of prudence is that comparison of signatures by Courts as a
mode of ascertaining the truth should be used with great care and caution.311 The
dispute about the genuineness of handwriting or signature should not be decided by
the court merely on the basis of its personal comparison.312 This section does not
infringe Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India.313 Thus, it was pointed by the
Bombay High Court in a case before it that where the prosecution had failed to prove
that the handwriting and signature on a document were those of the accused, the court
itself comparing the signature on the vakalatnama with the document would not
constitute evidence of signature and much less of handwriting.314 Though the court is
competent to do so, it would not normally compare signature of its own.315 The
question as to whether a direction given by a court to an accused present in court to
give his specimen writing and signature for the purpose of comparison under section
73 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872, infringes the fundamental right enshrined in Article
20(3) of the Constitution, has been referred to a three-judge bench of Supreme Court, in
view of disagreement between the two judges constituting the Division Bench.316
In the case of dishonour of a cheque, the defence of the accused was that his
signature on the cheque was forged. The cheque was not sent for forensic
examination. The Court said that no credence could be given for comparison purposes

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
to signature made by the accused on documents subsequent to the cheque, e.g., in this
case signature on vakalatnama and acknowledgements card. Decision on the basis of
such comparison was held to be not proper because subsequent signatures are only of
self-serving value. The magistrate should have compared the signature with those
available on earlier agreements and stamp paper.317
Two pronotes were alleged to have been executed for consideration. But neither the
scribe nor the attesting witnesses cogently deposed about it. The ink used for
signature was different from that used in scribing. The defendant denied execution.
Evidence and statement were contradictory. The Court said that the comparison by
experts was necessary. The comparison by the court in such circumstances was not
proper.318
Where signature on a registered Will was disputed on the basis of a sale deed executed
by the testator long back and the court rejected the prayer for sending the document to
an expert and recorded a ﬁnding by itself comparing the signatures, it was held that the
modality adopted by the court was improper.319
Signatures of the testators on the Will were disputed. The defendants produced a
document which carried the undisputed signature of the testator. Neither party took
any steps to have the signatures compared by an expert. It was held that comparison
by the court in such circumstances was proper. The Court could do so without the
assistance of any expert.320
Although section 73 speciﬁcally empowers the court to compare the disputed writings
with the specimen or admitted writings shown to be genuine, prudence demands that
the court should be extremely slow in venturing an opinion on the basis of mere
comparison, particularly when the quality of evidence in respect of specimen or
admitted writings is not of high standard or is not beyond doubt.321
Handwriting can be proved in the following ways:—
(1) By proof of signature and handwriting of the person alleged to have signed or

written the document (section 67).
(2) By the opinion of an expert who can compare handwritings (section 45).322
(3) By a witness who is acquainted with the handwriting of a person by whom it is

supposed to have been written and signed (section 47).
(4) By comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved

(section 73).

[s 73.2] "By whom it purports to have been written or made".—
According to the Bombay High Court this expression means, by whom it is alleged to
have been written or made.323 The Calcutta High Court has construed it to mean that
the writing which is in dispute must itself in terms express or indicate that it was
written by the person to whom the writing is attributed. It has observed that the section
"does not sanction the comparison of any two documents, but requires that the writing
with which the comparison is to be made ... shall be admitted or proved to have been
written by the person to whom it is attributed, and next the writing to be compared with
the standard. must purport to have been written by the same person, that is to say, the
writing itself must state or indicate that it was written by that person. a comparison of
handwriting is at all times as a mode of proof hazardous and inconclusive, and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
especially when it is made by one not conversant with the subject and without such
guidance as might be derived from the arguments of counsel and the evidence of
experts."324
According to the Bombay view when an anonymous writing is produced and ascribed
by the prosecution to a particular person, the case for the prosecution must be taken to
be that having regard to the admitted documents, and the comparison between them
and the disputed writing, the prosecution alleges that the disputed document purports
to have been written or made by the accused.325

[s 73.3] "Signature, writing or seal admitted or proved to the satisfaction of the
Court to have been written or made by that person".—
Where such signature, writing or seal on a particular document is not proved or
admitted to be genuine, it cannot be legitimately used for comparing it with the
signature, writing or seal other documents.326
Specimen signatures and writings made by an accused person while he is in the
custody of the police and while the police are investigating into the offence are
admissible in evidence at the trial of the accused for the offence of forgery.327

[s 73.4] "Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or
ﬁgures".—
This section limits the power of the court to direct a person present in court to write
any words or ﬁgures only where the court itself is of the view that it is necessary for its
own purposes to take such writing in order to compare the words or ﬁgures so written
with any words or ﬁgures alleged to have been written by such person. The power does
not extend to permitting one or the other party before the court to ask the court to take
such writing for the purpose of its evidence or its own case.328 The Court also cannot
send such a document to an expert who is a prosecution witness, but it can call its own
expert as a court-witness.329 The writing obtained by the court under this section does
not come within the expression "evidence".330
A direction to the accused to give a specimen writing can only be issued by the court
holding inquiry under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 or the court conducting the
trial of the accused person. The person under investigation against whom no case is
pending cannot be compelled to provide any specimen. The exercise of this power by
anyone else, for example, as in this case, by the Tehsildar or the Executive Magistrate,
will not be valid even if the accused failed to raise any objection.331
The words "any person present in Court" may not include an onlooker or a spectator
who has come to Court for purpose of sightseeing or witnessing the proceedings in
court. The words refer to persons who are parties to a "cause" pending before the court
and may include the witnesses of the contesting parties in the cause.332
A Court can call upon the accused to give his writing in court and make it available for
comparison by an expert.333 Though, section 73 does not speciﬁcally say as to who
could make such a comparison but reading section 73 as a whole, it is obvious that it is
the court which has to make the comparison and it may form the opinion itself by
comparing the disputed and the admitted writings or seek the assistance of an expert
who will put before the court all the material, together with reasons, which induced the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
expert to come to a conclusion that the disputed and the admitted writings are of one
and the same author so that the court may form its own opinion by its own assessment
of the report of the expert based on the data furnished by the expert. The function of a
handwriting expert is to express his opinion after a scientiﬁc comparison of the
disputed writing with the admitted writing with regard to the points of similarity and
dissimilarity in the two sets of writings.334
Where a person denied that he was married to the complainant and a letter supposed
to have been written by him which had a bearing on the fact of marriage was also
denied by him, the direction by the court requiring him to give a specimen of his
handwriting was held to be proper.335 Where in a case for enforcement of bank
guarantee, the guarantor pleaded that his signature was forged, his specimen
signatures which were admitted by him, were there on acknowledgement slip and
summons, the court said that it was not necessary to ask him to give his specimen
signature in the open Court.336
A person required by the court to give a specimen may refuse to do so. There is no
element of compulsion in it. The only consequence of non-compliance is that the court
is free to draw an adverse presumption under section 144.337 Where the plaintiff
refused to give his signature in court for comparison, the court refused to accept the
prayer that a presumption should be drawn against him under section 114. The Court
said a person could not be compelled to provide a specimen of his handwriting or
signature because that would tantamount to asking him to become a witness against
himself. It would be violative of Article 20(3) of the Constitution. The High Court did not
accept this approach. It said that such approach can be adopted only in reference to
persons accused of a crime and would not extend to parties and witnesses in a civil
proceeding.338
The Court can direct even a stranger to the suit to write something. The son of a party
was so directed in this case.339 The Court cannot take specimen handwriting at the
stage of investigation. There must be a case before it.340
Comparing of disputed signatures on the counter foils by the High Court judge without
the aid of an expert or person conversant with disputed signatures was held to be
illegal.341 Where the trial court formed the opinion that the signature on the document
in question was that of the plaintiff and, without considering any other evidence, based
the decision on its own comparison, it was held that this approach was not proper.342
Expert opinion should be obtained as a rule of prudence. The court should give cogent
reasons for its conclusions.343
In order to secure evidentiary value to footmarks, it is not enough to show that the
footmarks tally with the shoes of the accused. The evidence must go further and show
that the marks have some peculiarity which is found in the shoes of the accused and
will not be found in most other shoes.344 The court cannot be told not to exercise the
power under the section only because it is hazardous to do so. The court is not thereby
assuming the role of an expert.345 Chinappa Reddy J said at 537: The argument that
the court should not venture to compare writings itself, as it would thereby assume to
itself the role of an expert is entirely without force. Section 73 expressly enables the
court to compare disputed writings with admitted or proved writings to ascertain
whether the writing is that of the person by whom it purports to have been written. If it
is hazardous to do so, we are afraid, it is one of the hazards to which judges and
litigants must expose themselves whenever it becomes necessary. There may be
cases where both sides call experts and the voices of science are heard. There are
cases where neither side calls an expert, being unable to afford him. In all such cases it
becomes the plain duty of the court to compare the writings and come to its own
conclusion. The duty cannot be avoided by recourse to the statement that the court is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
no expert. Where there are expert opinions, they will aid the court. Where there is none,
the court will have to seek guidance from some authoritative textbook and the court's
own experience and knowledge. But it must, discharge the plain duty, with or without
expert. We may mention that Shashi Kumar v Subodh Kumar346 and Fakhruddin v State
of MP,347 were cases where the court itself compared the writings. Section 73 does not
make any difference between civil and criminal proceedings. In neither case does the
section authorise the court to ask the prisoner to provide a specimen of his handwriting
at the stage of investigation itself.348

[s 73.4.1] Specimen handwriting of stranger.—
The Patna High Court349 directed the defendant's son who was present in the court to
give a sample of his handwriting, though he was not a party to the case. The Court
said:
The language (of the section) is wide in terms and empowers the court to give necessary
directions to any person present in the Court and there does not appear to be any reason to
limit the expression "any person" to parties to the litigation. If the authenticity of a writing by
a stranger is necessary to be decided in a case, such a person must come within the sweep
of the section. Even if the meaning of the provision be assumed to be ambiguous, the Court
must construe it in a way which may advance the object of the section and the interest of
justice.

308 Ins. by Act 5 of 1899, section 3.
309 T Subbiah v Ramaswamy, AIR 1970 Mad 85 .
310 Abdul Subhan Khan alias Khalilur-Rahman v Nusrat Ali Khan, (1936) 12 Luck 606 ; Pakala

Narayana Swamy v King-Emperor, (1937) 17 Pat 15. See Tilakdhari v Jagat Rai, AIR 1962 Pat 76 ;
Mathew Jacob v Salestine Jacob, AIR 1998 Del 390 , the Court is empowered to draw the
comparison with an admitted signature.
311 Nagappa Chendappa v Nannibu, AIR 1960 Mys 220 .
312 Laxmi Bai v A Chandravati, AIR 1995 Ori 131 . Ajit Savant Majagavi v State of Karnataka, AIR

1997 SC 1255 : 1997 Cr LJ 3964 (SC), on the permissibility of this method of comparison. See
generally, Mukhtiar Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 4544 (P&H).
313 State of Bombay v Kathi Kalu, (1961) 64 Bom LR 240 (SC).
314 Vishwanath Mahadev Karkhania v State of Maharashtra, 1991 Cr LJ 3146 (Bom).
315 D Pandi v Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd, AIR 2001 Mad 243 .
316 Ritesh Sinha v State of UP, (2013) 2 SCC 357 .
317 Ajithkumar v Rejinkumar, AIR 2010 NOC 908 (Ker).
318 Venkatachalam v Govindan Chettiar, AIR 2010 NOC 698 (Mad); VK Sridhar v CR Shankar, AIR

2010 NOC 697 (Mad), execution of sale deed challenged only after death of a senior in the
family when it was said that signature was fabricated. Challenge allowed, comparison to be
made by expert, not court.
319 Gaudiya Mission v Shobha Bose, AIR 2008 SC 1012 : (2008) 17 SCC 714 .
320 SB Itligi v SV Salochana, AIR 2007 NOC 424 (Kar).
321 State of Maharashtra v Sukhdev Singh, (1992) 3 SCC 700 , 730 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 705 : AIR

1992 SC 2100 . A Neelalahtthadasan Nadar v George Mascrene, (1994) Supp 2 SCC 619, the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
court did the comparison itself in a case of double voting, the Supreme Court said that it was
necessary for the expeditious disposal of an election petition, but issued the advice that the
court should be slow in adopting this procedure. Tarak Nath Sha v Bhutoria Bros, AIR 1988 Cal 31
, the court should be slow to undertake the task of comparison itself. It should take the aid of an
expert. Booma Naicken v Chinna Gounde, AIR 1998 Mad 375 , thumb impression, the judge
himself compared the disputed impression with the admitted impression and gave his ﬁnding.
This was held to be not proper.
322 KS Satyanaryana v VR Narayana Rao, AIR 1999 SC 2544 : (1999) 6 SCC 104 , this was a suit

for recovery of amount from two defendants paid earlier as a sale consideration for property.
The plaintiffs plea was that the defendant No. 1 authorised the defendant No. 2 for the purpose.
But the defendant No. 1 denied his signature on any such paper as well as on Vakalatnama and
written statement. Dismissal of the suit on this ground was held to be illegal. Nallabothu
Purnaiah v Garre Malikarjuna Rao, AIR 2003 AP 201 , the evidence of the handwriting expert was
rejected by the court by reason of the fact that expert had no qualiﬁcation, held, not proper
because identiﬁcation of handwriting being not a developed science. There was no formal
qualiﬁcation to be possessed. Direct and circumstantial evidence lent support to the expert
opinion. Rejection of his opinion by the court was held to be not proper.
323 Emperor v Ganpat Balkrishna, (1912) 14 Bom LR 310 . See Mangubhai Mansukhram v

Pranjivan, AIR 1992 Guj 1 , a promissory note which was proved to be in the handwriting of the
dependant made him liable.
324 Barindra Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 , 502, 503. See Sarojini Dasi v Hari Das

Ghose, (1921) 49 Cal 235 ; Khijiruddin Sonar v Emperor, (1925) 53 Cal 372 .
325 Emperor v Ganpat Balkrishna, (1912) 14 Bom LR 310 ; Bhagirati Sahu v Akapati Bhaskar

Patra, AIR 2001 Ori 185 , a suit for speciﬁc performance was based on an agreement of sale of
the property in question, the defendant pleaded that the document was fabricated and that his
signature was forged and, therefore, he asked for examination by a handwriting expert. The
order rejecting the application was held liable to be set aside.
326 Sri Prasad v Special Manager, Court of Wards, Balrampur Estate, (1936) 12 Luck 400 .
327 Emperor v Ramrao Mangesh, (1932) 56 Bom 304 : 34 Bom LR 598.
328

Punamchand v State of MP, (1957) 59 Bom LR 1165 ; RB Khajotia v The State of

Maharashtra, (1972) 75 Bom LR 116 .
329 Hiralal v State, AIR 1958 Cal 123 .
330 Ram Swarup v The State of UP, AIR 1958 All 119 .
331 Sukhvinder Singh v State of Punjab, (1994) 5 SCC 152 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1376 .
332 T Subbiah v Ramaswamy, AIR 1970 Mad 85 ; Sanjay Goel v State of UP, 2002 Cr LJ 625 (All),

the Court could compel the accused under section 164, CrPC to give his specimen handwriting
to the investigating oﬃcer to enable him to get it compared with the note found at the scene of
crime in which the accused confessed to his crime. Another Allahabad decision, Guru Pal Singh
v State of UP, 2002 Cr LJ 1517 (All), is to the contrary effect. The Court said that it could not
compel the accused to give his specimen writing to the police for comparison with disputed
writings when the case was at the stage of investigation.
333 State of Mysore v Gapala Rao, (1953) Mys 697; State v Parameswaran Pillai, (1952) TC 447 .
334 Sukhvinder Singh v State of Punjab, (1994) 5 SCC 152 , 162, 163 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1376 .
335 Kumaran Nair v Bhargavi, 1988 Cr LJ 1000 Ker.
336 New Bank of India v Sajitha Textiles, AIR 1997 Ker 201 .
337 Sashi Bhusan v S.BI, AIR 1986 Ori 218 .
338 Shyam Sundar Chowkhani v Kajal Kanti Biswas, AIR 1999 Gau 101 .
339 Dinanth v Sukhdeo, AIR 1980 Pat 253 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
340

State of UP v Ram Babu Misra, AIR 1980 SC 791 : 1980(2) SCC 343 . Followed in

Harekrishna Patnaik v State of Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 462 (Ori), the court adding that if the specimen
was taken by the investigating oﬃcer in the course of investigation, even if with some
irregularities, the same can still be used.
341 Bharathan v K Sudhakaran, AIR 1996 SC 1140 : 1996(2) SCC 704 , relying on State (Delhi

Admn.) v Pali Ram, AIR 1979 SC 14 : 1979 Cr LJ 17 .
342 Shyam Sundar Chowkhani v Kajal Kanti Biswas, AIR 1999 Gau 101 .
343 Ashok Kumar Uttamchand Shah v Patel Mohmad, AIR 1999 Guj 108 .
344 Emperor v Bhika Gober, (1943) 45 Bom LR 884 : (1944) Bom 25.
345 Murarilal v State of MP, AIR 1980 SC 531 at 537 : 1980 Cr LJ 396 citing Shashi Kumar v

Subodh Kumar, AIR 1964 SC 529 and Fakhruddin v State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 1326 : 1967 Cr LJ
1197 . where the Court itself had done the comparison.
346 Shashi Kumar v Subodh Kumar, AIR 1964 SC 529 : LNIND 1963 SC 402
347 Fakhruddin v State of MP, AIR 1967 SC 1326 : 1967 Cr LJ 1197 .
348 State of UP v Ram Babu Misra, AIR 1980 SC 791 : (1980) 2 SCC 343 . Laxmi Shankar v

Shyam Lal, AIR 2006 All 171 , comparison of signature by court on sale agreement of motor
vehicles with signature on other documents and also supported by witnesses, ﬁnding of being
genuine.
349 Dinanath v Sukhdeo, AIR 1980 Pat 253 : 1980 BJLR 398.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
350[[s 73A] Proof as to veriﬁcation of digital signature.—

In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it
purports to have been aﬃxed, the Court may direct—
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the Digital

Signature Certiﬁcate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature

Certiﬁcate and verify the digital signature purported to have been aﬃxed by
that person.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, "Controller" means the
Controller appointed under sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000].

COMMENT
[s 73A.1] Information Technology Act, 2000—Proof of digital signature.—
For the purpose of ascertaining whether a digital signature is that of the person by
whom it purports to have been aﬃxed, the court may direct that person or the controller
or the certifying authority have to produce the digital signature certiﬁcate. The Court
may also direct any other person to apply the public key listed in the digital signature
certiﬁcate and verify the digital signature purported to have been aﬃxed by that person.
For this purpose the "controller" means the controller appointed under section 17(1) of
the Information Technology Act, 2000.

350 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II-11 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
[s 74] Public documents.—
The following documents are public documents:—
(1) documents forming the acts or records of the acts.[s 74.1]—
(i) of the sovereign authority,
(ii) of oﬃcial bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public oﬃcers, legislative, judicial and executive, 351[of any part of

India or of the Commonwealth], or of a foreign country;
(2) public records kept352 [in any State] of private documents. [s 74.4]

COMMENT
Documents are divided into two categories: public and private.
This section states what comes in the category of public documents. Section 75 states
that all other documents are private.
Certain modes of proof are prescribed in regard to public documents as distinguished
from private documents.
Sections 74–78 deal with (a) the nature of public documents, and (b) the proof which is
to be given of them. Section 74 deﬁnes their nature; and sections 76–78 deal with the
exceptional mode of proof applicable in their case. The proof of private documents is
subject to the general provisions of the Act relating to the proof of documentary
evidence contained in sections 71–73.
"There are several exceptions to the rule which requires primary evidence to be given....
The most important and conspicuous exception, however, is with respect to the proof
of records, and other public documents of general concernment; the objection to
producing which rests on the ground of moral, not physical inconvenience. They are,
comparatively speaking, not liable to corruption, alteration, or misrepresentation—the
whole community being interested in their preservation, and, in most instances, entitled
to inspect them; while private writings, on the contrary, are the objects of interest but to
few, whose property they are, and the inspection of them can only be obtained, if at all,
by application to a court of justice. The number of persons interested in public
documents also renders them much more frequently required for evidentiary purposes;
and if the production of the originals were insisted on, not only would great
inconvenience result from the same documents being wanted in different places at the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
same time, but the continual change of place would expose them to be lost, and the
handling from frequent use would soon ensure their destruction. For these and other
reasons the law deems it better to allow their contents to be proved by derivative
evidence, and to run the chance, whatever that may be, of errors arising from
inaccurate transcription, either intentional or casual. But, true to its great principle of
exacting the best evidence that the nature of the matter affords, the law requires this
derivative evidence to be of a very trustworthy kind, and has deﬁned, with much
precision, the forms of it which may be resorted to in proof of the different sorts of
public writings."353
Public documents form an exception to the hearsay rule and their admissibility rests on
the ground that the facts contained therein are of public interest and the statements
are made by authorised and competent agents of the public in the course of their
oﬃcial duty.
However, the statutory declaration that a particular document is conclusive proof of a
particular fact or legal right by itself, does not oust the jurisdiction of the civil courts.
The effect of such a statutory declaration is that in any enquiry regarding the existence
of such fact or a legal right, Courts/tribunals are forbidden from entertaining any
further evidence on such an issue the moment the document which is declared to be
conclusive proof of such fact/legal rights is produced before the court or tribunal
conducting such an enquiry. The ouster of the jurisdiction is altogether a different
matter354.

[s 74.1] "Documents forming the acts or records of the acts".—
"The word "acts" in the phrase "documents forming the acts or records of the acts" is
used in one and the same sense. The act of which the record made in a public
document must be similar in kind to the act which takes shape and form in a public
document. The kind of acts which section 74 has in view is indicated by section 78. An
electoral roll is a public document. It requires no formal proof. Certiﬁed copies are
enough proof.355 The acts there mentioned are all ﬁnal completed acts as
distinguished from acts of a preparatory or tentative character. The inquiries which a
public oﬃcer may make, whether under the Code of Criminal Procedure or otherwise,
may or may not result in action. There may be no publicity about them. There is a
substantial distinction between such measures and the speciﬁc act in which they may
result. It is to the latter only ... that section 74 was intended to refer."356
Statements recorded by police oﬃcers under section 161, CrPC are required by
sections 115(5) and (7), read together, to be furnished to the accused. Hence all the
earlier cases, before this provision was enacted in the CrPC, 1973, which regarded such
statements as public documents entitled to the privilege against disclosure under
section 123 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872, became out of date since then.357
A document which is brought into existence as a result of a survey, inquiry or
inquisition carried out or held under lawful authority is not admissible in evidence as a
public document unless the inquiry was a judicial or quasi-judicial inquiry and the
document is not only available for public inspection, but was brought into existence for
that very purpose. The statements in a document tendered in evidence as a public
document should be statements with regard to matters which it was the duty of the
public oﬃcer holding the inquiry to inquire into and report on.358 Records maintained
by revenue oﬃcers relating to land revenue, survey and settlement, etc. are public
documents, "Pahanies" and "faisal patties" are public documents.359 The documents
issued by the concerned Government Department indicating salary and allowances of a
deceased employee, do not require corroboration or any evidence to prove them and
can be received as additional evidence by the appellate court.360 Records of a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Development Authority are public documents. Certiﬁed copies of such records are
admissible in evidence.361
A document which purports to be a letter or report of an executive oﬃcial is not a
public document.362

[s 74.1.1] Published Scheme under Statute.—
A scheme was published in the Oﬃcial Gazette under the Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
The scheme envisaged installation of overhead transmission lines. The scheme had
thus become a public document. The Notiﬁcation had the effect of law under the
provisions of the Constitution. No adverse presumption could be drawn against a party
for his failure to produce the document in the court.363
There is a statutory requirement under section 159 of the Companies Act, 1956 that
every company having a share capital shall have to ﬁle with the Registrar of Companies
an annual return which includes details of the existing Directors. The provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956 require the annual return to be made available by a company for
inspection (section 163) as well as section 610 which entitles any person to inspect
documents kept by the Registrar of Companies. Therefore, a conjoint reading of
sections 159, 163 and 610(3) of the Companies Act, 1956 read with sub-section (2) of
section 74 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 makes it clear that a certiﬁed copy of
annual return is a public document.364

[s 74.1.2] Orders of civil court, FIR, charge sheet.—
Certiﬁed copies of the orders of the civil court and FIR were allowed to be submitted
because they are all public documents. They were admissible in evidence under section
77 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.365 A charge sheet under section 120B, IPC, 1860
against an election candidate was held to be a public document and admissible in
evidence without any proof.366 An order of sanction for prosecution issued in the name
of the Governor and authenticated by the secretary was regarded as a public
document. It was held that its authenticity, if not challenged before the trial court, the
same could not be challenged for the ﬁrst time before the Appellate Court.367
Similarly, when a compromise becomes part of the decree which is passed by the
court, it is a public document in terms of section 74 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
and certiﬁed copy of public document prepared under section 76 of the Act is
admissible in evidence under section 77 of the said Act. A certiﬁed copy of a public
document is admissible in evidence without being proved by calling witness.368

[s 74.2] Executive oﬃcer.—
A school master comes within the purview of "executive oﬃcer" and a copy of a
certiﬁcate given by him is admissible in evidence if properly certiﬁed.369 The check
memo which is required to be maintained by the oﬃcers in charge of the counting table
is a document forming record of the acts of public oﬃcers and, therefore, a certiﬁed
copy given by the collector in whose custody the document is kept can be admitted in
evidence in proof of the contents of the original document.370 The report of an oﬃcer
who effected delivery of possession in the Land Restoration Register was held to be
not a public document. But it happened to be admitted without objection at the trial

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
stage having been marked as an exhibit. Its admissibility was not allowed to be
challenged at any subsequent stage.371

[s 74.3] Marriage register.—
Hindu Marriage Register has been held to be a public document. Its contents were,
therefore, provable by producing certiﬁed copies.372 Where the documentary evidence
based in the oﬃcial registration of marriage was produced, it was accepted as a proof
of marriage for award of interim maintenance. The contrary evidence produced by the
husband in the shape of Ration Card and the Voters' List did not show any date of
marriage of the accused with any other person.373
A death certiﬁcate was issued by a police station. The death was not unnatural. A set
of police oﬃcers, who prepared the panchanama, it could not be said of them that they
did so in discharge of oﬃcial duty enjoined upon them. No reasons were given for
placing the matter on record. The certiﬁcate could not also be described as a part of a
public record. Hence, the certiﬁcate was of weak evidentiary value. Its rejection from
evidence was not improper.374 A death certiﬁcate, though a public document, could not
be accepted without considering circumstances. A decree passed against a dead
person is a nullity and cannot be executed against his legal representatives.375

[s 74.4] "Public records kept in any state of private documents".—
This clause refers to public records or original will and of registered documents.376
According to the Bombay High Court an income-tax return is not a public document or
a public record of a private document.377 Similarly, the Calcutta High Court has held
that certiﬁed copies of assessment or dues and order sheets are inadmissible in
evidence.378 The Madras High Court has held that an income-tax return or a statement
ﬁled in support of it is a public document and certiﬁed copies will be admissible under
section 65(c).379 Memorandum of Association of a company is a public document
within the meaning of this section.380 Electoral roll prepared under the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 is a public document.381 A plaint or a written statement ﬁled in
a case is not a public document.382 An agreement between a Maharaja and
Government setting up a Gurudwara as a public trust and the Government setting a
scheme of constituting a Temples' Board of Management including the Gurudwara, is a
part of public records—a public document and, therefore, needs no formal proof.383 So
is true of a wakf deed384 and a sale deed385 which are private documents but are
recorded with the sub-registrar.
In a case of this kind, a Division Bench of the Gauhati High386 Court explained the
status of such documents in these words: "Public records are those records which a
Government unit is required by law to keep or which it is necessary to keep in discharge
of duties imposed by law. A public record is one required by law to be kept, or
necessary to be kept in the discharge of a duty imposed by law, or directed by law to
serve as a memorial and evidence of something written, said or done. Therefore, a
private document would be a "public record" within the meaning of section 74(2) if the
private document is ﬁled and the public oﬃcial is required to keep it for a memorial or
permanent evidence of something written, said or done."
The Gauhati High Court has held that a registered power of attorney is not a public
document and, therefore, a certiﬁed copy cannot be admitted as equivalent to primary

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
evidence. It would rank as secondary evidence and would be admissible only when any
of the categories of admissibility under section 65 is proved to be available.387
Explaining the reason, the court said in the above case that the Registration Act, 1908
provides for registration of documents and the method of registration is that the
contents of documents are copies in a book maintained in the oﬃce of the subRegistrar which is commonly called the "Volume Book". Thus, the book contains only
copies of documents and not original documents. Documents so registered do not
become public documents. Only those public records which keep private documents
and not copies of private documents are treated as public documents.388
A registered document has a lot of sanctity attached to it. Such sanctity can be
demolished only by following proper procedure. The mere ﬁling of a complaint against
a registered power of attorney holder was held to be not suﬃcient to revoke the power
of attorney.389 A girl was rescued from ﬂesh trade. She was prosecuted under the
Immoral Traﬃc (Prevention) Act, 1956. The question was of her age. The police
produced public documents showing her age. It was held that everything else, like
statement in FIR, medical documents or even her supplementary aﬃdavit would have
to give way to the public record.390

[s 74.5] Sale/Lease deed.—
A sale deed or a lease deed is undoubtedly a private document, but once it is registered
and entered in the Book-I of the Registering Oﬃcer, the records maintained by such
Registering Oﬃcer becomes a public document.391

[s 74.6] Medico-legal report.—
In a medico-legal case, the medical oﬃcer prepares the (MLC) report as a public
servant in discharge of his duties and the (MLC) report is a public document, the
contents of which are admissible in evidence.392 Neither the post-mortem report nor
any certiﬁcate issued by the doctor regarding the date of death, is a public document
and they must be proved by the doctor concerned.393
The document furnished to the Press Council of India by organisations in order to
substantiate their claims to be recognised by the Press Council, are public documents
and are open to inspection.394

[s 74.6.1] School register.—
The age of the accused had to be determined for the purposes of the Juvenile Justice
Act, 1986. There was a concurrent ﬁnding of courts below that he was of the age
between 19 and 20 years and, therefore, not a juvenile. This ﬁnding was based upon the
report of the Medical Board. The doctor who examined the accused was not produced
as a witness. The school leaving certiﬁcate showed the age to be 15 years. No
evidence was produced to show that the certiﬁcate was wrong. The school records
could not be doubted for the fact that the admission register was not signed by the
father of the accused.395 A school leaving certiﬁcate is a document which falls within
the ambit of section 74. It is admissible in evidence per se without the need for any
formal proof.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 74.6.2] Records of nationalised banks.—
Records of nationalised banks have been taken to be in the category of public
documents. They are, therefore, admissible without further proof. The examination of
the person who prepared the document which is being offered in evidence is not
necessary.396

351

The original words "whether of British India, or of any other part of Her Majesty's

dominions" have successively been amended by the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as
above.
352 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "in any province".
353 Best, 12th Edn, sections 484, 485, pp 407-409. Abanti Jena v Priyabada Jena, AIR 2000 Ori

156 , whenever a document of this kind (electoral roll in this case) in produced, opportunity
should be given to the opposite party to lead rebuttal evidence.
354 Achyutanand Choudhary v Luxman Mahto, (2012) 2 SCC 76 .
355 Naladhar Mahapatra v Seva Dibya, AIR 1991 Ori 166 : LNIND 1990 Ori 50 .
356 Queen-Empress v Arumugam, (1897) 20 Mad 189, 197 FB.
357 Ram Jethmalani v Director CBI, 1987 Cr LJ 570 (Del) and the case law surveyed there.
358 Thrasyvoulos Ioannou v Papa Christoford L Demetriou, (1952) AC 84 . A spot inspection

report by a Tahsildar has been held to be not a public document. Radhey v Board of Revenue, AIR
1990 All 175 .
359 K Pedda Jangaiah v Mandal Revenue Oﬃcer, Moinabad, 1996 AIHC 1006 (AP).
360 Subhandra Kumari v Lallu Ram, AIR 1996 Del 64 .
361 Roshan Lal Khandelwal v Dr Jagdish Chand, AIR 2008 NOC 2043 (All).
362 Fazl Ahmad v Crown, (1913) PR No. 1 of 1914 (Cr).
363 Vijay Kumar S Rajput v MC of Greater Bombay, AIR 2000 Cal 97 .
364 Anita Malhotra v Apparel Export Promotion Council, (2012) 1 SCC 520 .
365 Md Akbar v State of AP, 2002 Cr LJ 3167 (AP).
366 Kitab Singh v Deputy Commissioner, AIR 2008 NOC 2310 (Raj).
367 State v K Narasimhachary, (2005) 8 SCC 364 : AIR 2006 SC 628 .
368 Jaswant Singh v Gurdev Singh, (2012) 1 SCC 425 : 2011 (12) Scale 182 .
369 Maharaj Bhanudas v Krishnabai, (1926) 28 Bom LR 1225 , 50 Bom 716.
370 Banamli Das v Rajendra Chandra, AIR 1975 SC 1863 : 1976(1) SCC 54 .
371 Junul Surin v Surdas Munda, AIR 2008 Jhar 82 .
372 Manjula v Mani, 1998 Cr LJ 1476 (Mad).
373 Kashi Nath Naskar v Aparupa Naskar, 2003 Cr LJ 1201 (Cal).
374 Hardayal v Aram Singh, AIR 2001 MP 203 . New India Assurance Co Ltd v Krishma Sharma,

AIR 1998 Delhi 386 , an insurance policy is not a public document.
375 Nilamani Pradhan v Narottam Pradhan, AIR 2008 Ori 185 , the decree happened to be

passed against a deceased person. The plea that the date of death was incorrect was raised
after 15 years.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
376 Rekha Rana v Ratnashree Jain, AIR 2006 MP 107 , registered documents (deed of sale) is a

private document registered in a public oﬃce. Overruling Nawab Saheb v Firoz Ahmed, (2002) 5
MPLJ 438 : 2003 AIHC 544 . Hussaini Mahto v Hulash Mahto, AIR 2006 Jhar 87 , certiﬁed copy of
registered sale deed produced by way of additional evidence, held, admissible without further
proof, the sale deed was not challenged.
377 Devidatt v Shriram, (1931) 34 Bom LR 236 , 56 Bom 324. Same is the view of the Rangoon

High Court: Anwar Ali v Tafozal Ahmed, (1924) 2 Ran 391.
378 Pramatha Nath Pramanik v Nirode Chandra Ghosh, (1939) 2 Cal 394 .
379 Rama Rao v Venkataramayya, (1940) Mad 969 FB.
380 Binani Properties v GA Hossein & Co, AIR 1967 Cal 390 .
381 Kirtan v Thakur, AIR 1972 Ori 158 .
382

Gulab Chand v Sheo Karan Lall, AIR 1964 Pat 45 . But for a contrary view see

Jagdishchandra v State of Gujarat, 1989 Cr LJ 1724 (Guj). Bawa Singh v Harnam Singh, AIR 2008
NOC 2574 (P&H), certiﬁed copy of written statement ﬁled by plaintiff in earlier suit, not
admissible in evidence per se. Those who signed them or made them would have to appear to
be examined. Shamlata v Visheshwara Tukaram Giripuriji, AIR 2008 Bom 155 , certiﬁcate copy of
a plaint is not a public document. It requires proof.
383 Kabul Singh v Ram Singh, AIR 1986 All 75 .
384 Fazal Sheikh v Abdur Rahman, AIR 1991 Gau 17 .
385 Jagdishchandra v State of Gujarat, 1989 Cr LJ 1724 (Guj).
386 Narattam Das v Md. Masadharali, (1991) 1 Gau LR 197 (DB).
387 Bidhan Paul v Paresh Chandra Ghose, AIR 2002 Gau 46 .
388 The court referred to the following authorities, Narattam Das v Md Masadharali Haribhuiyan,

(1991) 1 Gau LR 197 (DB) overruling the decision in Md. Saimuddin Sheikh v Abejuddin Sheikh,
AIR 1979 Gau 14 ; Manindra Kumar Dey v Mahendra Sukla Baidya, (1999) 2 Gau LR 219 : AIR 1999
HC 2147 . State of Haryana v Ram Singh, AIR 2001 SC 2532 , certiﬁed copy of a registered sale
deed of immovable property admitted in evidence for proving comparative land value without
examining the parties to the document.
389 Shanti Budhiya Vesta Patel v Nirmala Jayprakash Tiwari, AIR 2010 SC 2132 : (2010) 5 SCC

104 .
390 State of Maharashtra v Mohd Sajid Hussain, AIR 2008 SC 155 : (2008) 1 SCC 213 .
391 Gopinath Educational and Welfare Society v Rejendra Singh Shekhawat, AIR 2016 Raj 106 ,

para 12. See also Hemlata Devi v Ramautar Sao, 2016 AIR CC 686, para 15 (Jhar).
392 Dalip Kumar v State, 1995 Cr LJ 1742 (Del).
393 State v Bhola Pal, 1995 Cr LJ 3717 (Cal).
394 Indian Federation of S. & M Newspapers v Press Council of India, AIR 1996 Del 90 .
395 Prem Chand Sao v State of Jharkhand, 2003 Cr LJ NOC 66 (Jhar).
396 Gorantla Venkateshwarlu v B Demudu, AIR 2003 AP 251 : 2003 (2) Andh LD 648.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
[s 75] Private documents.—
All other documents are private.

COMMENT
Documents which are not public documents are private documents, e.g., contracts,
leases, mortgage-deeds, etc.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
[s 76] Certiﬁed copies of public documents.—
Every public oﬃcer having the custody of a public document, which any person has a
right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the legal
fees therefor, together with a certiﬁcate written at the foot of such copy that it is a
true copy of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certiﬁcate
shall be dated and subscribed by such oﬃcer with his name and his oﬃcial title, and
shall be sealed, whenever such oﬃcer is authorised by law to make use of a seal, and
such copies so certiﬁed shall be called certiﬁed copies.
Explanation.—Any oﬃcer who, by the ordinary course of oﬃcial duty, is authorised to
deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within
the meaning of this section.

COMMENT
This section provides the means of proof of public documents which any person has a
right to inspect. There is a common law right of a person to take inspection of a
document in which that person is interested for the protection of such interest.397 The
person claiming interest in the speciﬁed land cannot be refused certiﬁed copies of
"pahanies" and "faisal patties" on the ground that the land in question is classiﬁed in the
revenue records as Government land.398
The section requires that a copy of a public document given by a public oﬃcer should
bear a certiﬁcate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such
document. Where a copy bears no certiﬁcate and it is not supported by the evidence of
the person who prepared it, it is not admissible in evidence.399 But a carbon copy of the
court order issued in oﬃcial process but not marked as "true copy" was allowed in
evidence.400
When a compromise becomes part of the decree which is passed by the court, it is a
public document in terms of section 74 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and certiﬁed copy of
public document prepared under section 76 of the Act is admissible in evidence under
section 77 of the said Act. A certiﬁed copy of a public document is admissible in
evidence without being proved by calling witness.401

[s 76.1] Corrupt Practice in Election Speeches.—
An election petition alleged corrupt practice. It was alleged that the returned candidate
had resorted to communal appeals. A certiﬁed copy of a cassette of video recording of
the speeches was alleged to have been obtained by the petitioner from the oﬃce of the
Election Commission. The court said that the mere fact of obtaining from the oﬃce of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the Election Commission was not suﬃcient to show that the receipt was issued against
payment made by the petitioner for obtaining a certiﬁed copy.402

397 Shamdasani v Sir Hugh Cocke, (1941) 43 Bom LR 961 : (1942) Bom 71.
398 K Pedda Jangaiah v Mandal Revenue Oﬃcer, Moinabad, 1996 AIHC 1006 (AP).
399 Khadim Ali v Jagannath, (1940) 16 Luck 230 .
400 Thatha v Peru, AIR 1986 Ker 196 . Democratic Bar Assn, Allahabad v High Court, Allahabad,

AIR 2000 All 300 , recommendation of screening committee, which was not a public document.
401 Jaswant Singh v Gurdev Singh, (2012) 1 SCC 425 .
402 Tukaram S. Dighole v Manikrao Shivajee Kokate, AIR 2008 NOC 1767 (Bom).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
[s 77] Proof of documents by production of certiﬁed copies.—
Such certiﬁed copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public
documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.

COMMENT
In reference to a claim for compensation before the Accident Claims Tribunal, the
Rajasthan High Court held that the Tribunal has to follow summary procedure without
insisting upon strict compliance of the provisions of the Evidence Act. The court said
that certiﬁed copies of the FIR, inspection map, site inspection memo, panchanama,
injury report or post mortem report and other relevant documents produced by police
oﬃcer or doctor while discharging oﬃcial duties should have been admitted in
evidence without any formal proof.403
Even a compromise becomes part of the decree which is passed by the court, it is a
public document in terms of section 74 of the Evidence Act, 1872 and certiﬁed copy of
public document prepared under section 76 of the Act is admissible in evidence under
section 77 of the said Act. A certiﬁed copy of a public document is admissible in
evidence without being proved by calling witness.404
In a compensation claim for land acquisition, comparable sales method was adopted
for working out the compensation amount. It was held that certiﬁed copy of a
registered agreement of sale was admissible without examining the parties to the
document.405
It has been held that Khasra (Revenue Record) is a public document. A mere production
of a copy of the record would be suﬃcient for its proof under section 77. But a
certiﬁcate given by the Patwari (village record keeper), being a private document, it has
to be proved by examining the Patwari.406
A birth certiﬁcate issued by the appropriate Municipal Authority is an ultimate
document for proof of date of birth. It carries presumption as to its genuineness and is
admissible in evidence. The presumption holds good unless rebutted. Different
handwriting in date of birth and name of child born can be explained. That by itself
does not make the record suspicious or fabricated.407

[s 77.1] Marriage Certiﬁcate.—
The registration of a marriage cannot be proof of a valid marriage per se and is also not
a determinative factor regarding validity of a marriage. But it has a great evidentiary

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
value in family matters. This is shown by the fact that a marriage can be denied where
it is not registered nor otherwise ceremonially performed.408

403 Rajasthan State Road Transport Corpn. v Nand Kishore, AIR 2001 Raj 334 .
404 Jaswant Singh v Gurdev Singh, (2012) 1 SCC 425 .
405 State of Haryana v Ram Singh, AIR 2001 SC 2532 .
406 Badri Prasad v State of MP, AIR 2010 NOC 937 (MP).
407 Vasudha Gorakmati Mandvikar v City and Industrial Development Corp of Maharashtra, AIR

2008 NOC 2572 (Bom).
408 Seema v Ashwani Kumar, (2006) 2 SCC 578 : AIR 2006 SC 1158 : (2006) 101 Cut LT 639 :

(2006) 127 DLT 282 : (2006) 1 KLT 791 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
[s 78] Proof of other oﬃcial documents.—
The following public documents may be proved as follows:—
(1) Acts, orders or notiﬁcations of 409[the Central Government] in any of its

departments, 410[or of the Crown Representative] or of any State Government
or any department of any State Government,—
by the records of the departments, certiﬁed by the heads of those departments
respectively,
or by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such Government
410 [or, as the case may be, of the Crown Representative];

(2) the proceedings of the Legislatures,—

by the journals of those bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts,
or by copies purporting to be printed 411[by order of the Government
concerned];
(3) proclamations, orders or regulations issued by Her Majesty or by the Privy

Council, or by any department of Her Majesty's Government,—
by copies or extracts contained in the London Gazette, or purporting to be
printed by the Queen's Printer;
(4) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign

country,—
by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country
as such, or by a copy certiﬁed under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by
a recognition thereof in some 412[Central Act];
(5) the proceedings of a municipal body in 413[a State],—

by a copy of such proceedings, certiﬁed by the legal keeper thereof, or by a
printed book purporting to be published by the authority of such body;
(6) public documents of any other class in a foreign country,—

by the original, or by a copy certiﬁed by the legal keeper thereof, with a
certiﬁcate under the seal of a notary public, or of414 [an Indian Consul] or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly certiﬁed by the oﬃcer having the legal
custody of the original, and upon proof of the character of the document
according to the law of the foreign country.

[s 78.1] STATE AMENDMENTS
West Bengal.— New s. 78A, inserted by W.B. Act No. 20 of 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-1-1961).
"78-A. Copies of public documents, to be as good as original documents in certain
cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, where any public documents concerning any areas within West Bengal
have been kept in Pakistan, then copies of such public documents shall, on being
authenticated in such manner as may be prescribed from time to time by the State
Government by notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette, be deemed to have taken the place
of, and to be, the original documents from which such copies were made and all
references to the original documents shall be construed as including references to
such copies".

COMMENT
This section speciﬁes the various ways in which the contents of a public document can
be proved.
The word "may" is used only as denoting a mode of proof other than the ordinary one,
namely, the production of the original. For, when the original is a public document
within the meaning of section 74, a certiﬁed copy of the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible.415
This section does not appear to have the effect of absolving the parties from any rules
governing the proof of the facts on which they desire to rely. It is to be observed that
the section does not say how any fact, historical or otherwise, is to be proved by the
parties, but gives the court liberty to resort for its aid to appropriate books or
documents of reference on matters of public history.416 The proceedings of Parliament
may be proved under clause (2) by the Journals of the House of Commons or by copies
purporting to be printed by order of the Government.417 A carbon copy of a court order
issued by oﬃcial process, but not marked as "true copy" has been regarded as good
evidence.418 Cyclostyled copy of typed notiﬁcation attested by Divisional Forest Oﬃcer
is not an "authenticated copy" of the notiﬁcation as a proof of a particular forest being
a reserved one. In making an act of authentication, the oﬃcer who makes it, is to
declare his authority to do so.419 The landlord refused to receive the money sent by the
tenant by money order. The post oﬃce issued a letter showing refusal. The letter is
based on a public record and, therefore, relevant.420 A copy of the post mortem report
can be received in evidence for the purposes of a claim under the Motor Vehicles Act
without calling the doctor.421
The Exhibit was a photostat copy of the passport and the same was an inadmissible
document as it was not authenticated by the legal keeper as provided under section
78(6) of the Evidence Act. Based on such inadmissible document, it was argued on
behalf of the accused that no prosecution could be launched and once it was to be held
that the said document was not admissible, the whole case of the prosecution
collapsed like a pack of cards. The Supreme Court upheld the conclusion of the High
Court that section 78(6) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with public documents

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of any other class in a foreign country. In the present case, the original of Ext. P-50 is
the passport issued by the competent authorities in this country and, therefore, section
78(6) has no application whatsoever to the facts of this case. The issuance of original
of Ext. P-50, passport is clearly proved. It is based on that passport that the accused
travelled abroad and entered Portugal for which she had to face a prosecution and
suffer conviction and sentence. Accordingly, it was held that the prosecution cannot be
held to be vitiated.422
The Calcutta High Court has held that a court is not bound to have recourse exclusively
to the mode of proof in respect of public documents set out in this section. This is a
permissive and not an exclusive section.423 On a point of limitation it adopted the
version contained in the published Act and not that contained in the Gazette.424 The
Lahore High Court has, on the other hand, held that the text published in the Gazette
must be taken to be the authorized text of the Limitation Act, 1963, under clause (2) of
this section.425 Newspapers are not documents within the meaning of this section.
Hence the privilege given by this section is not enjoyed by facts reported in a
newspaper.426

409 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "the Executive Government of British India".
410 Ins. by the A.O. 1937.
411 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "by order of Government".
412 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "public Act of the Governor General of India in Council".
413 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "a Province".
414 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "a British Consul".
415 Jagdishchandra v State of Gujarat, 1989 Cr LJ 1724 (Guj), proof of registered sale deed and

plaint ﬁled in court by certiﬁed copies.
416 "The Englishman" Ltd v Lajpat Rai, (1910) 37 Cal 760 .
417 Ibid
418 Thatha v Peru, AIR 1986 Ker 196 : 1985 Ker LT 1069 .
419 Chandra Naik v State of Orissa, 1993 Cr LJ 2128 (Ori).
420 Shiv Narain v Nag & Co, AIR 1982 All 44 .
421 Raj SRTC v Devilal, AIR 1991 Raj 29 .
422 Monica Bedi v State of AP, (2011) 1 SCC 284 .
423 Seodayal Khemka v Joharmull Manmull, (1923) 50 Cal 549 , 560.
424 Ibid
425 Gobind Das v Rup Kishore, (1923) 4 Lah 367; Mathuradas v State, (1954) Nag 578.
426 Luxmi Raj Shetty v State of TN, AIR 1988 SC 1274 : 1988 Cr LJ 1783 . Newspaper report

supported by documentary evidence, admitted, Pvt Bus Operator Welfare Society v State of HP,
AIR 2016 NOC 138 (HP).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 79] Presumption as to genuineness of certiﬁed copies.—
The Court shall presume 427[to be genuine] every document purporting to be a
certiﬁcate, certiﬁed copy or other document, which is by law declared to be
admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly certiﬁed
by any oﬃcer 428[of the Central Government or of a State Government, or by any
429[oﬃcer in the State of Jammu and Kashmir] who is duly authorised thereto by the

Central Government]:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed
in the manner directed by law in that behalf.
The Court shall also presume that any oﬃcer by whom any such document purports
to be signed or certiﬁed, held, when he signed it, the oﬃcial character which he
claims in such paper.

COMMENT
Sections 79–90 deal with certain presumptions as to documents.
This section proceeds upon the maxim omnia proesumuntur rite esse acta (all acts are
presumed to be rightly done). In fact all the following sections down to section 90
inclusive, are illustrations of, and founded upon, this principle. But though the courts
are directed to draw a presumption in favour of oﬃcial certiﬁcates, it is not a
conclusive presumption; it is rebuttable. It is but a prima facie presumption, and if the
certiﬁcate, etc. be not correct, its incorrectness may be shown. On the same maxim
stands the last clause of this section. It is very old law that where a person acts in an
oﬃcial capacity it shall be presumed that he was duly appointed.430
This section applies to certiﬁcates, certiﬁed copies or other documents which are duly
certiﬁed by an oﬃcer of the Central Government or of a State Government or by an
oﬃcer in the State of Jammu and Kashmir who is authorised by the Central
Government in that behalf, to be genuine. The section has also been held to apply to a
carbon copy of a court order issued in oﬃcial process though not certiﬁed as "true
copy".431
Under this section a court is bound to draw the presumption that a certiﬁed copy of a
document is genuine and also that the oﬃcer signed it in the oﬃcial character which he
claimed in the said document;432 but if the original of a public document is sought to
be tendered in evidence it must be proved in the manner required by law as any other
document required to be proved under sections 67 and 68 of the Act.433 This
presumption is liable to be rebutted. This section imperatively directs the court to raise

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
a presumption. The terms of section 114 are only permissive. The words "shall
presume" indicate that if no other evidence is given the court is bound to ﬁnd that the
facts mentioned in the section exist. They occur in sections 79–85 and section 89.
These sections are, therefore, mandatory.

[s 79.1] Presumption as to signing authority—
[Clause 2].—Where a letter purporting to be issued from the Chief Secretary to the
Government of Bengal was signed by a Deputy Secretary, not in his oﬃcial capacity, but
"for the Chief Secretary," it was held that there was no legal proof that the Local
Government had ordered or authorized a prosecution under section 196 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. The presumption under this section would have arisen if the letter
had been signed by the Chief Secretary himself.434

[s 79.2] CASES.—
In a suit for permanent injunction, the certiﬁed copy of the Khasra entry made by the
Patwari showing the defendant as sub-tenant could not be presumed to be correct as
no evidence was adduced to prove that entry and the Patwari who made the entry was
not examined.435 A certiﬁed copy of a registered sale deed is admissible in evidence
without examining the vendors or vendees as witnesses.436

427 Ins. by the A.O. 1948.
428

The original word beginning from "in British India" and ending with the words "to be

genuine" have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937, A.O. 1948 and A.O. 1950 to read as
above.
429 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "in a Part B State".
430 Norton, 260-261.
431 Thatha v Peru, AIR 1986 Ker 196 .
432 Binka v Charan Singh, AIR 1959 SC 960 : 1959 Cr LJ 1223 .
433 CH Shah v Malpathak, (1971) 74 Bom LR 505 .
434 Oziullah v Beni Madhab Chowdhuri, (1922) 50 Cal 135 .
435 Sitaram v Ram Charan, AIR 1995 MP 134 .
436 Tata Chemicals Ltd, Bombay v Sadhu Singh, AIR 1994 All 66 , distinguishing Collector

Kamrup v Prabati Phukhan, AIR 1973 Gau 114 ; Mohamedbhai Rasulbhai Malek v Amirbhai
Rahimbhai Malek, AIR 2001 Guj 37 , certiﬁed copies of a judgment were produced in evidence,
the copy did not bear signature of the judge, the ﬁnal portion of the judgment was also missing,
date of the judgment was also not appearing on the copy, held inadmissible in evidence, being
incomplete.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 80] Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence.—
Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or
memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a
judicial proceeding [s 80.1] or before any oﬃcer authorized by law to take such
evidence or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken
in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, [s
80.2] or by any such oﬃcer as aforesaid, the Court shall presume—

that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the circumstances under
which it was taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are true, and that
such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.

COMMENT
The presumptions to be raised under this section are considerably wider than those
under section 79. They embrace not only the genuineness of the document, but that it
was duly taken and given under the circumstances recorded in the document. The
presumptions under this section are not conclusive; they may be rebutted.
The section is applicable (a) to a document which purports to be a record or
memorandum of the evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding or before any
oﬃcial authorised by law to take such evidence and (b) to a statement or confession by
an accused person, taken in accordance with law, and signed by any Judge or
Magistrate.
The section dispenses with the necessity for formal proof in the case of certain
documents taken in accordance with law. If a document has not been taken in
accordance with law, this section does not operate to render it admissible. The section
merely gives legal sanction to the maxim "Omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta" with
regard to documents taken in the course of a judicial proceeding.437 The depositions
and statements may be proved by the production of the document without any witness
being called to prove it.438 Where, for instance, a confession is reduced to writing by a
Magistrate in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the
record is admissible in evidence without further proof.439 The court will presume that a
confession was duly recorded and that the circumstances under which the confession
was recorded were such as had been set down in the record made by the Magistrate. It
says nothing about there being any presumption regarding the voluntariness of the
confession.440 Statements in writing made soon after the incident are far more
trustworthy than later denials or embellishments. Such statements are admissible in
evidence and presumption of genuineness under section 80 attaches to such
statements.441 A dying declaration, which has been recorded by a Magistrate, can be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
tendered in evidence without the Magistrate who recorded it being called.442 When a
deposition is taken in open Court or a confession is taken by a Magistrate, there is a
degree of publicity and solemnity, which affords a suﬃcient guarantee for the
presumption that everything was formally, correctly and honestly done.

[s 80.1] "Evidence ... given by a witness in a judicial proceeding".—
See section 33. This section will not apply to any statement failing to satisfy the
provisions of section 33.
A deposition given by a person is not admissible in evidence against him in a
subsequent proceeding without it being ﬁrst proved that he was the person examined
and giving the deposition. A pardon was tendered to an accused, and his evidence was
recorded by a Magistrate. Subsequently the pardon was revoked, and he was put on
trial before the Sessions judge along with the other accused. At the trial the deposition
given by him before the Magistrate was put in and used in evidence against him
without any proof being given that he was the person who was examined as a witness
before the Magistrate. It was held that the deposition was inadmissible without proof
being given as to the identity of the accused with the person who was examined as a
witness before the Magistrate.443

[s 80.2] "Taken in accordance with law, and purporting to be signed by any
Judge or Magistrate".—
If particular provisions of law in recording evidence are not fully complied with, this
section does not operate. Thus, omission to read over to a witness his deposition, in
accordance with O XVIII, rule 5, of the Code of Civil Procedure, renders the same
inadmissible in evidence against him on his subsequent trial for perjury.444 Where a
confession, made before a Magistrate, did not bear his certiﬁcate, stating his belief that
it was freely and voluntarily made, as required by section 164(3) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, it was held that it could not be admitted under this section without
proof of its having been so made.445
By virtue of the provision in this section, statements recorded under section 164, CrPC
are presumed to be genuine, but not a guarantee of truth.446
A confession made by an accused before a Magistrate in a former Indian State cannot
be admitted in evidence under this section. The Magistrate recording the confession
must be examined to prove all the confession before it can be used as evidence.447
Where such is not the case, it is not necessary that the recorder of a confession should
always be examined.448

437 Queen-Empress v Viran, (1886) 9 Mad 224, 227. See Hashim v The Empress, (1900) PR No.

9 of 1900 (Cr).
438 Emperor v Surajbali, (1933) 56 All 750 .
439 Kheman v Crown, (1924) 6 Lah 58; Nga San Baw v The Crown, (1902) 1 LBR 340 FB

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
440 Emperor v Thakur Das Malo, (1943) 1 Cal 487 .
441 Ramchit Rajbhar v State of WB, 1992 Cr LJ 372 (Cal).
442 Emperor v Surajbali, (1933) 56 All 750 .
443 Queen-Empress v Durga Sonar, (1885) 11 Cal 580 .
444 Emperor v Nabab Ali Sarkar, (1923) 51 Cal 236 , following Jyotish Chandra Mukerjee v

Emperor, (1909) 36 Cal 955 , and Emperor v Jogendra Nath Ghose, (1914) 42 Cal 240 ,
distinguishing Ramesh Chandra Das v Emperor, (1919) 46 Cal 895 , and disapproving Elahi Baksh
Kazi v Emperor, (1918) 45 Cal 825 .
445 The Emperor v Radhe Halwai, (1902) 7 Cal WN 220. See Nadir v The Empress, (1887) PR No.

36 of 1887 (Cr).
446 Ramchit Rajbhar v State of WB, 1992 Cr LJ 372 (Cal), statement of the prosecutrix who was

the victim of a rape not recorded under section 164 CrPC, this did not detract from her
testimony which was otherwise without any embellishment.
447 Emperor v Dhanka Amra, (1914) 16 Bom LR 261 .
448 Guja Majhi v The King-Emperor, (1917) 2 PLJ 80 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 81] Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of Parliament and
other documents.—
The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be the
London Gazette or 449[any Oﬃcial Gazette, or the Government Gazette] of any colony,
dependency of possession of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or journal, or to
be a copy of a private Act of Parliament 450[of the United Kingdom] printed by the
Queen's Printer and of every document purporting to be a document directed by any
law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept substantially in the form
required by law and is produced from proper custody.

COMMENT
[s 81.1] Principle.—
Government Gazettes or newspapers or journals or copies of private Acts of
Parliament printed by the King's Printer are prima facie proof of their genuineness.
As to the meaning of the expression "proper custody", see the Explanation to section
90, infra.
As to the relevancy of statements in a Gazette, see section 37, and the Supreme Court
decision in Vimla Bai v Hiralal Gupta.451
The second part of this section includes most of the documents which contain matters
referred to in section 35 and which are declared to be public documents by section 74.
Genuineness of the Gazette of Bombay Presidency published in 1879 was presumed.
So far as the statements recorded showed the historical material on the matter in
dispute, namely whether the temple in question which was of ancient origin was a
public trust, it was considered to be an expert evidence under section 45 and also
evidence from a public record under section 35.452 A clause in a Government contract
providing for arbitration was deleted and a notiﬁcation to that effect was published in
the Oﬃcial Gazette. The court said that it attracted the presumption under section
23(5) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and section 81 of the Evidence Act. It became
binding on the parties in respect of their commercial transactions with the
Government.453 Statements contained in the Gazetteer can be taken into account to
discover historical material contained in it. Facts stated in it are evidence under section
81.454
In the case of carriage of goods by sea the bill of lading is evidence to establish the
fact that the goods were actually put on Board by the master of the ship. Unless proved

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
otherwise, the contents of and details mentioned in the bill of lading are presumed to
be true.455

[s 81.1.1] Newspaper reports.—
The presumption of genuineness attached under this section to a newspaper cannot be
treated as proof of the facts reported therein, and the statement of a fact contained in
a newspaper is merely hearsay and, therefore, inadmissible in evidence.456 The
translated copies of the news item cannot be considered by the court as a document in
the absence of the original newspaper. The newspaper as a whole must be ﬁled before
the court457.
Matters published in newspapers are not admissible in themselves.458 The
presumption of genuineness cannot be treated as a proof of the facts stated in the
newspaper report. Such a statement of facts is only a hearsay.459

449 Subs. by A.O. 1937, for "the Gazette of India or the Government Gazette of any L.G., or".
450 Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
451 Vimla Bai v Hiralal Gupta, (1990) 2 SCC 22 : 1989 Supp (2) SCR 759 , on the value of the

statements in the Gazette of Indore relating to a certain migration. For full statement see under
section 37.
452 Bala Shankar Maha Shankar v Charity Commissioner, Gujarat State, AIR 1995 SC 167 : 1995

Supp (1) SCC 485 : 1995 Supp (1) SCC 485 : (1995) 1 Guj LR 711.
453 Shambhu Sharma v State of Bihar, AIR 2009 Pat 161 .
454 Pattakal Cheriyakoya v Aliyathammuda B Muthunoya, AIR 2008 Ker 1421 DB.
455 SK Networks Co Ltd v Amulya Exports Ltd, AIR 2007 Bom 15 .
456 Harbhajan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1961 Punj 215 ; Luxmi Raj Shetty v State of Tamil

Nadu, AIR 1988 SC 1274 : 1988 Cr LJ 1783 , where the court ruled out newspaper reports as
against direct evidence substantiating the prosecution case. Ramswaroop Bagari v State of
Rajasthan, AIR 2002 Raj 27 , newspaper report not allowed to be the basis of ﬁling a petition.
Statement of facts in a newspaper is merely hearsay. It is inadmissible in evidence. The court
followed the above cited decision.
457 Binod Kumar Jain v Gauhati Municipal Corp, AIR 1994 Gau 96 . Tulsi v Besar, AIR 2002 HP 12

, the possession of the plaintiff was shown to be recorded as co-sharer in Khasra Girdwari and
Jamabandi, presumption of correctness attached to the entry, not rebutted, plaintiff was entitled
to the injunction in respect of his possession. B Singh (Dr) v UOI, AIR 2004 SC 1923 : (2004) 3
SCC 363 , newspaper reports do not per se constitute legally acceptable evidence.
458 Krishnamma v Govt of Tamil Nadu, 1999 Cr LJ 1915 (Mad).
459 Ravinder Kumar Sharma v State of Assam, AIR 1999 SC 3571 : (1999) 7 SCC 435 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
460[s 81A] Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic forms.—

The Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic record purporting to be
the Oﬃcial Gazette or purporting to be electronic record directed by any law to be
kept by any person, if such electronic record is kept substantially in the form required
by law and is produced from proper custody.]

COMMENT
[s 81A.1] Information Technology Act, 2000—Presumption as to Gazettes in
electronic form.—
The court has to presume the genuineness of any electronic record purporting to be the
Oﬃcial Gazette or purporting to be the electronic record directed by law to be kept by a
person. It is necessary that the electronic record is substantially kept in accordance
with the form required by the law and is produced from proper custody.

460 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II-12 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 82] Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof of seal
or signature.—
When any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a document
which, by the law in force for the time being in England or Ireland, would be
admissible in proof of any particular in any Court of Justice in England or Ireland,
without proof of the seal or stamp or signature authenticating it, or of the judicial or
oﬃcial character claimed by the person by whom it purports to be signed, the Court
shall presume that such seal, stamp or signature is genuine, and that the person
signing it held, at the time when he signed it, the judicial or oﬃcial character which he
claims, and the document shall be admissible for the same purpose for which it would
be admissible in England or Ireland.

COMMENT
This section enables the courts to recognise presumptions with regard to certain
classes of documents which are recognised in English Courts. The court must
presume (a) that the seal or stamp or signature is genuine; and (b) that the person
signing the document held, at the time when he signed, the judicial or oﬃcial character
he claims. Documents which, without proof of the seal or signature, or of the oﬃcial
character of the person by whom they purport to have been signed, are admissible in
England, will be admissible in courts in India.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 83] Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.—
The Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of
461[the Central Government or any State Government] were so made, and are

accurate; but maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be
accurate.

COMMENT
The presumption as to accuracy is limited only to maps or plans made under the
authority of Government.462 Such maps or plans contain the results of inquiries made
under competent public authority. In all other cases proof of accuracy is needed. Where
maps are prepared by private persons no presumption in favour of accuracy can be
drawn under this section.463 This section must be read with section 36, which deals
with statements in maps, charts and plans. These are provable under Sections 77 and
79 by the production of certiﬁed copies.
Maps and surveys made in India for revenue purposes are oﬃcial documents prepared
by competent persons and with such publicity and notice to persons interested as to be
admissible and valuable evidence of the state of things at the time they are made. They
are not conclusive, and may be shown to be wrong; but, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, they may be properly, judicially received in evidence as correct when
made.464 Where the survey number in dispute was covered by the development plan of
the municipal limits which was prepared in compliance with statutory provisions, its
correctness will be presumed and mere collection of taxes by Panchayat did not
disentitle the Municipal Corporation to levy octroi.465
Where the site plan and inventory prepared on behalf of a former ruler was not
produced in its original state, the Supreme Court did not allow any objections to be
raised about the matter in the Supreme Court.466
The section concludes by providing that maps, etc. made for any particular cause must
be proved to be accurate. This can be done by examining persons who actually
prepared them. Any defect or inﬁrmity can be overcome by bringing before the court
the maker of the map, etc. and testifying to the accuracy.467

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
461 The original word "Government" has successively been amended by the A.O. 1937, A.O.

1948, Act 40 of 1949, A.O. 1950, to read as above.
462 Rahmat-ulla Khan v Secretary of State for India, (1913) PR No. 63 of 1913 (Civil); Secretary of

State v Chimanlal Jamnadas, (1941) 44 Bom LR 295 : (1942) Bom 357.
463 Ram Kishore v UOI, AIR 1966 SC 644 : 1966(1) SCR 430 .
464 Jagudindra v Secretary of State, (1902) 5 Bom LR 1 : 30 IA 44 : 30 Cal 291.
465 Morvi Municipality v Arunodaya Mills Ltd, AIR 1995 Guj 109 .
466 Adhunik Grah Nirman Sahakari Samiti Ltd v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1989 SC 867 : 1989 Supp

(1) SCC 656 .
467 Ranganath Ramchandra Suryavanshi v Mohan, AIR 2008 NOC 2814 (Kar).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 84] Presumption as to collection of laws and reports of decisions.—
The Court shall presume the genuine ness of every book purporting to be printed or
published under the authority of the Government of any country, and to contain any of
the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions
of the Courts of such country.

COMMENT
This section should be read along with section 38, which makes relevant statements as
to any law and rulings contained in oﬃcially printed books of any country. It dispenses
with the proof of the genuineness of authorized books of any country containing laws
and reports of decisions of courts. Section 57 authorizes the courts to take judicial
notice of the existence of all laws and statutes in India and in the UK. Section 74
recognizes statutory records to be public records. Section 78 lays down the method of
proving the statute passed by the legislature.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 85] Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.—
The Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a power-of-attorney,
and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a notary public, or any Court,
Judge, Magistrate, 468[Indian] Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative 469[***] of the
470[Central Government], was so executed and authenticated.

COMMENT
[s 85.1] Principle.—
The court shall presume the due execution and authentication of a power-of-attorney
when executed before and authenticated by a notary public, or any Court, Judge,
Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, etc. The section does not exclude other legal
modes of proving the execution of a power-of-attorney.471 The court can presume that
the Notary Public must have satisﬁed himself about competence of the executant.472
The presumption applies not merely to local Notaries but also those functioning
abroad.473 A power of attorney in favour of a company's permanent delegate in Delhi
authenticated by a judge of the foreign country, due execution and authentication was
presumed.474
"Power-of-attorney includes any instrument (not chargeable with a fee under the law
relating to court-fees for the time being in force) empowering a speciﬁed person to act
for and in the name of the person executing it" [Indian Stamp Act, 1899, section 2(21)].
A "notary public" is an oﬃcer who takes notes of anything which may concern the
public; he attests deeds or writings to make them authentic in another country; but is
principally employed in mercantile affairs, to make protests of bills of exchange, etc.475
Under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (XXVI of 1881), the Central
Government is authorised to appoint notaries public within any local area. There can be
no presumption without compliance of the formalities.476
The mere fact that the document had not been drafted or typed out by the executant
before the Notary Public and the fact that the typed matter duly signed by the
executant was presented before the Notary Public, did not in any way, make the
execution and authentication doubtful.477
An application for regularisation of a building plan was ﬁled through power of attorney
which did not convey or confer any title or interest whether vested or contingent. The
court said that the application was not liable to be rejected because of the fact that the
power of attorney was not registered. The power of attorney was duly notarised and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
therefore carried the presumption of validity under section 85. The oﬃcer order
insisting upon registered power of attorney had no legal sanctity.478
Presumption as to due execution and authentication is available in favour of the
original power of attorney holder provided the mandate of section 85 is duly
followed.479

[s 85.1.1] Foreign Power of Attorney.—
For creating the presumption about a foreign power of attorney, the document has to
be authenticated by the Indian Counsel or the relevant Indian Authority. That was not
done, nor was the relevant law in the United State about the power of a Notary Public
cited. The presumption under the section was not attracted.480

468 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "British".
469 The words "of Her Majesty, or" omitted by the A.O. 1950.
470 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Government of India".
471 Re Sladen, (1898) 21 Mad 492; Punjab National Bank v Parmesh Knitting Works, AIR 1986

P&H 214.
472 Citi Bank NA, New Delhi v JK Jute Mills, AIR 1982 Del 487 , 488; Yogesh Singh Sohta v

Niranjan Lal, AIR 1981 Del 222 , the objector could not offer any proof to the contrary. Sandip
Ghosh v Submal Chowdhury, AIR 2010 NOC 979 (Cal), document not stamped as power of
attorney cannot be attested as such by notary, it cannot be considered as power of attorney, the
question of drawing presumption under the section did not arise.
473 Abdul Zabbar v ADJ Orai, AIR 1980 All 369 , Pakistan Notary.
474 Rudnap Export-Import v Eastern Associates Co, AIR 1984 Del 20 .
475 Wharton's Law Lexicon, 14th Edn, p 697.
476 EC & E Co v JE Works, Sisra, AIR 1984 Del 363 .
477 Raj Kumar Gupta v Des Raj, AIR 1995 HP 107 . Power of attorney duly authenticated by a

Notary Public would be presumed to be true, Northern Traders v Bank of Baroda, AIR 1994 All
381 . KA Pradeep v Branch Manager, Nedungadi Bank Ltd, AIR 2007 Ker 269 , the presumption
applies both to execution and authentication by notary. The document bore the seal of notary.
Unsatisfactory endorsement by notary was held to be immaterial. It is not necessary that there
should be attestation by two witnesses.
478

B Maragathammi v Member-Secretary, Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority, AIR

2010 Mad 81 (DB).
479 Bank of India v Allibhoy Mohammed, AIR 2008 Bom 81 . Kamla Rani v Texmaco Ltd, AIR 2007

Del 147 , power of attorney presumed to be valid, an eviction petition ﬁled.
480 In the Goods of Pradeep Kumar Jalota, AIR 2008 NOC 2318 (Cal), by the authorised person

was held to be competent, it was not necessary that any high functionary of the company
should have been examined as to authorisation.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
481[[s 85A] Presumption as to electronic agreement.—

The Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement
containing the 482[electronic signature] of the parties was so concluded by aﬃxing
the 482 [electronic signature] of the parties.]

COMMENT
This section was initially inserted vide Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2000.483
In 2008, an amendment484 was made in this section, whereby the word "digital
signature" was substituted by the word "electronic signature" at three places in this
section. This substitution is a part of the entire scheme under which the digital
signature regime is being switched over to the electronic signature regime in the ﬁeld
of e-commerce and e-governance. This switching over of regime is meant to broaden
the spectrum and follow the global trend.485
After this amendment, where an electronic record happens to be an agreement
between the parties therein and it has been entered into in an electronic format with the
electronic signatures of the parties, a party to litigation has to prove before the court
that the electronic signature actually belonged to that party in terms of section 67A of
this Act. Once this aspect is proved, the court is under an obligation to presume that
the agreement was entered into by aﬃxing of electronic signature by the parties. No
further proof is to be required for the purposes of proving the execution of that
agreement in the electronic format.

481 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–13 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
482 Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(e), for "digital signature" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
483 Ins. by the Information Technology Act, 2000, section 92 & Schedule 2, (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
484 (10 of 2009), section 52, [w.e.f. 27-10-2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O 2689(E), dated 27-10-

2009].
485 For difference between "digital signature" and "electronic signature", please see section 3

(ante).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
481[[s 85B] Presumption as to electronic records and 486[electronic signatures]

—
(1) In any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall

presume unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not
been altered since the speciﬁc point of time to which the secure statute
relates.
(2) In any proceedings involving secure 486 [electronic signature], the Court shall

presume unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure 486 [electronic signature] is aﬃxed by subscriber with the

intention of signing or approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure 486

[electronic signature], nothing in this section shall create any
presumption, relating to authenticity and integrity of the electronic
record or any 486 [electronic signature ].

COMMENT
This section was initially inserted vide the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2000.487
In 2008, an amendment488 was made in this section, whereby the word "digital
signature" was substituted by the word "electronic signature" in the heading and at four
places in this section. This substitution is a part of the entire scheme under which the
digital signature regime is being switched over to the electronic signature regime in the
ﬁeld of e-commerce and e-governance. This switching over of regime is meant to
broaden the spectrum and follow the global trend.489
This section intends to grant the sanctity of rebuttable presumption to secured
electronic records and signatures.
Under sub-section (1), where a secure electronic record is involved, the court is under
an obligation to presume that the secure electronic record has not been altered since
the speciﬁc point of time to which the secure status relates, unless the contrary is
proved by the party which wants to impeach the sanctity of such secure electronic
record.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Under sub-section (2), clause (a) provides that where a secure electronic signature is
involved, the court is under an obligation to presume that the secure electronic
signature has been aﬃxed by subscriber with the intention of signing or approving the
electronic record. However, clause (b) explains that nothing in this section imposes any
obligation upon the court to presume relating to authenticity and integrity of an
ordinary electronic record or an ordinary electronic signature, except where it is a
secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature. These statutory
presumptions are rebuttable and the party which wants to impeach the sanctity of such
secure electronic record or such secure electronic signature can prove the contrary by
leading cogent evidence of the secure electronic record or the secure electronic
signature having been tampered with.490
Secure system is deﬁned in section 2(ze) of the IT Act as follows:
(ze) "secure system" means computer hardware, software, and procedure that—
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended function; and
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures;

486 Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(f), for "digital signature" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).
487 Ins. by the Information Technology Act, 2000, section 92 & Schedule 2 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
488 (10 of 2009), section 52, (w.e.f. 27-10-2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O 2689(E) dated 27-10-

2009).
489 For difference between "digital signature" and "electronic signature", please see section 3

(ante).
490 For secure system, please see section 2 (ze) of the Information Technology Act, 2000.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
481[[s 85C] Presumption as to 491[Electronic Signature Certiﬁcates].—

The Court shall presume, unless contrary is proved, that the information listed in a 491
[Electronic Signature Certiﬁcate] is correct, except for information speciﬁed as
subscriber information which has not been veriﬁed, if the certiﬁcate was accepted by
the subscriber.]

COMMENT
This section was initially inserted vide the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2000.492
In 2008, an amendment493 was made in this section, whereby the word "digital
signature" was substituted by the word "electronic signature" and the word "digital
signature certiﬁcate" was substituted by the word "electronic signature certiﬁcate". This
substitution is a part of the entire scheme under which the digital signature regime is
being switched over to the electronic signature regime in the ﬁeld of e-commerce and
e-governance. As mentioned earlier, this switching over of regime is meant to broaden
the spectrum and follow the global trend.494
After this amendment, the court is under an obligation to presume that information
listed in an Electronic Signature Certiﬁcate is correct, unless the party challenging to
impeach the Electronic Signature Certiﬁcate leads positive evidence to shake its
veracity. However, under the second limb of this section, the presumption is not
applicable to information speciﬁed as subscriber information, which has not been
veriﬁed, if the certiﬁcate was accepted by the subscriber. Therefore, the presumption is
only valid up to the certiﬁcation done by statutory regulator who has been empowered
to issue certiﬁcate and not for subscriber's information, which is attributable to a
subscriber which remains unveriﬁed.

491 Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, section 52(g), for "Digital Signature Certiﬁcates" (w.e.f. 27-10-

2009).
492 Ins. by the Information Technology Act, 2000, section 92 & Schedule 2 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
493 (10 of 2009), section 52, [w.e.f. 27-10-2009 vide Notiﬁcation No. S.O 2689(E), dated 27-10-

2009].

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
494 For difference between "digital signature" and "electronic signature", please see section 3

(ante).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 86] Presumption as to certiﬁed copies of foreign judicial records.—
The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certiﬁed copy of any
judicial record of 495[496[***] any country not forming part of India] or of Her Majesty's
Dominions is genuine and accurate, if the document purports to be certiﬁed in any
manner which is certiﬁed by any representative of 497[***] the 498[Central
Government] 499[in or for] 500[such country] to be the manner commonly in use in
501[that country] for the certiﬁcation of copies of judicial records.]
502[An oﬃcer who, with respect to 503[***] any territory or place not forming part of
504[India or] Her Majesty's Dominions, is a Political Agent therefor, as deﬁned in

section 3, 505[clause (43)], of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, for the purposes of
this section, be deemed to be a representative of the Central Government in and for
the country comprising that territory or place.

COMMENT
[s 86.1] Principle.—
If a copy of a foreign judicial record purports to be certiﬁed in a given way, the court
may presume it to be genuine and accurate. It, however, does not exclude other proof,
for, under Sections 65 and 66, secondary evidence may be given of public documents,
without notice to the adverse party, when the person in possession of documents is out
of the reach of, or not subject to, the process of the court.506
A photostat copy of a decree of a foreign Court was held to be admissible and also
capable of being acted upon by the court provided only that it was certiﬁed as required
by the section.507
This section contains an instance of documents which section 65, Clause (f), seems to
refer to. The provisions of this section are imperative and must be complied with.

495 Subs. by A.O. 1950, for "any country not forming part".
496 The words "a Part B State or of" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
497 The words "Her Majesty or of" omitted by the A.O. 1950.
498 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Government of India".
499 Subs. by Act 3 of 1891, section 8, for "resident in".
500 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "such Part B State or country".
501 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "that State or country".
502 Subs. by Act 5 of 1899, section 4, for the para added by Act 3 of 1891, section 3.
503 The words "a Part B State or" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule. Earlier the

words "a Part B State or" were insterted by the A.O. 1950.
504 Ins. by the A.O. 1950.
505 Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "clause (40)".
506

Haranund v Ram Gopal, (1899) 2 Bom LR 562 : 27 IA 1 : 27 Cal 639; Vallabhdass v

Pranshankar (1926) 30 Bom LR 1519 .
507 Narasimha Rao v Venkata Lakshmi, (1991) 3 SCC 451 : 1991 SCC Cri 626 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 87] Presumption as to books, maps and charts.—
The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on
matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the
statements of which are relevant facts and which is produced for its inspection, was
written and published by the person and at the time and place, by whom or at which it
purports to have been written or published.

COMMENT
[s 87.1] Principle.—
The court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on matters
of public or general interest or any published chart or map, was written and published
by the person, and at the time and place by whom or at which it purports to have been
written or published. See Sections 36 and 83.
A map is nothing but statements of the maker thereof regarding the state of
conﬁguration of a particular site and objects standing thereon, by lines and pictorial
representations, instead of by words of mouth, and admitting such a map in evidence
without calling the maker thereof is admitting statements by a third party who is not
called as witness and amounts to admitting hearsay evidence. So mere proof of the
map by itself is only proof of the fact of the preparation of the map and apart from
independent proof about the correctness of its contents it cannot be said to have any
bearing on the matters in issue and cannot be admitted into evidence unless shown to
be admissible under any section of this Act. But a map and a chitta prepared under the
orders of the defendants and ﬁled along with collection papers showing collection on
basis of the map and the chitta were held to be rightly admitted in evidence under
section 13.508

508 Dwijesh Chandra Ray Chaudhuri v Naresh Chandra Gupta, (1946) 1 Cal 149 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 88] Presumption as to telegraphic messages.—
The Court may presume that a message, forwarded from a telegraph oﬃce to the
person to whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a
message delivered for transmission at the oﬃce from which the message purports to
be sent; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such
message was delivered for transmission.

COMMENT
[s 88.1] Principle.—
The court may treat telegraphic message received, as if they were the originals sent,
with the exception, that a presumption is not to be made as to the person,509 by whom
they were delivered for transmission and, unless the non-production of the originals is
accounted for, secondary evidence of their contents is inadmissible. It must be proved
that the message had been forwarded from the telegraphic oﬃce to the person to
whom such message purports to have been addressed. In the absence of such
evidence, the telegram cannot be held to have been proved. A telegram is a primary
evidence of the fact that the same was delivered to the addressee on the date
indicated therein.510
The court is forbidden to make any presumption as to the person by whom the
telegram was sent. Where the detenus sent a telegram conveying that they were
illegally detained but the same was not taken into consideration, it was held that a
telegram is not an authentic document. It is like an unsigned/anonymous
communication. Unless a telegram is conﬁrmed by a subsequent signed application,
representation or an aﬃdavit, the contents of telegram have no authenticity at all and
the same cannot be taken into consideration.511
The section enables the court to accept the hearsay statement as evidence of the
identity of the message delivered with that handed in.

509 Emperor v Abdul Gani, (1925) 27 Bom LR 1373 : 49 Bom 878.
510 Abba Astavans v Suresh, AIR 1984 NOC 131 (Del).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
511 District Magistrate v G Jothisankar, AIR 1993 SC 2633 : 1993 Cr LJ 3677 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
512[[s 88A] Presumption as to electronic messages.—

The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator
through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to
be addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for
transmission; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom
such message was sent.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expressions "addressee" and
"originator" shall have the same meaning respectively assigned to them in clauses (b)
and (za) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.]

COMMENT
[s 88A.1] Information Technology Act, 2000.—Presumption as to electronic
messages.—
The section provides that the court may presume that an electronic message
forwarded by the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee
corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission. The court is
not authorised to make any presumption as to the person by whom such matter was
sent.
The explanation to the section explains the meaning of the terms "addressee" and
"originator". It says that these terms will have the same meaning as is assigned to them
in clauses (b) and (za) of section 2(1) of the Information Technology Act, 2000. Section
2(1)(b) says that an addressee means a person who is intended by the originator to
receive the electronic record but does not include any intermediary. Section 2(1)(za)
says that an originator means a person who sends, generates, stores or transmits any
electronic message or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or
transmitted to any other person, but does not include an intermediary.

512 Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, sec. 92 and Sch. II–13 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 89] Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced.—
The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after
notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.

COMMENT
[s 89.1] Principle.—
When a document is called for and not produced after proper notice so to do, the court
shall presume that it was duly attested, stamped and executed in the manner
prescribed by law. The section refers only to stamp, execution and attestation of
documents. It is restricted to cases where notice to produce a document is given to a
party. Where a document is shown to have remained unstamped for some time after its
execution, the party who relied on it must prove that it was duly stamped. Where the
defendant failed to produce mortgage deed despite notice, presumption that the
mortgage deed was duly attested could be drawn.513

513 Kodri Smt. v L Rs. of Fakira, AIR 1994 NOC 182 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
[s 90] Presumption as to documents thirty years old.—
Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, [s 90.7] is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court
may presume [s 90.8] that the signature [s 90.9] and every other part of such document,
which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's
handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly
executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed and
attested.
Explanation.—Documents are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in
which, and under the care of the person with whom they would naturally be; but no
custody is improper if it is proved to have had legitimate origin, or if the
circumstances of the particular case are such as to render such an origin probable.
This explanation applies also to section 81.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from

his custody deeds relating to the land, showing his title to it. The custody is
proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The

mortgagor is in possession. The custody is proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's possession which

were deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody is proper.

[s 90.1] STATE AMENDMENTS
Uttar Pradesh.— Amendments made by U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 3011-1954).
In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh, in Sec. 90—
(i) Renumber the existing section as sub-section (1) thereof, and
(ii) For the words "thirty-years', substitute the words 'twenty years', and
(iii) Insert the following as new sub-section (2):—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
"(2) Where any such document as is referred to in sub-section (1) was registered in
accordance with the law relating to registration of documents and a duly certiﬁed copy
thereof is produced, the Court may presume that the signature and every other part of
such document which purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in
that person's handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or attested, that it
was duly executed and attested by the person by whom it purports to have been
executed or attested."
Section 90A.
New section 90-A, inserted by U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954.
"90-A.—(1) Where any registered document or duly certiﬁed copy thereof or any
certiﬁed copy of a document which is a part of the record of a Court of Justice, is
produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the
Court may presume that the original was executed by the person by whom it purports
to have been executed.
(2) The presumption shall not be made in respect of any document which is the basis
of a suit or of a defence or is relied upon in the plaint or written-statement.514
(The explanation to sub-section (1) of section 90 will also apply to this section.)

COMMENT
[s 90.2] Object.—
The object of this section is not to make it too diﬃcult for persons relying upon ancient
documents to utilize those documents in proving their cases. It is intended to do away
with the insuperable diﬃculty of proving the handwriting, execution, and attestation of
documents in the ordinary way after the lapse of many years. It does away with the
strict rule of proof of private documents.515

[s 90.3] Principle.—
When a document is or purports to be more than 30 years old, if it be produced from
what the court considers to be proper custody, it may be presumed (a) that the
signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in the
handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and (b) that it was
duly executed and attested by the person by whom it purports to be executed and
attested.516 Thirty-year-old document, produced from proper custody, not looking ex
facie suspicious, presumption could be drawn in favour of the document.517 Where the
document relied on was not more than 30 years old, ﬁnding of the court based on no
evidence could be interfered with.518 It is not necessary that the signatures of the
attesting witnesses or of the scribe be proved, for if everything was proved there would
be no need to presume anything.519 There can, however, be no presumption as to who
the person who executed the document was and what authority he had to execute the
document,520 and whether he had the requisite authority,521 or whether the contents of
the document are true,522 or that the document has the legal effect that it purports to
have.523 Presumption under section 90 in respect of 30 years' old document coming
from proper custody relates to the signature, execution and attestation of a document
i.e. to its genuineness but it does not give rise to presumption of correctness of every

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
statement contained in it. That the contents of the document are true or it had been
acted upon, have to be proved like any other fact.524
In State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh,525 the Supreme Court said that the court relying
on the genealogy of family must guard itself against falling into the trap laid by series
of documents or labyrinth of seemingly old genealogies while deciding rival claims.
The presumption allowed by this section is not a presumption which the court is bound
to make, and the court may require the document to be proved in the ordinary
manner.526
It is in the discretion of a court whether it will raise the presumption in favour of a
document for which this section provides, but this discretion is not to be exercised
arbitrarily; it must be governed by principles, which are consonant with law and justice.
And while on the one hand great care is requisite in applying the presumption, on the
other hand it is clear that very great injustice may be perpetrated, if an ancient
document coming from proper custody is rejected by a court capriciously or for
inadequate reasons. "Because a document purports to be an ancient document and to
come from proper custody, it does not, therefore, follow that its genuineness, is to be
assumed. If there are reasonable grounds for suspecting its genuineness and the party
relying upon it fails to satisfy the court of its due execution, there is an end of it. But if
no such grounds exist, and it satisﬁes the conditions prescribed by section 90 of the
Indian Evidence Act, then proof of execution is dispensed with, and it is to be dealt with
on the same footing as any other genuine instrument. If the authority or the title of the
executant, for example, be not questioned, then, effect is to be given to it as though he
had the requisite authority or title. If either be questioned, then of course the person on
whom the burden of proof lies must adduce evidence to satisfy the court on the point,
or he fails. When the genuineness of a document purporting to be an ancient document
is put in issue, it appears to have been sometimes thought that any presumption in its
favour is thereby excluded. But this would be to deprive the party producing it of the
beneﬁts of the presumption precisely in the circumstances in which he most stands in
need of its aid. And there seems to be no difference in principle between cases in
which due execution is traversed without more—those, that is, in which the party relying
on the document is put to proof of it, and those in which it is alleged that the document
is a forgery, except that in the latter case, the suspicions of the court may be aroused
by the nature of the plea. But in the one case, as in the other, the presumption merely
takes the place of the evidence which would, where modern document is concerned, be
necessary for the purpose of proving due execution. The court may decline to raise the
presumption, in which case the party producing the document must fail, unless he is
provided with evidence in support of it. But where the court thinks proper to raise the
presumption, it must be met and rebutted in the same way as direct evidence of the
execution in the case of a modern document. The proper rule is ... well stated by Mr
Taylor ... He says (page 587, 8th Edition)—
An ancient deed, which has nothing suspicious about it, it presumed to be genuine without
express proof, the witnesses being presumed dead, and if found in proper custody and
corroborated by evidence of ancient or modern corresponding enjoyment or by other
equivalent or explanatory proof, it will be presumed to have constituted part of the actual
transfer of the property therein mentioned, because this is the usual course of such
transaction.527

The Supreme Court observed that it should be produced at the earliest, so that it is not
looked upon askance and with suspicion so far as its authenticity is concerned,528 in
the instant case.
Even if the document is purported or is proved to be 30 years old, the person seeking to
rely on section 90 would not axiomatically receive a favourable presumption, the
section 90 presumption being a discretionary one.529

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 90.4] Proper custody.—
Before a court is justiﬁed in making a presumption in favour of the genuineness of an
ancient document it should be satisﬁed aliunde that there is good ground for accepting
it as a true document.530 If there are circumstances in the case which throw great
doubt on the genuineness of a document more than 30 years old, even if it is produced
from proper custody, the court may exercise its discretion by not admitting that
document in evidence without formal proof, and reject it when no such proof is
given.531

[s 90.5] Presumption as to signature of executant.—
The presumption permitted by this section in the case of a document purporting to be
30 years old, that it was duly executed by the party by whom it is purported to be
executed, includes the presumption that when the signature of the executant purports
to have been made by the pen of the scribe, the letter was duly authorised to sign for
him.532

[s 90.6] Presumption as to seal.—
Under this section the presumption does not apply to a seal and hence no such
presumption can be drawn in favour of a document which bears only a seal but neither
any signature nor purports to be in the handwriting of any particular person.533

[s 90.6.1] Presumption as to Caste.—
There was a dispute about the caste of an election candidate. His father's application
for admission in a school was produced. It showed the caste. It carried the father's
thumb impression. The document was more than 30 years old. It attracted the
application of section 90. The mere fact that there was diﬃculty in reading one ﬁgure in
the date was not considered by the court as a ground for rejecting the document.534

[s 90.7] "Document, purporting or proved to be 30 years old".—
The period of 30 years is to be reckoned not from the date upon which the document is
ﬁled in court, but from the date on which, it having been tendered in evidence, its
genuineness or otherwise becomes the subject of proof.535
A document dated 13 August 1888, was produced in court on 19 December 1917, and
its genuineness was not called in question up to 12 August 1918, when the ﬁrst court
gave its judgment. It was only when the case came up to the appellate court that the
defendants took objection that the document had not been proved. It was held that the
period of 30 years should be reckoned from 12 August 1918, when the trial court gave
its decision, and the due execution of the document could therefore be presumed.536
The plea for relaxation cannot be granted as the antiquity of the document is the very
reason for it to be bestowed with the curial presumption that the signature and every
other part of such document which purports to be the handwriting of any particular
person, is in that person's handwriting, and in the case of a document executed or
attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the person by whom it purports to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
be executed and attested. In the instant case the gift deed was only 29 years 5 months
on the relevant date i.e. 30 years short by seven months.537

[s 90.7.1] Revenue records.—
Entries in the revenue records made more than three decades before were presumed to
be authentic.538

[s 90.7.2] Wills.—
Presumption under this section extends to testamentary documents. A will purporting
to be 30 years old and produced from proper custody may be presumed to have been
duly attested and executed. The court must however act with extreme caution and
utmost circumspection.539 The period of 30 years will run from the date of the will and
not from the death of the testator.540

[s 90.7.3] Copy of document.—
The presumption under this section can be raised only with regard to the original
document if produced before the court. It does not apply to a certiﬁed copy when the
original document is not before the court. The section requires the production to the
court of the particular document in regard to which the court may make the statutory
presumption. If the document produced is a copy, admitted under section 65 as
secondary evidence, and it is produced from proper custody and is over 30 years old,
then the signature authenticating the copy may be presumed to be genuine, but the
production of a copy is not suﬃcient to justify the presumption of the execution of the
original under this section. The production which entitles the court to draw the
presumption as to the execution and attestation of a will is of the original and not its
copy.541 Presumption of genuineness does not apply to a copy or a certiﬁed copy
unless foundation is laid for admission of secondary evidence.542

[s 90.7.4] Gazette Notiﬁcation.—
A Gazette Notiﬁcation issued 32 years prior to the suit was produced and marked in
evidence. No circumstances were proved to justify the inference that it might not have
been published as enjoined by law. The court said that the regularity of the issue of the
Notiﬁcation should have been presumed leaving it to the defendants to rebut that
presumption.543

[s 90.8] "May presume".—
The expression means that the trial court has a discretion either to presume a fact as
proved or to call for proof of it.544 The presumption is discretionary and not obligatory.
Even if the elements mentioned in the section are satisﬁed, the court may require the
document to be proved in the ordinary manner. It is necessary for the court to consider
the evidence external and internal of the document in order to enable it to decide
whether in any particular case it should or should not presume proper signature and
execution. The court may, but is not bound to, make the presumption merely because

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the alleged age of the document.545 The presumption being based on the rule of
expediency, unless the surrounding circumstances satisﬁed the court that the
document was produced from proper custody it would be unsound to admit it.546
Where the court chooses to raise the presumption, no further proof of the fact is
necessary under section 69.547
The recorded statements of the members of a particular community regarding a
custom prevailing in that community were produced in the shape of a document which
was 30 years old. There was no mention that the declarants were the leaders of the
community or that they had the authority to make the statement on behalf of the
community. The designation of the oﬃcers before whom the statement was made was
also not mentioned. The court did not accept the document as proving the fact stated.
The presumption under the section applies only to genuineness and the fact of
execution, attestation, etc.548
A private document produced from private custody, even if 30 years old, cannot have
the same effect as a public document would have such a private document cannot be
relied on to deny the paternity of a child.549

[s 90.9] "Signature".—
Signature includes a mark, a mark being a sort of symbolic writing. The presumption of
execution of a document under this section extends to a mark put on the document
and it is taken to be the signature in the absence of proof to the contrary.550 The
section makes no provision for any presumption in regard to seals, nor can a seal be
regarded as a signature within the deﬁnition of the word contained in the General
Clauses Act, 1897.551 Some High Courts have held that there is no presumption as to
the truth of the contents though they constitute an estoppel against the executant and
will be relevant against him under sections 17, 18, 21 and 32(2).552
Where a party leads evidence in proof of the due execution of the document, he cannot
afterwards rely upon the presumption of genuineness of the document.553

[s 90.9.1] Unregistered Partition Deed.—
A suit was ﬁled for partition or separate possession. The division was effected by way
of family arrangement recorded in City Survey Records after a lapse of 21 years. It was
ﬁled after 9 years from the date of the suit, and at Appellate stage. The document was
unregistered. It was produced from the custody of the defendant. The author of the
document and attesting witnesses were not available. The court said that no partition
could be presumed on the basis of such document.554

[s 90.10] Proper Custody—
[Explanation].—"Proper custody" means the custody of any person so connected with
the deed that his possession of it does not excite any suspicion of fraud.555 It is not
necessary that the document should be found in the best and the most proper place of
deposit. The section insists only on a satisfactory account of the origin of the custody,
and not on the history of the continuance. Possibly the origin of the custody was alone
regarded as material because it is intelligible that ancient documents may be
overlooked and left undisturbed notwithstanding a transfer of old, or creation of new,
interests.556 In illustrations (a) and (b) the documents are produced from their natural

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
place of custody, in (c) A's custody is proper under the circumstances. The provisions
of the section read with the Explanation insist on a satisfactory account of the origin of
the possession being given by the party relying upon the documents. The custody
might not be in the strictest sense legal custody, but, whether it originated in right or
wrong, the origin must be explained. The court must, therefore, examine the
surrounding circumstances tending to establish the connection of the party producing
the document with the person with whom the documents should naturally have
been.557
A document was produced by the plaintiff's witness which was in his custody and of
which the plaintiff had no knowledge. It was held that there was no legal error in
admitting such document in evidence in spite of the fact that there was no pleading
about it.558
A copy of sale deed which was brought on record was only a photostat copy of a
document which was not even registered. The sale deed was obtained from the court.
It was held that such custody was not a proper custody. Refusal to place reliance on it
was not improper.559 Certain ancient letters written by the deceased to a third person
were produced by the defendant. He failed to explain how the letters came to his
custody. The court refused to draw the presumption under the section.560 A person
who was claiming title and possession of a property which was under mortgage and
though he produced a redemption deed which was 90 years old, he was not able to
show how it came into his custody and it also was not endorsed by the signature of the
mortgagee. The evidence was held to be not admissible.561

[s 90.10.1] Presumption at any Stage.—
The presumption can be raised at any stage of the proceedings including the Appellate
stage. A belated claim of presumption would not by itself confer any right on the other
party to claim an opportunity to lead evidence in rebuttal.562

514 Krishna Mohan v Bal Krishna Chaturvedi, AIR 2001 AIR 334 , the question of presumption as

to execution of a document made in the auction sale of property, dakhalnama which was neither
the basis of the suit nor defence, required no proof, presumption could be drawn in respect of it
under the section.
515 Lakhi Baruah v Padma Kanta Kalita, AIR 1996 SC 1253 : 1996(8) SCC 357 , the court stated

the objects of this section. Sesha Reddy v Managing Committee, Jame Masjid, AIR 2002 NOC
164 (AP) : 2002 AIHC 1811 , the presumption goes in favour of the contents of the document
unless it is rebutted by adducing satisfactory evidence.
516 Ekcowree Singh Roy v Kylash Chunder Mookerji, (1873) 21 WR 45 ; Hari Dhangar v Biru Dasru,

(1868) 5 BHC (ACJ) 135. Fifty year old registered deed of gift; burden was on those who alleged
that the deed was fraudulent. Fatima Bibi v Irfana Begam, AIR 1980 All 394 .
517 Parkash Chand v Hans Raj, AIR 1994 HP 144 .
518 State v Veerangouda Mallikarjunagouda, AIR 1995 Kant 361 : 1994 (5) Kar LJ 266 .
519 Raghubir Singh v Thakurain Sukhraj Kaur, (1938) 14 Luck 393 .
520 Sri Prasad v Special Manager, Court of Wards, Balrampur Estate, (1936) 12 Luck 400 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
521 Ram Naresh Singh v Chirkut, (1932) 8 Luck 18 .
522 Chandulal v Bai Kashi, (1938) 40 Bom LR 1262 : (1938) Bom 97. Re-iterated in Mohinuddin v

President, Municipal Committee, Khargone, AIR 1993 MP 5 .
523 Ramaji v Manohar, AIR 1961 Bom 169 : 62 Bom LR 322. Ancient nature of the document is

not suﬃcient in itself to prove the facts stated, genealogy in this case, State of Bihar v Radha
Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : 1983(3) SCC 118 . Gangamma v Shivalingaiah, (2005) 9 SCC
359 , no presumption as to terms and authenticity or that recitals are correct.
524 UOI v Ibrahim Uddin, (2012) 8 SCC 148 .
525 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh,, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 3 SCC 118 .
526 Musammal Shaﬁq-un-nisa v Raja Shaban Ali Khan, (1904) 6 Bom LR 750 : 26 All 581 : 31 IA

217; Mansukj v Trikambhai, (1929) 31 Bom LR 1279 ; Anur v Nur Muhammad, (1902) PR No. 82 of
1902 (Civil).
527 Per Hill J, in Govinda Hazra v Pratap Narain Mukhopadhya, (1902) 29 Cal 740 , 747.
528 Om Prakash v Shanti Devi, (2015) 4 SCC 601 (para 5) : AIR 2015 SC 976 .
529 Om Prakash v Shanti Devi, (2015) 4 SCC 601 (para 10).
530 Jesa Lal v Mussammat Ganga Devi, (1913) PR No. 81 of 1913 (Civil).
531 Musammat Shaﬁq-un-nisa v Khan Bahadur Raja Shaban Ali Khan, (1904) 31 IA 217 : 6 Bom

LR 750 : 26 All 581; Charitar Raj v Kailash Bishari, (1918) 3 PLJ 306 .
532 Haji Sheikh Bodha v Sukhram Singh, (1924) 47 All 31 FB; Balkaran Singh v Dulari Bai, (1926)

49 All 55 , contra, Mohammad Azim v Special Manager, Court of Wards, Balrampur, (1936) 12 Luck
98 .
533 Maheswar Naik v Tikayet Sailendra Narayan, (1949) Cut 312.
534 Desh Raj v Bodh Raj, AIR 2008 SC 632 : (2008) 2 SCC 186 .
535 Minu Sirkar v Shedoy Nath Roy, (1897) 5 CLR 135 ; Surendra Krishna Roy v Mirza Mahammad,

(1935) 63 IA 85 : 38 Bom LR 330; Bhanwaria v Ramratan, (1953) 4 Raj 145 ; Kesarapu Manikyalu v
Venna Perumanayya, AIR 2000 NOC 20 (AP) : 2000 AIHC 590 period of 30 years is to be
computed from the date of execution of the document to the date on which the document was
sought to be put into evidence.
536 Ladha Singh v Mst Hukam Devi, (1923) 4 Lah 233.
537 Om Prakash v Shanti Devi, (2015) 4 SCC 601 (para 8).
538 Kartar Singh v Collector, Patiala, 1996 AIHC 1538 (P&H).
539 Dhanapal v Govindaraja, AIR 1961 Mad 262 . Haradhan Mahatha v Dukhu Mahatha, AIR 1993

Pat 129 , executant and attesting witnesses not alive, execution and attestation may be
presumed. Kandadal Tirumalachari v Kandamal Venkatachari, AIR 2008 NOC 2896 (AP), signature
identiﬁed by witness and the Will being 30 years old, the signature and every other part of the
Will was presumed to be in the testator's handwriting.
540 Sarat Chandra Mondal v Panchanan Mondal, (1955) 1 Cal 55 ; Mahendra Nath Surul v Netai

Charan Ghosh, (1943) 1 Cal 392 .
541 Basant Singh v Kunwar Brij Raj Saran Singh, (1935) 62 IA 180 : 37 Bom LR 805 : 57 All 494;

Seethayya v Subramanya Somayajulu, (1929) 56 IA 146 : 31 Bom LR 756 : 52 Mad 453. See to the
same effect; Sital Das v Sant Ram, AIR 1954 SC 606 and Harihar Prasad v Deonarain Prasad, AIR
1956 SC 305 : 1956 SCR 1 ; KV Subbaraju v C. Subbaraju, AIR 1968 SC 947 : 1968(2) SCR 292 ;
Shiolalsing v Shankar, AIR 1984 Bom 19 ; Dhirendra Singh v Dhanai, AIR 1983 All 216 .
542 Lakhi Baruah v Padma Kanta Kalita, AIR 1996 SC 1253 : 1996(8) SCC 357 .
543 Rohit Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2007 SC 10 : (2006) 12 SCC 734 .
544 Rangu v Rambha, AIR 1967 Bom 382 : 69 Bom LR 559. To the same effect is the decision of

the Supreme Court in Narendra Akash Maharaj Pelkar v Shahji Baburao Pelkar, AIR 2009 Bom 165

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
.
545 Mansukh v Trikambhai, (1929) 31 Bom LR 1279 .
546 Rudragouda v Basangouda, (1937) 40 Bom LR 202 .
547 Mahendra Nath Surul v Netai Charan Ghosh, (1943) 1 Cal 392 ; Kirpal Singh v Aas Kaur, AIR

1997 P&H 240, a gift-cum-will deed which was 30 years old and came from the custody of a
proper person and was also registered, it was a presumptive evidence of its due execution and
attestation.
548 Mohmedbhai Basubhai Malek v Amirbhai Rahimbhai Malek, AIR 2001 Guj 37 .
549 Pavitri Devi v Darbari Singh, (1993) 4 SCC 392 .
550 Shailendranath Mitra v Girijabhushan Mukherji, (1930) 58 Cal 686 .
551 Special Manager, Court of Wards, Balrampur v Tirbeni Prasad, (1935) 11 Luck 35 ; Sri Prasad

v Special Manager, Court of Wards, Balrampur Estate, (1936) 12 Luck 400 .
552 Bal Sakindabal v Gulam Rasul, AIR 1981 Guj 142 ; Ghurahu v Sheo Ratan, AIR 1981 All 3 .
553 Chanda Bai v Anwar Khan, AIR 1997 MP 238 .
554 Roshanbi Shaikaji Attar v Usmansab Shaikaji Attar, AIR 2006 NOC 1156 (Kant) : (2006) 4 AIR

Kar. R 143.
555 Doedem Neale v Samples, (1838) 8 Ad & E1 151.
556 Tajudin v Govind, (1902) 5 Bom LR 144 : 27 Bom 452.
557 Rudragouda v Basangouda, (1937) 40 Bom LR 202 ; Chitru Devi v Ram Dei, AIR 2002 HP 59 ,

document executed in 1928 alleged to be showing marriage between the defendant and certain
person and not being defendant and plaintiff's father, the plaintiff failed to prove that she was
the proper custodian of the document, or how the document came to her custody, held that
section 90 was not applicable.
558 Jayadeb Swain v Santha Behera, AIR 2007 Ori 15 .
559 Irshad Ali v Viresh Agarwal, AIR 2009 NOC 197 (All).
560 Narendra Akash Maharaj Petkar v Shahaji Baburao Petkar, AIR 2009 Bom 165 .
561 Harendra Rai v Chandrawati Devi, AIR 2007 Pat 120 .
562 Hazarilal v Sh Shyamlal, AIR 2007 NOC 323 (Raj—DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER V OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE

PRESUMPTIONS AS TO DOCUMENTS
563[[s 90A] Presumption as to electronic records ﬁve years old.—

Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be ﬁve years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court
may presume that the 564[electronic signature] which purports to be the 564
[electronic signature] of any particular person was so aﬃxed by him or any person
authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation.—Electronic records are said to be in proper custody if they are in the
place in which, and under the care of the person with whom, they naturally be; but no
custody is improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate origin, or the
circumstances of the particular case are such as to render such an origin probable.
This Explanation applies also to section 81A]

COMMENT
[s 90A.1] Information Technology Act, 2000.—
Where an electronic record purports to be or is proved to be ﬁve years old and is
produced from any custody which the court considers proper in the particular case, the
court may presume that the digital signature which purports to be the digital signature
of any person was so aﬃxed by him or by any person authorised by him in the behalf.
Deﬁning the expression "proper custody" the explanation to the section says that
electronic records are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which and
under the care of the person with whom they would naturally be; but that no custody is
improper if it is proved to have had a legitimate origin or the circumstances of the
particular case are such as to render such an origin probable. This explanation also
applies to the presumption under section 81A as to Gazettes in electronic forms.

563 Ins. by the Information Technology Act (Act 21 of 2000), section 92 and Second Schedule

(w.e.f. 17-10-2000).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
564 Subs. by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 2009), section 52(h),

for the word "digital signature" (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 91] Evience of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions of property
reduced to form of document.—
When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property,
have been reduced to the form of a document, [s 91.3] and in all cases in which any
matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, [s 91.4] no evidence
shall be given in proof of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of
property, or of such matter, except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its
contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions
hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.—When a public oﬃcer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and
when it is shown that any particular person has acted as such oﬃcer, the writing by
which he is appointed need not be proved.
Exception 2.—Wills 1[admitted to probate in 2[India]] may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.—This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or
dispositions of property referred to are contained in one document and to cases in
which they are contained in more documents than one.
Explanation 2.—Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be
proved.
Explanation 3.—The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the
facts referred to in this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as
to the same fact.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) If a contract is contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained

must be proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be

proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts, in writing, with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The

contract mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted
for verbally on another occasion.
Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other indigo. The
evidence is admissible.
(e) (e) A give B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
payment. The evidence is admissible.

COMMENT
[s 91.1] Principle.—
When a transaction has been reduced to writing either by agreement of the parties or
by requirement of law, the writing becomes the exclusive memorial thereof, and no
evidence shall be given to prove the transaction, except the document itself or
secondary evidence of its contents where such evidence is admissible. This rule is
based on the principle that the best evidence, of which the case in its nature is
susceptible, should always be presented. This rule does not demand the greatest
amount of evidence which can possibly be given of any fact, but its design is to prevent
the introduction of any which, from the nature of the case, supposes that better
evidence is in the possession of the party. It is adopted for the prevention of fraud, for,
when better evidence is withheld, it is only fair to presume that the party has some
sinister motive for not producing it, and that, if offered, his design would be frustrated.
The rule thus becomes essential to the pure administration of justice.3 The best
evidence about the contents of a document is the document itself and it is the
production of the document that is required by this section in proof of its contents.4
The section lays down the best evidence rule but does not prohibit any other evidence
where the writing is capable of being construed differently and which shows how the
parties understood the document. By this process the parties were able to show that
they intended to enter into a transaction of mortgage and not sale.5 The surrounding
and attending circumstances are relevant for the construction of a document only
when some ambiguity exists in the document and not otherwise.6
Under this section:
(1) When the terms of (a) a contract, (b) a grant, or (c) any disposition of property have
been reduced to the form of a document; or
(2) Where any matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, then
(a) the document itself, or (b) secondary evidence of its contents, must be put in
evidence.
The ﬁrst provision refers to transactions voluntarily reduced to writing. The second
refers to those cases in which any matter is required by law to be reduced to the form
of a document, e.g., sale of immovable property of the value of Rs.100 and upwards,
mortgage for an amount exceeding Rs 100, a lease of immovable property for a year at
least, a trust of immovable property, a gift of immovable property,7 etc.
There are two exceptions to these provisions:
(1) When a public oﬃcer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and any oﬃcer
has acted as such, the writing need not be proved;
(2) Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate.
The general rule laid down in this section is also subject to the exceptions laid down in
the following sections 95–99. The section has no application when the writing is not
evidence of the matter reduced to writing.8

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 91.2] Scope.—
This section and section 92 deﬁne the cases in which documents are exclusive
evidence of transactions which they embody. They only apply when the document
evidencing a contract appears to contain all the terms thereof. The inference that a
writing was intended to contain the whole agreement may be drawn from the
document itself as well as from extrinsic evidence.9 Sections 93–100 provide for the
interpretation of documents by oral evidence.
A contract being a creature of an agreement between two or more parties, has to be
interpreted giving literal meanings unless there is some ambiguity therein. The contract
is to be interpreted giving the actual meaning to the words contained in the contract
and it is not permissible for the court to make a new contract, however reasonable, if
the parties have not made it themselves. It is to be interpreted in such a way that its
terms may not be varied. The contract has to be interpreted without any outside aid.
The terms of the contract have to be construed strictly without altering the nature of
the contract, as it may affect the interest of either of the parties adversely.10

[s 91.3] "When the terms ... have been reduced to the form of a document".—
The section prohibits the admission of oral evidence to prove the contents of the
document.11 If parties have reduced all the terms of a contract or of a grant or of any
disposition of property into writing, then no parole evidence is admissible, but if they
intended only to reduce to writing a portion of the terms of the contract, then they are
entitled to give parole evidence of the terms which they did not intend to reduce to
writing.12 Where parties to a contract agree to substitute a written instrument for an
oral contract the ultimate contract is deemed to be contained in the instrument alone
and no oral evidence of its terms can be given thereafter.13 This section excludes oral
evidence as to the terms of a written contract. There is nothing to exclude oral
evidence that there was no agreement between the parties and, therefore, no
contract.14 The expression "terms" in this section and section 92 relates to statements,
assertions or representations contained in a written contract which relate to the
subject-matter of the contract and to something to be done or not to be done under the
contract, and has no application to a provision in the nature of a condition precedent to
the very existence or formation of a contract.15 The section does not preclude from
proving that the real contract was different from what was found in the deed.16
Illustration (b) refers to the ﬁrst part of the section.
A wakf can be created orally under Muhammadan law, but when the terms of a
dedication are reduced to the form of a writing, no evidence can be given to prove the
term except the document itself or secondary evidence thereof.17
Where a contract was signed by the defendant personally and he attempted to lead oral
evidence to show that he was contracting as agent and that the name of his principal
was disclosed at the time of the contract, it was held that such evidence was not
admissible for the purpose of exonerating a contracting party from liability, for that
would be substituting a different agreement from that evidenced by the writing.18

[s 91.4] "Any matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a
document".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Whereby any matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, then
the document itself must be put in evidence, e.g., deeds, conveyances of land,
mortgages, wills, etc. No other evidence can be substituted so long as the writing
exists. But where the matter is not required by law to be reduced to the form of a
document, this section does not apply, e.g., in 1866 an oral agreement with transfer of
possession suﬃced to create a mortgage and therefore a mortgage could be proved
aliunde even if there was no registered document.19 No oral evidence is admissible to
prove the rent payable under a lease reduced to writing.20 Where the document
containing a transaction is inadmissible for want of registration no other evidence of its
contents can be received. Where in a suit for redemption of land, the plaintiff alleged
that possession was given to the defendant by way of security for a loan of Rs 100 or
upwards but no registered deed was executed to evidence the transaction, oral
evidence to prove the transaction was held inadmissible.21

[s 91.5] Appointment of public oﬃcer.—[Exception 1].—
This Exception is partly based on the maxim omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta. "It is a
general principle, that a person's acting in a public capacity is prima facie evidence of
his having been duly authorised so to do; and even though the oﬃce be one the
appointment to which must have been in writing, it is not, at least in the ﬁrst instance,
necessary to produce the document, or account for non-production".22

[s 91.6] Wills admitted to probate.—[Exception 2].—
Probate means the copy of a will certiﬁed under the seal of a court of competent
jurisdiction with a grant of administration to the estate of the testator.23 Probate of a
will is evidence of the contents of the will against all the parties interested thereunder.
Probate is secondary evidence, but it is made admissible by this section.

[s 91.7] Transactions in one or more than one documents.—[Explanation 1].—
Illustration (a) to the section exempliﬁes this Explanation. When parties negotiate at a
distance by letters or telegrams, the entire mass of correspondence indicates the true
nature of the agreement entered into by the parties.

[s 91.8] More than one original.—[Explanation 2].—
Illustration (c) exempliﬁes the meaning of this Explanation. See section 62,
Explanations 1 and 2. Bills of exchange and bills of lading have more originals than
one.

[s 91.9] Extraneous facts in documents.—[Explanation 3].—
Illustrations (d) and (e) exemplify this Explanation. When the contents of a document
are in question, either as fact in issue or as a sub-alternate principal fact, the document
is the proper evidence of its own contents, and all derivative proof is rejected until its
absence is accounted for. But when a written instrument or document of any

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
description is not the fact in issue, and is merely used as evidence to prove some fact,
independent proof aliunde is receivable. Thus, although a receipt has been given for the
payment of money, proof of the fact of payment may be made by any person who
witnessed it. A receipt for sums paid in part liquidation of a bond hypothecating
immovable property must be registered to render it admissible as evidence. Under
illustration (e) to this section such payments may nevertheless be proved by parole
evidence, which is not excluded owing to the inadmissibility of the documentary
evidence.24
In a suit, which was brought for the price of goods sold and delivered, the plaintiff
swore to the fact of the sale and tendered in evidence a written admission of the
defendant that the goods had been supplied to him. The writing was rejected, as
unstamped, and the suit was dismissed. It was held that the judge should have allowed
the plaintiff an opportunity of proving by oral testimony the delivery of the goods sold,
and their value.25 So, although where the contents of a marriage register are in issue,
verbal evidence of those contents is not receivable, yet the fact of the marriage may be
proved by the independent evidence of a person who was present at it.26

[s 91.10] Names on public record.—
The name of a person entered in Municipal, sales tax and excise records can be
brought before by oral evidence of an employee of the concerned department. But its
evidentiary value would be worth very little unless accompanied by the record of the
entry.27

[s 91.11] Suit on promissory note inadmissible in evidence.—
The rulings of the Indian High Courts on the question where money is lent to a person
who passes a promissory note, but the note is inadmissible in evidence for want of
suﬃcient stamp or for any other reason, may be classiﬁed into two classes lucidly
enunciated by Garth CJ, in Sheikh Akbar v Sheikh Khan,28 in which the question was
whether a copy of a lost promissory note, which was itself inadmissible as being
insuﬃciently stamped, could be received in evidence. The court held that it could not
be received in evidence. Garth CJ, said:
When a cause of action for money is once complete in itself, whether for goods sold, or for
money lent, or for any other claim, and the debtor then gives a bill or note to the creditor for
payment of the money at a future time, the creditor, if the bill or note is not paid at maturity,
may always, as a rule, sue for the original consideration, provided that he has not endorsed
or lost or parted with the bill or note, under such circumstances as to make the debtor liable
upon it to some third person. In such cases the bill or note is said to be taken by the creditor
on account of the debt, and if it is not paid at maturity, the creditor may disregard the bill or
note and sue for the original consideration...But when the original cause of action is the bill
or note itself, and does not exist independently of it, as for instance, when, in consideration
of A depositing money with B, B contracts by a promissory note to repay it with interest at
six months' date, here there is no cause of action for money lent, or otherwise than upon the
note itself, because the deposit is made upon the terms contained in the note and no other.
In such a case the note is the only contract between the parties, and if for want of proper
stamp or some other reason the note is not admissible in evidence, the creditor must lose
his money.

In a later case, however, the same High Court tried to explain away the above case and
held in a suit brought on a hatchitta (promissory note) bearing an insuﬃcient stamp
and in which the defendant admitted the loan but pleaded payment, that the
promissory note was not admissible in evidence but the plaintiff had a cause of action
independently of it.29 Subsequently, in another case it laid down that the question,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
whether, when a bill or note is found to be inadmissible in evidence, the payee can sue
on the original consideration, depends upon whether the cause of action with regard to
the original consideration is one, which is complete in itself, and the debtor then gives a
bill or note to the creditor for payment of the money at a future time. If this be so, then
the plaintiff may disregard the promissory note, if he chooses, and sue upon the
original debt. Where, however, the original cause of action is a bill or a note itself and
does not exist independently of it, then the plaintiff cannot disregard the note and sue
for the original consideration.30
The Bombay High Court approved of the principle stated in Sheikh Akbar v Sheikh
Khan31 in a case in which the plaintiff sued to recover from the defendant the balance
of a debt due on an unstamped note passed to him by the defendant for a
consideration of Rs 38. The note recited that the defendant had received the amount,
and would repay it after 3 months from the date of its execution. The defendant
admitted, by his written statement, execution of the note and the receipt of Rs 37 in the
shape of paddy, but alleged that he had paid off the debt. He also contended that the
note being unstamped could not be admitted in evidence. It was held that the
document sued on was a promissory note, and that the suit being brought on it as the
original cause of action, the admission of its contents by the defendant did not avail
the plaintiff, the document itself being inadmissible for want of a stamp and that the
plaintiff could not recover irrespectively of the promissory note, as he did not seek to
prove the consideration otherwise than by the note, which was inadmissible in evidence
and the admission contained in the defendant's written statement did not amount to an
admission of the claim as for money lent.32 The distinction between cases in which a
suit is brought solely on a promissory note or hundi, and cases in which there is and
can be a claim to recover the original loan, has been acknowledged.33 Where there is
an independent admission of a loan, the holder of a hundi, bill or note, which is
defective, and inadmissible in evidence for want of a stamp, may still sue on the
consideration the person to whom he gave it, though he cannot use the bill in support
of his suit.34
The Madras High Court has in a Full Bench case held that whether a suit lies on the
debt apart from the instrument depends on the circumstances under which the
instrument is executed. If the promissory note embodies all the terms of the contract
and the instrument is improperly stamped no suit on the debt will lie. This section and
section 35 of the Indian Stamp Act bar the way. But if it does not embody all the terms
of the contract, the true nature of the transaction can be proved and, where an
instrument has been given as a collateral security or by way of conditional payment, a
suit on the debt will lie. The fact that the execution of the promissory note is
contemporaneous with the borrowing cannot exclude the possibility of the instrument
having been given as collateral security or by way of conditional payment. There is no
presumption that the giving of a promissory note by a debtor to his creditor operates as
a conditional payment only. A lender suing on the original consideration on the ground
that the instrument was given by way of conditional payment must prove facts which
warrant that inference.35
The Allahabad High Court has in a Full Bench case laid down that it is not open to a
party who has lent money on terms recorded in a promissory note, which turns out to
be inadmissible in evidence for want of proper stamp duty, to recover his money by
proving orally the terms of the contract, in contravention of the provision of this
section.36 In a later Full Bench case it laid down that the entire terms of the contract
were embodied in the promissory note in the above Nazir's case, but where all the
substantial terms of the contract have not been embodied in the promissory note and
where the promissory note is inadmissible in evidence for defect of proper stamp, it is
open to the plaintiff to prove the terms of the contract. It is also pointed out by some of
the judges that the distinction laid down in Nazir's case between cases where the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
money passed contemporaneously with the execution of the pro-note and where it was
antecedent in time to the latter is unreal and artiﬁcial.37 Where a loan was already
existing, and part of it had been repaid and a promissory note was executed in favour
of the creditor for the balance, it was held that the existence of the promissory note did
not debar the creditor from resorting to his original consideration or exclude evidence
of the oral acknowledgment of the debt.38
The Patna High Court has held that where the lending of money and the execution of a
promissory note for repayment of it are contemporaneous, the plaintiff in a suit for
recovery of the money is entitled to adduce evidence other than the promissory note
itself, in order to prove the loan. Where, therefore, a hand note bore a one-anna stamp
instead of a two-annas stamp and was therefore inadmissible in evidence, it was held
that the plaintiff was entitled to prove the loan by other evidence.39 Every loan carries
with it a contract to repay and if a hand note, which forms the evidence of the
transaction, cannot be accepted in evidence for some reason or other, there is nothing
in law to prevent the plaintiff from giving other evidence as regards the loan and if he
can satisfy the court as regards the truth of his version, he is entitled to a decree.40
Where there is a partition deed which is inadmissible in evidence for want of
registration it is open to the defendants to prove a previous partition by any other
evidence and this section will not operate as a bar to the admissibility of such
evidence.41
Where a promissory note is insuﬃciently stamped it is not admissible for any purpose
and a suit based on it must fail,42 but the suit can be decreed on money had and
received.43
The Lahore High Court has held that where a negotiable instrument taken on account
of pre-existing debt is inadmissible in evidence, the creditor may sue for the original
consideration, but when the original cause of action is the instrument itself and does
not exist independently of it, the plaintiff cannot sue except upon the instrument.
Whether there is a cause of action independent of the instrument upon which
independent evidence may be given, depends upon the question whether the plaintiff
can allege any contract as the basis of his suit which is not the contract reduced to the
form of a document. Where the money advanced a short time before the actual
execution of a hundi was advanced on the security of the hundi and the agreement
between the parties was that the loan should be made in consideration of the hundi, it
was held that there was no cause of action independent of the hundi, and as the hundi
was inadmissible in evidence on the ground that it was insuﬃciently stamped, and no
secondary evidence could be given under this section, the plaintiff must fail.44

[s 91.12] CASES
[s 91.12.1] Confession.—
A confession of an accused person made to a Magistrate holding an inquiry is a matter
required by law to be reduced to the form of a document within the meaning of this
section, and no evidence can be given of the terms of such a confession except the
record, if any, made under section 364 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.45

[s 91.12.2] Deposition.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The omission to read over his deposition to the witness, in accordance with O XVIII,
rule 5, of the Code of Civil Procedure, renders the same inadmissible in evidence
against him on his subsequent trial for forgery and oral evidence of its contents is
excluded by this section.46

[s 91.12.3] Unregistered Exchange Deed.—
A deed of exchange involved property of more than Rs 100 in value. It being
unregistered was held to be not admissible in evidence. No oral evidence was allowed
to prove its contents.47

[s 91.12.4] Unregistered document may be looked into for collateral purpose.—
Under the proviso now added to section 49 of the Indian Registration Act, an
unregistered document affecting immovable property and required to be registered
may be received as evidence of a contract in a suit for speciﬁc performance, or as
evidence of part performance of a contract, or as evidence of any collateral transaction
not required to be effected by a registered instrument. The proviso is declaratory of
what was previously the law. An unregistered document, though inadmissible as
evidence of a transaction affecting immovable property, was admissible as evidence of
collateral facts.48 Such document is admissible in evidence to prove the nature of the
possession of the person who holds under it.49 In a suit to recover possession of
certain property as joint undivided property the defendant relied on an earlier
unregistered partition deed to show that the property in dispute was not joint but
separate. It was held that the partition deed was admissible in evidence as it was not
intended to prove its terms but all that the court had been concerned with was to ﬁnd
out whether particular properties claimed by the plaintiff to be joint family property
were at the date of the suit joint or separate.50
Where a document, itself legally inadmissible in evidence, was subsequently referred to
and partly incorporated in a second document of similar import duly executed between
the same parties and registered according to law, it was held that the earlier document
might be referred to for the purpose of explaining and amplifying the terms of the
second, and of arriving at a correct conclusion as to the true nature of the transaction
into which the parties had entered.51
The Madras High Court had held that where the instrument of partition, being
unregistered, cannot be admitted as evidence of the transaction, oral evidence to prove
the terms of the agreement is barred.52 The Supreme Court has expressed the view in
Hriday Narain Choudhury v Shyam Kishore Singh,53 that where an unregistered partition
deed is not admissible in evidence, other evidence may be adduced by a member to
show the extent of his land holding and such evidence has to be considered. This
would be more particularly so when the suit is not based on such a document. On the
basis of other evidence, the lower Courts recorded a concurrent ﬁnding that the
plaintiff's holding was less than 5 acres and, therefore, the relevant Bihar Act was not
applicable. The Supreme Court found it to be improper for the High Court to interfere in
the ﬁnding on the ground that the transaction was reduced to writing and the document
being not admissible in evidence, oral evidence on the point could not have been
looked into. An unregistered memorandum of the partition of a joint property, though
inadmissible in evidence, can be used for collateral purpose of proving intention of
partition. To prove partition, oral evidence is not hit by any bar contained in section 91
of the Evidence Act.54

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 91.12.5] Family arrangement/settlement.—
There is no provision in law requiring family settlements to be reduced to writing and
registered, though when reduced to writing, the question of registration may arise.
Binding family arrangements dealing with immovable property worth more than Rs 100
can be made orally and when so made, no question of registration arises. If, however, it
is reduced to the form of writing with the purpose that the terms should be evidence by
it, it required registration and without registration it is inadmissible, but the said family
arrangement can be used as a corroborative piece of evidence for showing or
explaining the conduct of the parties.55

[s 91.12.6] Irrevocable Power of Attorney.—
The petitioner executed a power of attorney for transferring the land in question. The
power of attorney holder ﬁled the application for restoration of writ petition against
notiﬁcation of acquisition which was dismissed for default. The attorney had been in
possession of the land for long. The petitioners were not allowed to say that they never
intended to transfer the land. Their oral contention against the written power could not
be accepted because of the provisions of section 91.56

1 Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, section 7, for "under the Indian Succession Act".
2 Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, section 3 and Schedule, for "the States".
3 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 391, p 272. See Entisham Ali v Jamna Prasad, (1921) 24 Bom LR 675

: 48 IA 365, where secondary evidence of a sale-deed was admitted. Roop Kumar v Mohan
Thedani, AIR 2003 SC 2418 , the section embodies the best evidence rule, which becomes a
doctrine of substantive law. Even a third party can prove a written contract by producing the
writing.
4 Hira Devi v Oﬃcial Assignee, Bombay, AIR 1958 SC 448 : 60 Bom LR 932 : 1958 SCC 1384 .

See also National Insurance Co Ltd v Jugal Kishore, AIR 1988 SC 719 : (1988) 63 Comp Cas 847 :
1988(1) SCC 626 : (1989) 3 SCC 346 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 633 , stressing the duty of the party in
possession to produce the document which would be helpful in arriving at a just solution of the
problem.
5 Tulsi v Chandrika Prasad, AIR 2006 SC 3359 : (2006) 8 SCC 322 .
6 State Bank of India v Mula Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd, (2006) 6 SCC 293 : AIR 2007 SC

2361 , the document in question was a commercial document and did not exhibit any ambiguity
on its face. The High Court itself said that ex facie the document appeared to be a contract of
indemnity. Hence, reference by the High Court to oral evidence was not appropriate.
7 See Chowgatta v Chattar Singh, (1877) PR No. 18 of 1878 (Civil); Fattesh Singh v Mian Singh,

(1883) PR No. 131 of 1883 (Civil).
8 Javarasetty v Ningamma, AIR 1992 Kant 160 , there is nothing to compel the court to prefer

documentary evidence over oral, or vice versa.
9 Chimanram Motilal v Divanchand Govindram, (1931) 56 Bom 180 : 34 Bom LR 26. These

sections do not authorise the courts to prefer one kind of evidence over another. They only

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
permit in some speciﬁc situations to exclude a certain type of evidence. Jevarasetty v
Ningamma, AIR 1992 Kant 160 .
10 Rajasthan State Industrial Development & Investment Corp v Diamond & Gem Development

Corp Ltd, (2013) 5 SCC 470 .
11 Hira Devi v Oﬃcial Assignee, Bombay, AIR 1958 SC 448 : 60 Bom LR 932 : 1958 SCR 1384 . Y

Ganganaidu v M Surkantam, AIR 1993 AP 130 , terms reduced to the form of a document,
prohibition of oral evidence. Kashiram v State of MP, AIR 1996 MP 247 , oral agricultural lease,
subsequent entry in Government records, does not make it written lease.
12 Jamna Doss v Srinath Roy, (1889) 17 Cal 176 , 177n. See Sangam Lal v Mussammat Sikandar

Jehan Begam, (1889) PR No. 183 of 1889 FB (Civil); Ram Gopal v Tulshi Ram, (1928) 51 All 79 FB;
Ghasilal v Deobai, (1953) MB 303.
13

Nainsukhdas Sheonarayan Shop v Goverdhandas, (1947) Nag 510; Mohd. Daud v Abu

Mohammad, AIR 1961 Pat 310 .
14 Tyagaraja Mudaliyar v Vedathanni, (1935) 63 10.IA 126 : 38 Bom LR 373 : 59 Mad 446.
15 PB Bhatt v VR Thakkar, (1971) 74 Bom LR 509 .
16 Arumoorthi v SE Committee, AIR 1962 Mad 360 .
17 Shaikh Muhammad Ibrahim v Bibi Mariam, (1928) 8 Pat 484; Mohammed Khan v Sheo Bhikh

Singh, (1929) 5 Luck 377 .
18 Ebrahimbhoy Pabaney Mills Co Ltd, v Hassan Mamooji, (1920) 23 Bom LR 767 : 45 Bom 1242.
19 Narsi v Parshottam, (1928) 30 Bom LR 1277 : 52 Bom 875; Sir Sayaji Rao v Madhavrao,

(1928) 30 Bom LR 1463 : 53 Bom 12.
20 Lal Rajendrasingh v Mahant Hulasdas, (1944) Nag 704.
21 Maung San Min v Maung Po Hlaing, (1925) 4 Ran 1 FB
22 Best, 12th Edn, section 356, pp 313, 314.
23 The Indian Succession Act (XXXIX of 1925), section 2(f).
24 Dalip Singh v Durga Prasad, (1877) 1 All 442 ; Sukh Dial v Mani Ram, (1914) PR No. 29 of

1915 (Civil); Sharaf Ali Khan v Jagandar Singh, (1916) PR No. 98 of 1916 (Civil).
25 Binja Ram v Rajmohun Roy, (1881) 8 Cal 282 .
26 Balbhadar Prasad v The Maharajah of Betia, (1887) 9 All 351 , 356.
27 Duli Chand v Jagmendar Das, (1990) 1 SCC 169 .
28 (1881) 7 Cal 256 , 259; Radhakant Shaha v Abhoychurn Mitter, (1882) 8 Cal 721 .
29

Pramatha Nath Sandal v Dwarka Nath Dey, (1896) 23 Cal 851 , following Golap Chand

Marwaree v Thakurani Mohokoom Kooaree, (1878) 3 Cal 314 . It is dissented from by the
Allahabad High Court in Nazir Khan v Ram Mohan, (1930) 53 All 114 FB.
30 Ranendramohan Tagore v Keshabchandra Chanda, (1934) 61 Cal 433 .
31 Sheikh Akbar v Sheikh Khan, (1881) 7 Cal 256 .
32 Damodar Jagannath v Atmaram Babaji, (1888) 12 Bom 443; Jacob & Co v Vicumsey, (1926)

29 Bom LR 432 .
33 Chenbasapa v Lakshman Ramchandra, (1893) 18 Bom 369.
34 Krishnaji v Rajmal, (1899) 24 Bom 363 : 2 Bom LR 25; Ranchhod v Ravjibhai, (1925) 28 Bom

LR 631 ; Jacob & Co v Vicumsey, (1926) 29 Bom LR 432 ; Somabhai v Kalyanbhai, (1937) 40 Bom
LR 174 .
35 Perumal Chettiar v Kamakshi Ammal, (1938) Mad 933 FB.
36 Nazir Khan v Ram Mohan, (1930) 53 All 114 FB. Gopi Nath v Srimati Chameli, (1938) All 741 .
37 Sheo Nath Prasad v Sarju Nanio, (1943) All 610 , 641 FB.
38 Hira Lal v Datadin, (1881) 4 All 135 ; Benarsi Das v Bhikhari Das, (1881) 3 All 717 .
39 Dhaneshwar Sahu v Ramrup Gir, (1928) 7 Pat 845.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
40

Abdul Muhammad Khan v Mahananda Upadhyaya, (1931) 11 Pat 135. See Raja Lal

Bahadursingh v Sheikh Gulam Yasin, (1932) 29 NLR 131.
41 Ramjugeshwar v Gajadhar, (1950) 29 Pat 980.
42 Chandra Sekhar v Gobinda Chandra, AIR 1966 Ori 18 . Bollan Venkataiah v VV Ramana Reddy,

AIR 1985 AP 26 .
43 Mohd Jamal Saheb v Munwar Begum, AIR 1964 AP 188 .
44 Chandra Singh v Amritsar Banking Co, (1921) 2 Lah 330.
45 Emperor v Gulabu, (1913) 35 All 260 .
46 Emperor v Nabab Ali Sarkar, (1923) 51 Cal 236 ; Chenchian v King-Emperor, (1919) 42 Mad

561; Taj Mahmud v The Crown, (1927) 15 Lah 407.
47 Krishna Prasad v SN Prasad, AIR 2006 Sikkim 25 .
48 Ulfatunnisa Elahijan Bibi v Hosain Khan, (1883) 9 Cal 520 FB.
49 Haranchandra Chakrabarti v Kali Prasanna Sarkar, (1931) 59 Cal 396 ; Maharani Janki Kuer v

Bir Bhikhan Ojha, (1924) 3 Pat 349; Thakore Fatesingji v Bomanji A Dalal, (1903) 27 Bom 515 : 5
Bom LR 274; Jhamplu v Kutramani, (1917) 39 All 696 ; Ata Muhammad v Shankar Das, (1925) 6
Lah 319.
50 Chhotalal v Bai Mahakore, (1917) 19 Bom LR 322 : 41 Bom 466; Maung Po Kin v Maung Shwe

Bya, (1923) 1 Ran 405; Maung Tun Sein v Ko Tu, (1928) 6 Ran 337; Subramonian v Lutchman,
(1922) 50 Cal 338 : 25 Bom LR 582 : 50 IA 77.
51 Moti Chand v Lalta Prasad, (1917) 40 All 256 .
52 Subbu Naidu v Varadarajulu Naidu, (1947) Mad 694; Rasu v Pandidurai, AIR 2002 NOC 155

(Mad), a sale deed was claimed to be required for collateral purposes, but the case of the
applicant was that he gained title and possession of the property on the basis of the deed. The
deed was unregistered though registration was compulsory. Marking of the document was not
allowed.
53 Hriday Narain Choudhury v Shyam Kishore Singh, AIR 2002 SC 2526 .
54 Krishna Bai v Shivnath Singh, AIR 1993 MP 65 .
55 Subraya MN v Vittala MN, (2016) 8 SCC 705 , para 16 : AIR 2016 SC 3236 .
56 Najimmudin v UOI, AIR 2009 SC 1429 : (2009) 2 SCC 720 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 92] Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.—
When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, [s 92.5] or
any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, [s 92.6] have been
proved according to the last section, [s 92.7] no evidence of any oral agreement or
statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to any such instrument or their
representatives in interest, [s 92.8] for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to,
or subtracting from, its terms:
Proviso (1).—Any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or which
would entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto, such as fraud,
intimidation, illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party,
57[want or failure] of consideration, or mistake in fact or law.

Proviso (2).—The existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on which
a document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In
considering whether or not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the
degree of formality of the document.
Proviso (3).—The existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition
precedent to the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or
disposition of property, may be proved.
Proviso (4).—The existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind or
modify any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in
cases in which such contract, grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in
writing, or has been registered according to the law in force for the time being as to the
registration of documents.
Proviso (5).—Any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any
contract are usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or inconsistent
with, the express terms of the contract.
Proviso (6).—Any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language of a
document is related to existing facts.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods "in ships from Calcutta to London".

The goods are shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The fact that that
particular ship was orally excepted from the policy cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B Rs. 1,000 on the ﬁrst March, 1873. The

fact that, at the same time an oral agreement was made that the money should
not be paid till the thirty-ﬁrst March cannot be proved.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(c) An estate called "The Rampur Tea Estate" is sold by a deed which contains a

map of the property sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always
been regarded as part of the estate and was meant to pass by the deed cannot
be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B,

upon certain terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B's as to
their value. This fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the speciﬁc performance of a contract, and also

prays that the contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that
provision was inserted in it by mistake. A may prove that such a mistake was
made as would by law entitle him to have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of

payment, and accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show
that the goods were supplied on credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these

words: "Bought of A a horse for Rs. 500". B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and B gives a card on which is written—"Rooms, Rs. 200 a

month". A may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to include partial
board.
A hires lodgings of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement, drawn up by
an attorney, is made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may
not prove that board was included in the terms verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the

receipt and does not send the money. In a suit for the amount A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain

contingency. The writing is left with B, who sues A upon it. A may show the
circumstances under which it was delivered.

COMMENT
[s 92.1] Principle.—
When a transaction has been reduced into writing, either by requirement of law, or
agreement of the parties, the writing becomes the exclusive memorial thereof; and no
extrinsic evidence is admissible either to prove independently the transaction, or to
contradict, vary, add to, or subtract from, the terms of the document, though the
contents of such document may be proved by either primary or secondary evidence.58
The grounds of exclusion are: (1) that to admit inferior evidence when the law requires
superior would be to nullify the law; and (2) that when the parties have deliberately put
their agreement into writing, it is conclusively presumed between themselves and their
privies that they intended the writing to form a full and ﬁnal statement of their

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
intentions, and one which should be placed beyond the reach of future controversy, bad
faith, or treacherous memory.59 All parole testimony of conversations held between
parties, or declarations made by either of them, whether before, or after, or at the time
of, the completion of a contract, will be rejected; because such evidence would tend to
substitute a new and different contract for the one really agreed upon. Extrinsic
evidence as to what transpired subsequent to a written contract is not admissible for
ascertaining its terms.60

[s 92.2] Ingredients.—
This section operates only as between, the parties to a deed or their representatives in
interest. It has no application to strangers and does not therefore prevent a stranger
from showing that a transaction which on the face of it purports to be one thing was in
fact never intended by the parties to be that but was effected for some collateral
purpose and that the real transaction between them was something different. But such
a case must be pleaded and proved.61
Under this section:
(1) when the terms of (a) a contract, (b) a grant, or (c) any other disposition of property,
have been reduced to the form of a document, or
(2) when any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have
been proved by the production of the document or by giving secondary evidence of its
contents, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted as
between the parties to any such document or their representatives in interest, for the
purpose of (i) contradicting, (ii) varying, (iii) adding to, or (iv) subtracting from, its
terms. There are six exceptions to this—
(1) Any fact which would (i) invalidate any document, or (ii) entitle any person to any
decree or order relating thereto may be proved, such as fraud, intimidation, illegality,
failure of consideration, mistake in fact or law.
(2) Any separate oral agreement (i) as to any matter on which the document is silent,
and (ii) which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved.
(3) Any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to the attacking of
any obligation under the document, may be proved.
(4) Any subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any such contract, grant, or
disposition of property, may be proved, except when such contract of grant (i) is
required to be in writing, or (ii) has been registered.
(5) Any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract
are usually annexed to such contracts, may be proved if they are not repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, its express terms.
(6) Any fact which shows in what manner the language of the document is related to
existing facts, may be proved.
This section is supplementary to section 91 and is, to some extent, implied, in it. If the
contract, grant or disposition has been reduced into writing, section 91 says no
evidence shall be given of it, except the document itself, and this rule would be in vain,
unless, as is said in this section, it was also forbidden to contradict, vary, add to, or
subtract from, its terms.62

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The bar of this section applies only when it is sought to be proved that the terms of the
transaction were different and not that the transaction itself was different than what it
purported to be.63

[s 92.3] Scope.—
The section applies only where, upon the face of it, the written instrument appears to
contain the whole contract.64 If the parties have intended to reduce all the terms of the
contract into writing, then no parole evidence is admissible; but if they intended only to
reduce into writing a portion of the terms of the contract, then they are entitled to give
parole evidence of the terms which they did not intend to reduce into writing.65 This
section is only applicable to cases as between parties to an instrument or their
representatives in interest. Where, however, the dispute is between a stranger to an
instrument and a party to it or his representative in interest, this section is inapplicable,
and both the stranger and the party or his representative are at liberty to lead evidence
of oral agreement notwithstanding the fact that such evidence, if believed, may
contradict, vary, add to, or subtract from, its terms.66 Where however a transaction is
contained in more than one document the documents should be read and interpreted
together and this section is not applicable.67 A contract made on the basis of a tender
is in writing. Additional terms were not allowed to be brought in either on oral basis or
by the conduct of the oﬃcers of the authority making payments on a different basis.68

[s 92.4] Benami transaction.—
This section applies only to the terms of a transfer and does not preclude the
admission of any evidence to show the benami character of the transaction.69 The
Supreme Court allowed oral evidence to show that the real tenant was someone other
than the ostensible tenant.70 Oral evidence was allowed to show as to who were the
parties to a benami transaction.71

[s 92.5] "When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of
property".—
These words when read with the words "as between the parties to any such instrument"
which follow them, refer to bilateral instruments only and not to unilateral instruments,
such as wills and powers-of-attorney. Oral evidence as to the "terms" of a written
contract is excluded. There is nothing to exclude oral evidence that there was no
agreement between the parties and therefore no contract.72 The recital in a sale deed
that there are no encumbrances on the property sold is not a term of contract, and
evidence to prove that the vendee was aware of certain liability on the property and
purchased it subject to such liability is admissible.73

[s 92.6] "Or any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a
document".—
These words, when read with the words "as between the parties" and "any oral
agreement and statement," refer to bilateral contracts, grants or other dispositions of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
property, which the law requires to be reduced to writing and not to every matter which
the law requires to be reduced to writing.

[s 92.7] "Have been proved according to the last section".—
The provisions of the section come into force when the written instruments referred to
in the section have been proved in accordance with the provisions of section 91, that is,
either by the production of the document itself, or by the production of the secondary
evidence of it.

[s 92.8] "No evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted as
between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in
interest".—
The section forbids the admission of evidence of an oral agreement for the purpose of
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, the terms of a written document
as between the parties to such document or their representatives in interest.74 The rule
of exclusion laid down in the section does not apply to the case of a third party who is
not a party to the document. On the contrary, section 99 distinctly provides that
persons who are not parties to a document may give evidence tending to show a
contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document.75 Extraneous
evidence to show that the parties to a sale deed had no intention of conveying a
particular item of property included in the deed is admissible where the person
challenging the transfer is not a party to the deed.76
The words "between the parties to any such instrument" do not preclude one of two
persons in whose favour a deed of sale is purported to have been executed from
proving by oral evidence in a suit by the one against the other, that the defendant was
not a real but a nominal party only to a purchase, and that the plaintiff was solely
entitled to the property to which it related. M conveyed certain houses and premises to
plaintiff and defendant jointly by a sale deed. Plaintiff sued defendant for ejectment
from the premises, alleging that he alone was the real purchaser, and that the
defendant was only nominally associated with him in the deed. It was held that this
section did not preclude the plaintiff from showing by oral evidence that he alone was
the real purchaser, notwithstanding that the defendant was described in the sale deed
as one of the two purchasers.77 The plaintiff sued to recover money which he had been
compelled to pay in virtue of a mortgage executed by his two half-sisters and himself.
His claim was based on the plea that, though appearing in the bond as a co-obligor, he
was in reality merely a surety. It was held that evidence was admissible to show that
the plaintiff executed the mortgage bond as a surety only.78 The Rangoon High Court
has dissented from this view and held that oral evidence to show that one of the
executants of a monetary bond to the knowledge of the money-lender signed it only as
a surety is not admissible.79 The Privy Council has held that oral evidence is
inadmissible to show that the person who has signed a promissory note is not liable
but someone else is.80 Oral evidence was not allowed to contradict the contents of a
written deed of liability to a bank.81
The section does not prevent proof of a fraudulent dealing with a third person's
property or proof of notice that the property purporting to be absolutely conveyed in
fact belonged to a third person who was not a party to the conveyance.82 As between
the parties to an absolute conveyance this section precludes the giving of oral evidence
to prove that the transaction was intended to be a mortgage. But where the grantee

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
took knowing that a third person was the owner of the property and the grantor was
only a mortgagee, and that the intention of all parties was merely to transfer the
mortgage, oral evidence of the third party's rights was admissible to prove the real
nature of the transaction.83
The mere fact that both the parties have not signed a contract will not make the
agreement oral within the meaning of sections 91 and 92, because these sections only
require the terms to be reduced to writing and not the whole contract in the sense of
signatures and dates and so forth. Even where signatures are absent on an agreement
or the proposal and acceptance are not entered in it, it would still be hit by sections 91
and 92 provided the "terms" meaning all the terms, are embodied in the written
agreement. The absence of signatures could be used as good evidence of the fact that
the document was not intended to be ﬁnal and binding. But the mere absence of
signatures would not prevent the document from being the ﬁnal depository of the
intention of parties, any more than the presence of signatures would operate to bind if
it could be established that the signing was conditional.84

[s 92.9] "For the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting
from, its terms".—
This is what the section forbids. But it does not prevent a party to a contract from
showing by oral evidence that the consideration is different from that described in the
contract. It is therefore open to a party to show that that part of the consideration as to
rent payable in terms of a lease represented a past debt for rent and not a future
liability arising under the contract.85 Consideration is not a term. Oral evidence can be
adduced as to what exactly was the nature of consideration.86
The recitals in a registered adoption deed clearly showed the date on which the
adoption ceremony was held. It was held that no oral evidence could be allowed of any
agreement to contradict the terms of the written document and to show that the
adoption took place on a different date.87

[s 92.10] Evidence of intention, acts and conduct.—
The Privy Council laid down in Balkishen v Legge that oral evidence of intention is not
admissible for the purpose of construing a deed or ascertaining the intention of the
parties to the deed. Oral evidence was not allowed, for example, to show whether a
particular deed was intended by the parties to be a sale or lease.88 A deed of sale of
land for value was accompanied by a deed of agreement between the parties for
purchase back by the vendor of the land on payment by him of money to the vendee on
a future date ﬁxed. The deeds were followed by transfer of possession to the vendee,
and his receipt of the proﬁts. The vendor did not exercise his right of re-purchase; but
after many years, gave notice of his intention to redeem, and sued to enforce his right
of redemption as upon a mortgage by conditional sale. The Privy Council held that oral
evidence for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties to the deeds was
not admissible and that the case must be decided on a consideration of the contents
of the documents themselves with such extrinsic evidence of surrounding
circumstances as may be required to show in what manner the language of the
document was related to existing facts.89 Even after this pronouncement of the
Judicial Committee there was a conﬂict of views between the Bombay and the Madras
High Courts on the one hand and the Calcutta High Court on the other on the question
whether oral evidence as to acts and conduct of parties subsequent to a deed was

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
admissible to show that what on the face of it was a conveyance of sale was in reality
a mortgage. The High Courts of Bombay90 and
Madras91 were of opinion that such evidence was not admissible. The former Chief
Court of Lower Burma92 and the former Judicial Commissioner's Court of Upper
Burma93 followed this view. On the other hand, the Calcutta High Court94 was of
opinion that such evidence was admissible. The former Chief Court of the Punjab95
had adopted the view of the Calcutta High Court. This conﬂict has been set at rest by
the Privy Council in Maung Kyin's case, above referred to, in which it has expressly
overruled the decisions of the Calcutta High Court and approved those of the Bombay
and the Madras High Courts. It has held that as between the parties to an absolute
conveyance this section precludes the giving of oral evidence to prove that the
transaction was intended to be a mortgage.96
Though this section precludes oral evidence of intention for the purpose of construing
deeds or proving the intention of the parties, it merely prescribes a rule of evidence,
and does not fetter the court's power to arrive at the true meaning and effect of a
document in the light of all the circumstances surrounding the transaction.97 When it is
said that a court should look into all the circumstances to ﬁnd an author's intention, it is
only for the purpose of ﬁnding out whether the words apply accurately to existing facts.
But if the words are clear in the context of the surrounding circumstances the court
cannot rely on them to attribute to the author an intention contrary to the plain meaning
of the words used in the document.98
It is always permissible to look to the surrounding circumstances to see in what
manner the language of a document was related to existing facts. A party is not
precluded from showing that the writing was not the contract between the parties but
was only a ﬁctitious or colourable device which cloaked something else.99
Oral evidence was allowed to show that the transaction in question was actually
intended to be a loan transaction and not as an agreement for sale of property.100 In
another similar case, the plaintiff contended that the sale deed of the property in
question was executed not as a real sale deed but by way of security for the loan
transaction between the parties and that the defendant would reconvey the property to
the plaintiff after receiving back the amount of the loan and interest thereon. It was
held that the plaintiff was entitled to prove these facts by oral evidence.101
Evidence of subsequent conduct is not admissible for construing a document when the
words used are plain.102

[s 92.11] CASES.—Intention, conduct, etc.—
The plaintiff sued to recover possession of land contending that the document under
which the defendants held the land, though in the form of an absolute conveyance, was
intended to operate merely as a mortgage. The plaintiff's contention was based on the
ground that the consideration was a previously existing debt and not money paid at the
time; that the plaintiff's father, notwithstanding the execution of the deed, remained in
possession until his death and that after his death his widow remained in possession
for 3 years; that there was no transfer of the land into the khata of the transferee, and
that the consideration was grossly inadequate. It was held that the transaction was an
out-and-out sale and no evidence of the several circumstances relied on could be
admitted to show that it was a mortgage.103 Where in respect of an agreement to sell
an agricultural land, the defendant contended he only intended usufructuary mortgage
to secure advances of money made by the plaintiff who said that he would give up his

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
possession if the money advanced was returned, the admission of the plaintiff could be
used to invalidate the agreement to sell.104 Where tenancy was granted for a limited
period, the tenant, after expiry of the period, cannot make objection that the
proceedings were camouﬂage and real intention was to create general tenancy.105 The
plaintiffs, who were agriculturists, brought a suit to redeem and the defendant
contended that the transaction in suit was a sale out-and-out and not a mortgage. The
lower Court held that the transaction was a mortgage and allowed redemption. It was
held that evidence of intention could not be given for the purpose merely of construing
a document which purported to be a sale out-and-out and not a mortgage.106 A
surgeon attached to a private hospital on honorary basis was allowed to occupy a
cabin in the hospital. This kind of occupation was recorded on a stamped document.
Oral evidence was not allowed to show that the occupation was on some other basis,
like leave or licence. In support of the recorded fact the court admitted the testimony of
the co-occupant, who deposed that the letting was not on leave or licence basis and
that the basis was that the cabin was to be vacated whenever asked for. Though he
was an interested party his evidence was not unnatural.107 Oral evidence of the owners
of the lands, adjoining the land sold, may be given to prove that the names of the
adjoining owners were wrongly given.108
A deed of sale of immovable property and an agreement for resale to the vendor do not
together constitute a mortgage unless it appears from the documents, in the light of
surrounding circumstances, that the parties so intended. The intention of the parties,
which is the test in such a case, must be gathered from the language of the documents
themselves.109
In a suit for speciﬁc performance on the basis of sale agreement, the defendant was
allowed to contend that the parties never intended to act upon it and had a different
contract altogether in mind. The bar of section 92 operates only if the defendant relies
upon the agreement and also at the same time seeks to vary or contradict its terms.110
It has also been held that oral evidence in departure from the terms of a deed is
admissible to show that what was mentioned in the deed was not the real transaction
but that was something different.111

[s 92.12] Oral evidence inadmissible to vary terms.—
The executant of promissory note cannot be permitted to prove a separate agreement
according to which the sum speciﬁed in the note was not, as expressed therein,
payable on demand, but only after the adjustment of some accounts between the
parties.112 No oral evidence is admissible to vary the amount of price ﬁxed in a
registered sale deed,113 or the terms of a cheque which is a negotiable instrument114
or the rate of interest different115 from that in the written contract. In the sale of the
audio/CD rights in a movie, the agreement expressly stated that the sale consideration
was Rs 12.50 lakhs and nothing more. Another clause of the agreement as to variation
of terms would have no effect unless reduced to writing. The plea of a party that there
was an oral agreement that the actual sale price would be Rs 1 crore was not allowed.
A mortgage with possession was executed in plaintiff's favour for a term of 10 years.
Possession was not, in fact, taken by the plaintiff, but by a second document of even
date, the mortgaged land was leased to the mortgagor for the same term at an annual
rent. The court of the Judicial Commissioner held that reading the mortgage with the
lease of even date, and taking into account the fact that possession had remained all
along with the mortgagor and that there had been other similar transactions between
the parties, the mortgage should be construed only as a simple mortgage. The Privy
Council held that this section forbade the admission or consideration of evidence as to
the intention of the parties or to contradict the express terms of the document, and that

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the mortgage in question was, as it purported on the face of it to be, a possessory
mortgage.116
An oral agreement not to execute a decree, entered into between the parties after the
ﬁling of the suit and before the passing of the decree, provided the defendant did not
contest the suit, is admissible in evidence as it does not vary the terms of the decree,
and can be pleaded in bar of execution.117
Where a document purports to be an absolute sale, a contemporaneous unregistered
agreement giving the vendor the right of redemption is inadmissible to prove that the
deed of sale is in reality a mortgage.118

[s 92.13] Oral evidence inadmissible to contradict written terms.—
In a suit for a declaration that an apparent sale deed executed by the plaintiff was a
mortgage and for redemption, the lower Courts allowed the plaintiff to adduce
evidence to prove that the defendant at the time of the execution of the sale deed
represented to the plaintiff that the sale deed would not be enforced as such. It was
held that no evidence of a contemporaneous agreement, or promise, or representation
inconsistent with the written document could be admitted.119 In a suit for a decree for
sale for the mortgage amount due under an admittedly usufructuary mortgage the
defendants contended that there was a contemporaneous oral agreement to treat the
usufructuary deed as a simple mortgage and that transfer of possession was never
intended. On the question whether evidence in support of the oral agreement could be
allowed to be let in, it was held that the courts should give effect to the intention
expressed in the document and that the contemporaneous oral agreement was
inadmissible in evidence.120 Where a registered document on the face of it without any
ambiguity is a pure and simple mortgage, the parties to the transaction or their
successors-in-interest cannot be allowed under section 92 to prove by parole evidence
that it was intended to operate as a deed of sale.121 The plaintiff's father conveyed the
family properties to his sister's husband for a stated amount as consideration, the
consideration being the obligation which the vendee undertook to discharge the family
debts for that amount, and the vendee sold some of the properties and discharged the
debts, and the plaintiff sued the vendee for the recovery of the properties left, and for
an account of his management of the properties conveyed. It was held that the plaintiff
was precluded from establishing an oral agreement to reduce an out-and-out sale into
a trust so as to take away the right of the vendee to enjoy the properties, as such an
agreement would be hit by this section.122 Evidence in respect of an oral agreement to
return the property which has been conveyed under a registered sale deed is
inadmissible.123

[s 92.14] Oral evidence admitted where third party is concerned.—
Plaintiff sued to recover one-fourth of the price of a house alleged to have been sold by
the ﬁrst defendant to the second defendant, the claim being based upon a local
custom. The transaction between the defendants was ostensibly not a sale but a
usufructuary mortgage. It was held that the plaintiff, not being a party to the
transaction, was entitled to give evidence to show that what purported to be a
usufructuary mortgage was not in reality such, but was in fact a sale.124
The section is applicable only to parties to the instrument and not strangers to it. In a
criminal proceedings arising out of a transaction, the prosecution is not a party to it.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The bar applies to oral evidence to disprove the terms of the contract and not to
disprove the contract itself. Thus, even a party to the instrument can show that the
transaction contained in the instrument is itself sham or ﬁctitious or nominal in the
sense of being not intended to be acted upon. The prosecution could show that the
transaction was ﬁctitious because it was designed to offer an explanation for
disproportionate wealth acquired by the accused.125

[s 92.15] Void or voidable.—[Proviso 1].—
This proviso applies to cases where evidence is admitted to show that a contract is
void, or voidable, or subject to re-formation, upon the ground of fraud, duress, illegality,
etc., in its inception.126 See Illustrations (d) and (e). The instances given in the proviso
are not exhaustive. They are set out by way of illustration only. If the validity of a written
agreement is impeached, it is no defence to point to the apparent rectitude of the
document and to claim protection from inquiry under a rule which exists against the
contradiction and variance of the terms only of those instruments the validity of which
is not in question. In such cases, the court is not bound by what has been described as
the mere paper expressions of the parties, and is not precluded from inquiring into the
real nature of the transaction between them. The proviso declares that any fact may be
proved which would invalidate any document.127 A party to an instrument may prove
that it was a mere paper transaction, never intended to be given effect to or acted
upon.128
The combined effect of this proviso and section 31 of the Speciﬁc Relief Act is to
entitle either party to a contract, whether plaintiff or defendant, to protect his right by
proving a mistake in a written contract i.e., a mistake in the description of the property
sold by giving a wrong survey number to the same. Mistake in the belief of a party to a
document may be pointed out under this proviso.129 It is immaterial if the mistake is
caused by innocent misrepresentation.130 Evidence of mutual mistake is admissible
under this proviso.131
The Privy Council has held that this section only excludes oral evidence to vary the
terms of a written contract, and has no reference to the question whether the parties
had agreed to contract upon the terms set forth in a particular document. Even if there
were no provisos to sections 91 and 92 there is nothing in either section to exclude oral
evidence that a document purporting to embody the terms of a contract was never
intended to operate as an agreement but was brought into existence solely for the
purpose of creating evidence on some other matter. Such oral evidence stands on the
same footing as would evidence that the alleged signature of one of the parties was a
forgery.132
Where parties enter into a sale deed, it is not competent to them to prove a
contemporaneous oral agreement to reconvey the property sold on payment of the sum
advanced, in the absence of fraud, misrepresentation, or failure of consideration, etc.,
rendering the sale invalid.133

[s 92.15.1] Fraud.—
Fraud in order to vitiate a document must have been committed in the execution of the
document i.e. a document which was not intended to be executed must have been
executed. In cases of fraud the important thing that has got to be proved is the
intention to defraud. It would constitute fraud only where either there has been a
promise made without any intention of performing it or where there has been an active
concealment of fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact.134

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where one party induces the other to contract on the faith of representations made to
him any one of which is untrue, the whole contract is in a court of Equity considered as
having been obtained fraudulently.135
In order to plead fraud effectively the particulars of fraud must be given by the party,
and in the absence of such particulars, there cannot be any proper averment of fraud.
The fraud which is alleged must be such as enters into the transaction itself and
enables the party to avoid the transaction. It must be fraud within the meaning of the
term as used in section 17(3) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and unless and until the
allegations amount to that, there cannot be any valid plea of fraud which can be taken
up by a party.136
It may be shown that the document is a sham. It was contended in this case that the
mortgage deed in question was in fact intended to be a collateral security to the
landlord-tenant relationship to enable the landlord to enforce eviction. But this fact was
not proved as the document was found to be genuine. The mortgagee did not produce
the original in the court. The judgment was based upon a certiﬁed copy ﬁled by the
plaintiff as secondary evidence.137

[s 92.15.2] Misrepresentation.—
Where one party to a contract does not agree to any of its stipulations and the other
party induces him, not indeed to agree to it, but to agree to its formal insertion in the
written contract, by representing that the stipulation in question would be in reality
treated by him as a dead letter, it cannot be enforced because the party induced had
never assented to it and its inclusion in the written contract was the result of
misrepresentation.138 Where, at the time of executing a document, a representation is
made that the document though in form of a sale deed will not be enforced as against
the executant as a sale deed, and where on the faith of that representation the
executant executes the document, the sale deed cannot be upheld as a sale deed as
against him.139

[s 92.15.3] Illegal or Sham.—
Oral evidence is admissible to prove that the real object or consideration of an
agreement in writing is unlawful and that therefore the agreement is void.140 See
section 23 of the Indian Contract Act.
Fraud would have to be proved by leading evidence and not by mere averments in
pleadings. The High Court was not right in working on a mere suspicion of fraud or
going merely by the allegations in the plaint. The material on record must be capable of
spelling out at least a prima facie case of fraud.141

[s 92.15.4] Want of due execution.—
The term "execution" means the last act or series of acts which completes a document.
It is a formal completion of a document. Thus, execution of deeds is the signing,
sealing and delivery of them in the presence of witnesses. Execution of a will includes
attestation.142 Writing, stamp, registration, attestation are all formalities necessitated
by statutes.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 92.15.5] Want of consideration.—
Want of consideration, or failure of consideration, or difference in the kind of
consideration may be proved. But parole evidence to vary the consideration is not
admissible.143 The want or failure of consideration contemplated by the proviso is a
complete want or failure of consideration.144 Notwithstanding an admission in a sale
deed that the consideration has been received, it is open to the vendor to prove that no
consideration has actually been paid,145 but was agreed to be paid in a different
manner.146 If this was not so, facilities would be afforded for the grossest frauds. It is
no infringement of this section for a court to accept proof that by a collateral
arrangement between the vendor and the purchaser the consideration money remained
with the purchaser and under the conditions agreed upon between them.147 The
section does not say that no statement of fact in a written instrument may be
contradicted by oral evidence, but that the terms of the contract may not be varied.148
Where a part of the sale consideration is on the face of the document still outstanding
and to be paid by the vendee, it is not open to him to produce evidence to show that
there was a separate contemporaneous oral agreement that this sum would not be
payable and was merely ﬁctitious.149 The amount of sale consideration is a term of a
deed of sale and no evidence of any oral agreement can be given for the purpose of
varying the amount. An agreement made without consideration is void except in the
three cases speciﬁed in section 25 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. When it is brought
to the notice of a court that the consideration for a contract which it is asked to enforce
is, in whole or in part, an unlawful consideration, such Court is bound to give effect to
the fact thus brought to its notice, notwithstanding that the contract may appear upon
the face of it to be a perfectly legal contract, and that the unlawfulness of the
consideration was never pleaded by the defendant.150
A suit for title and possession of property was based on a registered sale deed. The
defendant pleaded that consideration was never paid to her. The original sale deed was
produced by the defendant and not by the plaintiff. There were recitals in it that the
entire consideration had already been paid. But there was no endorsement of the
Registrar as to such payment on the sale deed. The suit was dismissed for nonpayment of consideration.151
There is a presumption of execution of sale deed but there cannot be any presumption
of actual payment of sale consideration even if it is mentioned in the sale deed that a
particular amount towards full sale consideration has been paid. The contents in the
sale deed with respect to payment of sale consideration are always a question of fact,
which is required to be proved by leading evidence.152

[s 92.15.6] Value mentioned in loan application.—
In a dispute about the adequacy of sale consideration for the suit, it was shown that
the seller had applied for loan to a housing society in which he had mentioned the value
of the property. The court said that such statement amounted to an admission about
the value of the property and was relevant as such. The seller and the secretary of the
society were examined for this purpose and the statement thus became veriﬁed.153

[s 92.15.7] Value Mentioned in Sale Deed.—
It has been held that the section precludes a party who undervalued his property for the
purposes of stamp duty from claiming that their own document did not reﬂect the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
correct market value. Estoppel arises under section 115 also.154

[s 92.15.8] CASES.—
Where a deed of sale described the consideration to be Rs 100 in ready cash received,
but the evidence showed that the consideration was an old bond for Rs 63 and 12
annas and Rs 36 and 4 annas in cash, it was held that there was no real variance
between the statement in the deed and the evidence as to consideration, having regard
to the fact that it is customary in India, when a bond is given wholly or partially in
consideration of an existing debt, to describe the consideration as being "ready money
received".155 Plaintiffs sued for speciﬁc performance of an agreement in writing, which
set forth, inter alia, that defendants had agreed to sell, etc., under "certain conditions as
agreed upon". The defendants alleged that the written agreement did not contain the
whole of the agreement between the parties and offered parole evidence in support of
their contention. It was held that the parole evidence was admissible to show what was
meant by the clause "certain conditions as agreed upon."156
A Hindu widow, who signed a document evidencing the undivided status of her
husband and his brother and making certain provision for the maintenance, alleged
that she was induced to sign the document on the verbal assurance by the brother that
the document was only intended to create evidence of the undivided status of the
family and the provision for her maintenance was not ﬁnal but was to be settled in
future. In a suit for arrears of maintenance, it was held that oral evidence was
admissible to establish that the provision for maintenance in the document was not to
be acted upon and therefore there was no contract as to maintenance.157

[s 92.15.9] Mistake of fact.—
Evidence may be admitted to prove that there was mutual mistake in the working of an
agreement and to prove what the real intention of the parties was, and such evidence
as to the alleged mistake may be given not only in a suit for the rectiﬁcation of the
mistake brought under section 31 of the Speciﬁc Relief Act, but also in a suit based
upon the agreement itself.158 It is open to the court to allow oral evidence of mutual
mistake of fact to vary the terms of a deed. Oral evidence will be admissible even if the
mistake is due to innocent misrepresentation.159 Where a promissory note stated that
the interest was payable at the rate of Rs 2 per mensem and in a suit on the promissory
note the plaintiff contended that the interest agreed upon was two per cent. per
mensem and that the words "per cent." had been omitted by mistake, it was held that
oral evidence was admissible to prove that the rate of interest agreed upon was two
per cent per month.160 Where in an engineering contract the expression "sock" is typed
for the term "rock", oral evidence for correcting such a typing mistake is admissible.161
A person who seeks to rectify a deed upon the ground of mistake must be required to
establish, in the clearest and most satisfactory manner, that the alleged intention to
which he desires it to be made conformable continued concurrently in the minds of all
the parties down to the time of its execution, and also must be able to show exactly
and precisely the form to which the deed ought to be brought.162 The mistake referred
to in proviso (1) refers to both unilateral as well as a mutual mistake.163

[s 92.15.10] Mistake of law.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Under the Indian Contract Act, 1872, an agreement is not voidable because it was
caused by a mistake as to any law in force in India, but a mistake as to law not in force
in India has the same effect as a mistake of fact (section 21). But Courts do relieve
against mistakes in law as well as mistakes in fact, in cases where there is some
circumstance which makes it inequitable that the party who has received the money of
other party should retain it.

[s 92.16] Matters on which document is silent.—
[Proviso 2].—Under this proviso evidence of any collateral parole agreement which does
not interfere with the terms of the contract may be given. See Illustrations (f), (g) and
(h). Parties can prove that, either contemporaneously or as a preliminary measure, they
entered into a distinct oral agreement on some collateral matter. The only case in
which oral evidence will be admitted under this proviso is where the instrument is silent
on the matter sought to be proved and the agreement to be proved is consistent with
the terms of the document. It is allowable to urge an oral agreement which will have the
effect of leaving matters otherwise than if they had depended on the written agreement
alone, but such oral agreement must be clearly proved and the onus lies on him who
sets it up.164 Where the document does not record all the terms of the contract
between the parties, oral evidence is admissible to explain the real nature of the
transaction.165 An incomplete agreement was entered into in terms of a court decree,
external evidence was allowed to supply its missing links.166 Proof of a separate oral
agreement in respect of place of payment on which a promissory note is silent is
admissible in evidence under this proviso.167
If there is a rule of law which requires the transaction to be in writing, any separate
agreement must also be in writing.
The amount of the price agreed to be paid is an essential term of a contract of sale;
and consequently no evidence of an oral agreement at variance with the provisions of a
registered sale deed as to the amount of the price ﬁxed for the sale is admissible.168
Evidence that a sale deed was not intended by the parties thereto to be operative for
the purpose of passing title is inadmissible.169 The two vendees in a transaction can
vary the contents as between themselves.170

[s 92.16.1] Consent Decree.—
The consent decree did not cover the entire dispute between the parties and also some
vagueness remained. The factual background as also the manner in which the
existence of rights had been claimed by the parties had also to be considered.
Evidence could be given of such matters. Section 92 was not attracted.171

[s 92.16.2] Degree of formality of document.—
In a case before the Allahabad High Court172 the document in question acknowledged
the existence of a deed. It was on a stamp paper. It was silent about the interest
payable. Oral evidence was offered on the point. The question was whether the
document was so formal as to exclude oral evidence. The court allowed the evidence.
Mehrotra J said: When the second proviso to section 92 speaks of the degrees of the
formality of a document, it does not mean that every document should be treated as a
formal one in case it is executed on a stamp paper and has stamps aﬃxed to it. (The
present document) cannot be treated to be of such formality that oral evidence

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
regarding interest should be shut. Explaining when a document should be regarded as
completely formal, the learned judge said:
When the document is such that one may reasonably believe that the entire terms and
conditions agreed to between the parties were sought to be put into the document, then oral
evidence should not be allowed to creep in…Generally speaking, mere acknowledgment of
debt, even though stamped in accordance with law of stamps, cannot be deemed to be such
a formal document as to incorporate all the terms and conditions of the borrowing. It is
basically an acknowledgment of liability not mentioning the terms and conditions on which
the borrowing was contracted. In that sense, an acknowledgment of debt differs from a
formal pronote which undoubtedly incorporates the terms and conditions of the loan.

[s 92.16.3] Contemporaneous oral agreement.—to pay interest on hundi.—
Such an agreement is not admissible in evidence when there is no stipulation regarding
interest on the hundi (promissory note). In such cases the payee of the hundi is entitled
only to interest at the rate of six per cent per annum as provided by section 80 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.173 If there is a collateral written agreement, ﬁxing
the rate of interest in accordance with the custom prevailing in the district, the interest
is recoverable at the rate agreed upon between the parties.174

[s 92.16.4] Memorandum of Deposit.—
Section 21 prohibits oral evidence only regarding the terms of the agreement or other
evidence relating to terms. The section does not prohibit parties from leading oral
evidence in respect of the nature of the contract or as it may be shown by a
simultaneous oral agreement. It is well settled that if there is any ambiguity in the
language employed or its recitals, the intention of the parties may be ascertained by
adducing extrinsic evidence.175

[s 92.17] Condition precedent to obligation.—
[Proviso 3].—This proviso presupposes that the contract, grant or disposition of
property itself remains intact, but the condition precedent pleaded must in its very
nature be extraneous to the contract, grant or disposition itself and as agreed must
come into existence before the obligation attaches thereunder.176 Under this proviso a
contemporaneous oral agreement to the effect that a written contract was to be of no
force or effect and that it was to impose no obligation at all until the happening of a
certain event, may be proved. In a sale of property, payment of consideration was a
condition precedent. Failure of consideration was allowed to be proved by independent
evidence.177 See Illustrations (i) and (j).
The true meaning of the words "any obligation" is any obligation whatever under the
contract, and not some particular obligation which the contract may contain.178 Where,
at the time of the execution of a written contract, it is orally agreed between the parties
that the written agreement shall not be of any force or validity until some condition
precedent has been performed, parole evidence of such oral agreement is admissible
to show that the condition has not been performed, and consequently that the written
agreement has not become binding. This rule will not apply to a case where the written
agreement had not only become binding, but had actually been performed as to a large
portion of its obligations.179 The distinction in point of law is that evidence to vary the
terms of an agreement in writing is not admissible, but evidence to show that there is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
not an agreement at all is admissible. There is no rule of law to estop parties from
showing that a paper, purporting to be a signed agreement, was in fact signed by
mistake, or that it was signed on the terms that it should not be an agreement till
money was paid or something else was done,180 or that is was intended to be a sham
and not operative.181
Evidence of a contemporaneous oral agreement to suspend the operation of a written
contract of sale until an agreement for resale is executed is admissible.182 A collateral
oral agreement which is the condition of the execution of a promissory note would fall
within this proviso, and evidence of it would therefore be admissible to prove it.
Evidence of oral contract regarding the debt embodied in a promissory note was
allowed. The note was taken as a collateral security for the debt.183 A collateral
agreement which alters the legal effect of a promissory note must be distinguished
from an agreement that the instrument should not be an effective instrument until
some condition is fulﬁlled or to put it in another form, an agreement in defeasance of
the contract must be distinguished from an agreement suspending the coming into
force of the contract contained in the promissory note. An agreement coming under the
latter description is within this proviso. Where a promissory note is by its express terms
payable on demand, the obligation under the note attaches immediately. But an oral
agreement not to make a demand until some speciﬁed condition is fulﬁlled has the
intention and effect of suspending the coming into force of that obligation which is the
contract contained in the promissory note. The oral agreement constitutes a condition
precedent to the attaching of the obligation and is within the terms of this proviso.184
Where the collateral agreement which was the condition of the execution of a
promissory note was a written agreement it was held that it was outside this
section.185
An oral agreement that the execution of a deed of reconveyance should be a condition
precedent to the execution of the sale deed in pursuance of the written contract to sell
immovable property can be proved under this proviso.186

[s 92.17.1] CASE.—
Where the contract was to sell property for Rs 30,000 which sum was erroneously
stated to have been paid, it was competent for the vendor, without infringing any
provision of the Act, to prove a collateral agreement that the purchase-money should
remain in the vendee's hands for the purposes and subject to the conditions alleged by
the vendor;187 because the section does not say that no statement of fact in a written
instrument may be contradicted by oral evidence but the terms of the contract may not
be varied, etc.

[s 92.18] Rescission or modiﬁcation.—
[Proviso 4].—This proviso is based on the principle—"Nothing is so agreeable to natural
equity as that a thing be unbound in the manner in which it was bound." Under this
proviso a prior written contract may be varied by a subsequent verbal one, in cases in
which the law does not require the contract to be in writing. Where the original contract
is of such a nature as that the law requires it to be in writing or where its execution has
been followed by the formality of registration, the only way of proving the rescission or
modiﬁcation of the original contract must be by proof of an agreement of the like
formality and not by an oral agreement.
Only those agreements come within the proviso which affect the terms of the previous
transaction directly by virtue of the consensus of those who alone are competent to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
rescind or modify the original contract, viz., all the parties concerned or all their
representatives.188 The words of the proviso apply to any agreement whether
executory or executed.189
The word "oral" is used in the sense of being not committed to writing, and the words
"oral agreement" include all unwritten agreements, whether arrived at by word of mouth
or otherwise, that is, by acts or conduct of parties.190
In a suit for redemption, the mortgagees pleaded that the mortgaged property was
subsequently sold to them verbally for the mortgage debt and a further loan. It was
held that the mortgage being by a registered deed, evidence of a subsequent oral
agreement of sale was inadmissible under this proviso.191
The Calcutta and the Madras High Courts have held that oral evidence is admissible to
prove the discharge and satisfaction of a mortgage bond.192 The Bombay and the
Lahore High Courts have held that a subsequent agreement to take less than is due
under a registered mortgage-bond is an agreement modifying the terms of a written
contract and oral evidence is inadmissible in proof of it.193 The Bombay High Court has
subsequently held that where all that the defendant wants to prove is some fact
tending to show that the obligation has been discharged, either by payment, or by
remission of anything that was due, such fact may be proved as not amounting to a
modiﬁcation of the conditions of the mortgage but relating mainly to the discharge of
the contract, and not involving any question of its terms.194 A Full Bench of the
Allahabad High Court has held that an agreement between parties to a mortgage deed
cannot be proved by oral evidence to show that on payment of a sum of money less
than what would be due on calculating the correct amount of principal and interest at
the stipulated rate entered in the mortgage deed the debt would be discharged. Such
evidence would be admissible to prove the satisfaction of the debt, as resulting from a
mutual agreement by which the mortgagee accepted, in full discharge of the obligation,
payment of a part of the sum due and remitted the balance. A plea of such agreement
and satisfaction is not one setting up an agreement contradicting, varying, adding to or
subtracting from the terms of the contract of mortgage and does not contravene the
provisions of this section.195 A debtor cannot prove that his creditor agreed verbally to
take less, but he can prove that the creditor actually did accept less in full satisfaction.
A deed by which a property was settled by father upon his son was made in writing as
required by law. Oral evidence was not allowed of any new arrangement which had the
effect of modifying the deed of settlement.196 Oral evidence was not allowed to show
that the sale consideration for the property as agreed between the parties was more
than that mentioned in the deed.197

[s 92.18.1] New contract.—
This proviso does not exclude evidence of a subsequent oral agreement substituting a
new contract for one reduced to writing and registered according to law, the said
proviso only referring to a subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify such
contract.198 The distinction between a substituted new agreement by novation and the
mere alteration of an old contract is that in the former case the old contract is
extinguished, while in the latter it remains binding subject to the alteration which the
parties have agreed to.199 According to the Rangoon, the Lahore and the Bombay High
Courts a judgment-debtor can set up a new verbal agreement by the decree-holder to
accept some variation or a new contract in substituting of the original decree,200 but
not according to the Allahabad High Court.201

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 92.18.2] CASES.—Extraneous evidence admissible.—
A receipt which purported to show that simple and not compound interest was to be
charged (though the mortgage-bond contained provision for the payment of compound
interest), was held to be admissible in evidence.202 The receipt did not require
registration and was therefore admissible in evidence. It operated as a waiver.

[s 92.18.3] Extraneous evidence when not admissible.—
A lease contained a covenant for renewal of the lease whereby if the lessee desired to
renew the lease he should give three months' notice in writing of his intention to do so.
The lessee, however, failed to observe this covenant and relied on an oral agreement
between himself and his lessors for renewal of the lease. It was held that evidence of
such oral agreement was not admissible.203 Oral evidence was similarly not allowed to
show that another person than the one mentioned in the deed was intended to be the
lessee.204 Variation of rent ﬁxed by a registered lease deed must be made by another
registered instrument. The rent was increased under a separate agreement. It being a
variation of the registered deed was not admissible.205

[s 92.19] Customs and usages.—
[Proviso 5].—Parole evidence of usage or custom is admissible in aid of the
construction of a written instrument. Such evidence is received for explaining or ﬁlling
up terms used in commercial contracts, policies of insurance, negotiable instruments,
and other writings of a similar kind—when the language, though well understood by the
parties, and by all who have to act upon it in matters of business, would often appear to
the common reader scarcely intelligible, and sometimes almost a foreign language.
The terms used in these instruments are to be interpreted according to the recognised
practice and usage with reference to which the parties are supposed to have acted; and
the sense of the words, so interpreted, may be taken to be the appropriate and true
sense intended by the parties.206 "But the rule for admitting evidence of usage must be
taken always with this qualiﬁcation, that the evidence proposed is not repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the written contract. It ought never to be allowed to vary or contradict
the written instrument, either expressly or by implication...where the incident sought to
be annexed to a contract is unreasonable or illegal, it cannot be annexed to the contract
by evidence of usage."207

[s 92.20] Relationship with existing facts.—
[Proviso 6].—The proviso is a substantive provision laying down the law relating to the
admissibility of extrinsic evidence as an aid to the construction of a document in cases
in which it is necessary to ﬁnd out how the document is related to the existing facts.208
Where a document is a perfectly plain, straightforward document, no extrinsic evidence
is required to show in what manner the language of the document is related to existing
facts. But where the terms of the document themselves require explanation, then
evidence can be led within the restrictions laid down in this proviso.209 The language of
this proviso is rather vague. It is true that evidence of the circumstances surrounding a
document is admissible; but it is admissible only for the purpose of throwing light on
its meaning. It is not permissible to consider the surrounding circumstances with a
view to holding that a document which on the face of it is a sale deed is intended to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
operate as mortgage. There must be some limit to the suggestion that the surrounding
circumstances can always be scrutinized so as to enable the court to alter or change
the nature of a document to something different from what it purports to be. Otherwise,
there can be no certainty as to the proper construction to be placed on a document
which to all appearances is unambiguous.210
Extrinsic evidence is receivable of every material fact which will enable the court to
ascertain the nature and qualities of the subject-matter of the instrument; that is, to
identify the persons and things to which the instrument refers.211 Previous
correspondence between the parties for the purpose of explaining anything in a
document before the court is admissible.212 Subsequent conduct of the parties in
reference to the subject-matter can also be taken into account. This proviso was used
by the Supreme Court in a case where the grant of a jagir included the expression "part
of the uncultivated jagir".213 These words were found to be ambiguous in their setting
and, therefore, "extrinsic evidence aliunde the grant became necessary to explain [their]
coverage". The court took into account the past and subsequent history of the grant.
Ahmadi J214 cited a passage from an earlier Supreme Court decision which was
adopted from Halsbury's Laws of England.215 "The evidence of the conduct of the
parties in this situation as to how they understood the words to mean can be
considered in determining the true effect of the contract made between the parties.
Extrinsic evidence to determine the effect of an instrument is permissible where there
remains a doubt as to its true meaning. Evidence of acts done under it is a guide to the
intention of the parties in such a case and particularly when acts are done shortly after
the date of the instrument."216
On the basis of this authority, Ahmadi J observed:
The object of admissibility of such evidence in such circumstances under the 6th proviso is
to assist the court to get to the real intention of the parties and thereby overcome the
diﬃculty caused by the ambiguity. In such a case the subsequent conduct of the parties
furnishes evidence to clear the blurred area and to ascertain the true intention of the author
of the document.217

Sections 91 and 92 do not come in the way of considering whether a particular trade
practice is of restrictive nature or not. The decision in the Telco case did not proceed
on an application of the principle embodied in section 92(6).218 Correctness of facts
stated in a document can be questioned. Section 92 does not prevent it.219
Section 92 read with sections 94 and 95 clearly suggests that proviso (6) of section 92
comes into play only when there is a latent ambiguity in a document, that is, when the
language of the document is not prima facie consistent with the existing facts, or, in
other words, when there is conﬂict in the plain meaning of the language used in the
document and the facts existing or when put together they lead to an ambiguity. In a
case, therefore, where the language used in a document is plain and not in any way
ambiguous in reference to facts existing, there is no scope for coming into play of the
rule of interpretation laid down in proviso (6) to section 92.220
This section makes evidence as to the intention of a document contrary to its express
language inadmissible; but its proviso (6) lets in evidence to show in what manner the
disputed transaction or the language of the document was related to existing facts.221
Evidence can be admitted to show whether a gift deed has been acted upon or not.222

[s 92.21] Deed of one kind may be shown to be deed of another kind.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Extrinsic evidence is admissible for purpose of showing that a document, which
purports to be, and on the face of it is, a deed of sale, is in reality a deed of gift.223 Oral
evidence is admissible to show that a mortgage has been subsequently converted into
a sale,224 or that what ostensibly purported to be a sale with an agreement for a resale
and repurchase at the same price at a certain date was a mortgage by conditional
sale,225 or that two deeds of sale were in reality a deed of exchange.226 Where the
parties professing to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds, contemporaneously
enter into a contractual agreement in writing, such a document would amount to
mortgage by deposit of title deeds.227
There were certain recitals in the deed of a registered society. The court allowed oral
evidence to show that the recitals were supposed to be only nominal or that they were
not intended to be acted upon or that they were not meant to alter the existing state of
affairs. Thus oral evidence was allowed to prove what was the dominant object of the
society.228
Sections 93–97 partly develop and partly restrict the principle laid down by this
proviso.

57 Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, section 8, "for want of failure".
58 Roop Kumar v Mohan Thedani, AIR 2003 SC 2418 , sections 91 and 92 are supplementary to

each other and are based upon the "best evidence rule". The Supreme Court said:
"The two sections are, however, different in some material particulars. Section 91 applies to all
documents, whether they purport to dispose of rights or not, whereas section 92 applies to
documents which can be described as dispositive. Section 91 applies to documents which are
both bilateral and unilateral, unlike section 92 the application of which is conﬁned only to
bilateral documents. (See Bai Hira Devi v Oﬃcial Assignee of Bombay, AIR 1958 SC 448 : 1958
SCR 1384 ). Both these provisions are based on "best evidence rule". In Bacon's Maxim
Regulation 23, Lord Bacon said: "The law will not couple and mingle matters of speciality, which
is of the higher account, with matter of averment which is of the higher account, with matter of
averment which is of inferior account in law. It would be inconvenient that matters in writing
made by advice and on consideration, and which ﬁnally import the certain truth of the
agreement of parties should be controlled by averment of the parties to be proved by the
uncertain testimony of slippery memory."
59 Phipson, 7th Edn, p 552.
60 Belapur Co v Mah, State Farming Corp, (1968) 74 Bom LR 246 .
61 Rangubai v Govind, (1949) Nag 78.
62 Markby, 73, Bhawanbhai Premabhai v Bai Vahali, (1954) 57 Bom LR 250 .
63 Heirs of Jatashanker v Heirs of Mavji, AIR 1969 Guj 169 .
64 Cutts v Brown, (1880) 6 Cal 328 , 337.
65 Jumna Doss v Srinath Roy, (1886) 17 Cal 176 n, 177.
66 Bai Hira Devi v The Oﬃcial Assignee of Bombay, 1958 SCR 1384 : 60 Bom LR 932 : AIR 1958

SC 448 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
67 Chattanatha v Central Bank of India, AIR 1965 SC 1856 : 1965(3) SCR 318 : (1965) 35 Com

Cas 610 .
68 TN Electricity Board v N Raju Reddiar, AIR 1996 SC 2025 : 1996(4) SCC 551 .
69 Richard Taylor v Rajah of Parlakimedi, (1909) 32 Mad 443, 454; Pathammal v Syed Kalai

Ravuthar, (1903) 27 Mad 329.
70 Niranjan Kumar v Dhyan Singh, AIR 1976 SC 2400 : 1976(4) SCC 89 .
71 Raj Ballav Das v Haripada, AIR 1985 Cal 2 .
72 Tyagaraja Mudaliyar v Vedathanni, (1935) 38 Bom LR 373 : 63 IA 126 : 59 Mad 446.
73 Munninarayan Reddi v Chinnaswamy Gownder, (1953) Mys 29.
74 Nibash Ch Saha v Champa Lal Ladhar, AIR 2010 Gau 137 : 2010 (3) Gau LT 407, terms of an

agreement of sale reduced to writing and registered under the Registration, subsequent oral
agreement on those very terms held to be barred.
75 Bageshri Dayal v Pancho, (1906) 28 All 473 .
76 Ram Sundar Mal v Collector of Gorakhpur, (1930) 52 All 793 .
77 Mulchand v Madho Ram, (1888) 10 All 421 . See Pokal Gungayah v Ismail Mohomed Madaree,

(1895) 2 UBR (1892-96) 354.
78

Shamsh-ul-Jahan Begam v Ahmed Wali Khan, (1903) 25 All 337 ; Khudawand Karim v

Narendra Nath, (1935) 58 All 548 ; Mohammad Husain v Lala Hanoman Prasad, (1942) 18 Luck
81 .
79 Maung Ko Gyi v U Kyaw, (1927) 5 Ran 168.
80 National Bank of Upper India, Ltd v Bansidhar, (1929) 5 Luck 1 : 32 Bom LR 136 : 57 IA 1;

Khumaji Gajaji & Co v Damaji, (1933) 35 Bom LR 1197 .
81 Janki v Ganesh Ram, AIR 1984 All 219 . An altered deed cannot be put in evidence because it

amounts to variation. Suresh Chandra v Satish Chandra, AIR 1983 All 81 .
82 Maung Kyin v Ma Shwe La, (1911) 13 Bom LR 797 : 38 Cal 892 : 38 IA 146.
83 Maung Kyin v Ma Shwe La, (1917) 44 IA 236 : 20 Bom LR 278 : 45 Cal 320.
84 Balram v Mahadeo, (1949) Nag 849.
85 Abdullakin v Maung Ne Dun, (1929) 7 Ran 292.
86 State Bank of India v Premco Saw Mills, AIR 1984 Guj 93 .
87 MD Gopalaiah v Usha Priyadarshini, AIR 2002 Kant 73 : 2002 (1) KCCR 185 .
88 Satyanarayan Shah v Star Co, AIR 1984 Cal 399 : IR 1984 Cal 399.
89 Balkishen v Legge, (1899) 2 Bom LR 523 : 27 IA 58 : 22 All 149; Maharu v Khandu, (1924) 26

Bom LR 742 PC; Vithoba v Narayan, (1942) Nag 592; Kesarbai v Rajabhau, (1944) Nag 141.
90 Dattoo v Ramchandra, (1905) 30 Bom 119 : 7 Bom LR 669; Abaji v Laxman, (1906) 30 Bom

426 : 8 Bom LR 553.
91 Achutaramaraju v Subbaraju, (1901) 25 Mad 7.
92 Maung Bin v Ma Hlaing, (1906) 3 LBR 100 FB.
93 Mi Gywe v, Kesha Ram, (1908) 2 UBR (1907-1909) (Evi) 15.
94 Preonath Shaha v Madhu Sudan Bhuiya, (1898) 25 Cal 603 FB; Khankar Abdur Rahman v Ali

Hafez, (1900) 28 Cal 256 ; Mahomed Ali Hossein v Nazir Ali, (1901) 28 Cal 289 .
95 Abdul Ghafur Khan v Abdul Kadir, (1901) PR No. 72 of 1901 (Civil); Bulaki Mal v CJ Floyd,

(1911) PR No. 27 of 1911 (Civil).
96 Maung Kyin v Ma Shwe La, (1917) 44 IA 236 : 20 Bom LR 278 : 45 Cal 320 : 9 LBR 114; Maung

Shwe Phoo v Maung Tun Shin, (1927) 5 Ran 644.
97 Baijnath Singh v Hajee Vally Mahomed, (1924) 27 Bom LR 787 : 3 Ran 106 (PC).
98 Kamla Devi v Takhatmal, AIR 1964 SC 859 : 1964(2) SCR 152 .
99 Asaram v Lubdheshwar, (1939) Nag 1.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
100 K Bhaskaran Nair v Habeeb Mohd., AIR 2002 Ker 308 . Balram Kirar v Ramkrishna, AIR 2002

MP 139 , statements of witnesses showed fraud in the making of the transaction. Concurrent
ﬁnding of fact by courts below that the document was not a mortgage set aside. Document
alleged to be sham, oral evidence permitted to show that the document executed was never
intended, Kashinath Yadeo Hiwarde v Osman Baig Sandu Baig, AIR 2016 NOC 266 (Bom).
101 Shankarlal Ganulal v Balmukund, AIR 1999 Bom 260 .
102 Markandelal v Sitambharnath, (1945) Nag 10.
103 Dattoo v Ramchandra, (1905) 7 Bom LR 669 : 30 Bom 119; Keshavrao v Raya, (1906) 8 Bom

LR 287 ; Bai Adhar v Lalbhai, (1921) 24 Bom LR 239 ; Talakchand v Atmaram, (1923) 25 Bom LR
818 ; Mathai v Thomas, (1956) TC 411 .
104 Sitaram Lal v Jameswar Das, AIR 1995 Ori 260 .
105 Sunil Puri v Modi Spinning & Weaving Mills Co Ltd, AIR 1994 NOC 336 (Del).
106 Abaji v Laxman, (1906) 30 Bom 426, 8 Bom LR 553; Achutaramaraju v Subbaraju, (1901) 25

Mad 7.
107 Vinod Chaturvedi v State of MP, AIR 1984 SC 911 : 1984 Cr LJ 814 : (1984) 2 SCC 350 : 1984

SCC (Cri) 250 .
108 Mohan Rai v State of Bihar, AIR 1994 Pat 42 .
109 Jhanda Singh v Sheikh Wahid-ud-din, (1916) 19 Bom LR 1 : 43 IA 284 : 39 All 570.
110 Kanireddi Sattaraju v Kandanmuri Booleswari, AIR 2007 NOC 540 (Mad—DB).
111 Parvinder Singh v Renu Gautam, AIR 2004 SC 2299 : (2004) 4 SCC 794 .
112 Sri Ram v Sabha Ram Gopal Rai, (1922) 44 All 521 . This case has been dissented from in a

subsequent case in which the same High Court held that evidence to show that an instrument
like a promissory note, the title to which generally passes by delivery, was delivered conditionally
or for a special purpose only, and not for the purpose of transferring absolutely the property
therein, is not only admissible but is precisely the class of evidence contemplated by section 46
of the Negotiable Instruments Act and this section; Sheo Prasad v Gobind Prasad, (1927) 49 All
464 ; Bhogi Ram v Kishori Lal (1928) 50 All 754 .
113 Adityam Iyer v Rama Krishna Iyer, (1913) 38 Mad 514.
114 Walter Mitchell v AK Tennent, (1925) 52 Cal 677 .
115 Fitz-Holmes v Bank of Upper India Ltd, (1923) 4 Lah 258.
116 Feroz Shah v Sobhat Khan, (1933) 35 Bom LR 877 : 14 Lah 466 : 60 IA 273.
117 Papamma v Venkayya, (1935) 58 Mad 994 FB; disapproving Rajah of Kalahasti v Venkatadri

Rao, (1927) 50 Mad 897; Goseti Subba Row v Varigonda Narasimham, (1903) 27 Mad 368;
Chidambaram Chettiar v Krishna Vathiyar, (1916) 40 Mad 233 FB; Laldas v Kishordas, (1896) 22
Bom 463 FB. Contra Benode Lal Pakrashi v Brajendra Kumar Saha, (1902) 29 Cal 810 ; Hassan Ali
v Gauzi Ali Mir, (1903) 31 Cal 179 .
118 Kondiram v Gundappa, (1955) Hyd 440.
119 Dagdu v Nama, (1910) 12 Bom LR 972 ; Namdev v Dhondu, (1920) 22 Bom LR 979 : 44 Bom

961; Ramlochan v Pradip Singh, AIR 1959 Pat 230 .
120 Vasudevan Namboori v Devassi, (1956) TC 704 .
121 Ram Narain v Manki Singh, (1954) 33 Pat 638.
122 Rakkiyana v Chinnu, (1954) Mad 271.
123 Thatha Rao v Jummarlal, (1954) Hyd 373.
124 Bageshri Dayal v Pancho, (1906) 28 All 473 ; Rahiman v Elahi Baksh, (1900) 28 Cal 70 ,

dissented from Ganu v Bhau, (1918) 20 Bom LR 684 : 42 Bom 512; Kumara v Srinivasa, (1887) 11
Mad 213, 215; Gurdial Singh v Raj Kumar Aneja, AIR 2002 SC 1003 , in a challenge to the validity
of a lease deed, the question being whether the occupants were sub-tenants or tenants, they

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
could raise the question whether the transaction between the owner and tenant was not what it
appeared to be on reading the lease deed. They were not parties to the lease deed. Provisions of
sections 91 and 92 were not attracted to their case.
125 R Janakiraman v State, AIR 2006 SC 1106 : (2006) 1 SCC 697 .
126 Per Garth CJ, in Cutts v Brown, (1880) 6 Cal 328 , 338.
127 Beni Madhab Dass v Sadasook Kotary, (1905) 32 Cal 437 FB; Ma Thin Myaing v Maung Gyi,

(1923) 1 Ran 351; General Court Martial v Anittej Singh Dhaliwal (Col), 1998 Cr LJ 402 (SC),
section 92 applies only when the execution of the document is admitted and there is no other
inﬁrmity in it. The oral evidence of witnesses to the proceedings of the Board was held to be
admissible.
128 Ram Sundar Mal v Collector of Gorakhpur, (1930) 52 All 793 .
129 Tani Mahesha v Secretary of State for India in Council, (1894) PR No. 67 of 1894 (Civil).
130 Chimanram Motilal v Divanchand Govindram, (1931) 56 Bom 180 : 34 Bom LR 26.
131 Janardan v Venkatesh, (1938) 41 Bom LR 191 : (1939) Bom 149.
132 Tyagaraja Mudaliyar v Vedathanni, (1935) 63 IA 126 , 137 : 38 Bom LR 373 : 59 Mad 446.
133 Sangira v Ramappa, (1909) 11 Bom LR 1130 : 34 Bom 59.
134 Thatha Rao v Jummarlal, (1952) Hyd 373.
135 Abaji v Laxman, (1906) 30 Bom 426 : 8 Bom LR 553.
136 Narsingdas Takhatmal v Radhakisan, (1951) 54 Bom LR 492 ; Raghunath Tiwari v Rama Kant

Tiwari, AIR 1991 Pat 145 .
137 Ishwar Dass Jain v Sohan Lal, AIR 2000 SC 426 : (2000) 1 SCC 434 .
138 Sangira v Ramappa, (1909) 11 Bom LR 1130 : 35 Bom 59.
139 Navalbai v Sivubai, (1906) 8 Bom LR 761 .
140 Kashi Nath Chukerbati v Brindabun Chukerbati, (1884) 10 Cal 649 ; Anupchand Hemchand v

Champsi Ugerchand, (1888) 12 Bom 585.
141 Svenska Handelsbanken v Indian Charge Chrome, AIR 1994 SC 626 : (1994) 79 Comp Cas

589 : (1994) 1 Andh LT 37 (SC).
142 Bhawanji Harbhum v Devji Punja, (1894) 19 Bom 635, 638.
143 Motilal Singh v Mt Fulia, AIR 1958 Pat 61 ; KS Narasimhachari v Indo-Commercial Bank, AIR

1965 Mad 147 ; Leelamma Ambika Kumari v Narayan Ramakrishnan, AIR 1992 Ker 115 , evidence
that more consideration was given than that which was mentioned in the sale deed, evidence
not allowed. The court distinguished the case from Nabin Chandra v Shuna Mala, AIR 1932 Cal
25 , where evidence was allowed to show that a different kind of consideration was given than
the one mentioned in the deed.
144 Keshavrao v Raya, (1906) 8 Bom LR 287 .
145 Radhamohan Thakur v Bipin Behari Mitra, (1938) 17 Pat 318; Savitri Devi v State of Bihar, AIR

1989 Pat 327 .
146 Indrajit v Lal Chand, (1895) 18 All 168 .
147 Irfanali Laskar v Jogendrachandra Das Patni, (1932) 59 Cal 1111 .
148 Sah Lal v Indrajit, (1900) 2 Bom LR 553 : 27 IA 93 : 22 All 370; Lala Dholan Das v Ralya Shah,

(1899) PR No. 85 of 1898 (Civil); Mussammat Zohra Jan v Mussammat Rajan Bibi, (1915) PR No.
48 of 1915 (Civil).
149 Muhammad Taqi Khan v Jang Singh, (1935) 58 All 1 FB.
150 Alice Mary Hill v William Clarke, (1904) 27 All 266 .
151 Dhanbarti Koerin v Shyam Narain Mahton, AIR 2007 Pat 52 .
152 Parmar Narmadaben v Amratlal Motibhai Prajapati, 2017 AIR CC 540, para 6.1: (2016) 4 GLR

3205 (Guj-DB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
153 KM Rajendran v Anil Prakasam, AIR 1998 Mad 336 .
154 Krishi Utappadan Mandi Samiti v Bipin Kumar, (2004) 2 SCC 283 : AIR 2004 SC 2895 : 2004

All LJ 665.
155 Hukumchand v Hiralal, (1876) 3 Bom 159; Sheikh Muhammad Bakhsh v Ramdat, (1896) PR

No. 5 of 1896 (Civil); Le Hu v Elahi Bux, (1900) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 400.
156 Cutts v Brown, (1880) 6 Cal 328 .
157 Tyagaraja Mudaliyar v Vedathanni, (1935) 63 IA 126 : 38 Bom LR 373 : 59 Mad 446.
158 S Narayanaswamy v James D Rodrigues, (1906) 3 LBR 227; Janardan v Venkatesh, (1938) 41

Bom LR 191 : (1939) Bom 149.
159 Chimanram v Divanchand, (1931) 34 Bom LR 26 : 56 Bom 180.
160 Kamla Prasad Pandey v Hasan Ali Khan, (1939) All 329 .
161 Gujarat E Board v SA Jais & Co, AIR 1972 Guj 192 .
162 Rajaram v Manik, (1951) Nag 948.
163 Sateri Shiddappa v Rudrappa, (1953) 56 Bom LR 394 .
164 Motabhoy Mulla Essabhoy v Mujli Haridas, (1915) 42 IA 103 : 17 Bom LR 460: 39 Bom 399;

Badal Ram v Jhulai, (1921) 44 All 53 .
165 Sir Mohammad Akbar Khan v Attar Singh, (1936) 38 Bom LR 739 : 17 Lah 557: 63 IA 279.
166 Leena Roy v Indumati, AIR 1980 Pat 120 .
167 JN Sahani v The State, (1954) MB 343.
168 Adityam Iyer v Rama Krishna Iyer, (1913) 38 Mad 514.
169 Lachman Das v Ram Prasad, (1927) 49 All 680 .
170 Mohan Lal v Board of Rev., AIR 1982 All 273 ; Anjali Das v Bidyut Sarkar, AIR 1992 Cal 47 ,

transfer of possession on payment in part of the consideration speciﬁed in an agreement to sell,
held, provable. BB Lohar v Prem Prakash Goyal, AIR 1999 Sikkim 11 , intention of the parties to a
document can be drawn by the court by admitting and going into oral or other evidence.
171 Prayya Allayya Hittlamani v Prayya Gurulingayya Poojari, AIR 2008 SC 241 : (2008) 2 Mad LJ

504 : (2007) 11 SCR 326 : (2007) 14 SCC 318 .
172

Brij Kishore v Lakhan Tiwari, AIR 1978 All 314 at p 317. MK Setharamma Naidu v

Poovammal, AIR 2001 Mad 343 (Mad), tenancy granted, followed by the grants of simple
mortgage. The terms of it were not allowed to be altered by a subsequent unregistered deed.
173 Banwari Lal v Jagarnath Prasad, (1916) 1 PLJ 71 ; Fathuma Bivi v Hanumantha Row, (1907)

17 Mad LJ 296; Kishor Chand v Guram Ditta Mal, (1911) PR No. 52 of 1911 (Civil). See, however,
Re Sowdamonee Debya v A Spalding, (1882) 12 CLR 163 .
174 Goswami Sri Ghanshiam Lalji v Ram Narain, (1906) 34 IA 6 : 9 Bom LR 1: 29 All 33.
175 Jayalakshmi Trading Co v Krishnamurthy, AIR 2006 Mad 179 .
176 Chhaganlal Kalyandas v Jagjiwandas Gulabdas, (1939) 41 Bom LR 1263 .
177 Ganesh Pd v Deo Nandan, AIR 1985 Pat 94 .
178 Jugtanund Misser v Nerghan Singh, (1880) 6 Cal 433 ; Radhakissen Chamaria v Durga Prasad

Chamaria, (1931) 59 Cal 106 .
179 Jugtanund Misser v Nerghan Singh, (1880) 6 Cal 433 ; Walter Mitchell v AK Tennent, (1925)

52 Cal 677 ; CW Kinlock v Asa Ram, (1877) PR No. 51 of 1877 (Civil); Khuda Baksh v Budhar Mal,
(1882) PR No. 186 of 1882 (Civil).
180 Pym v Campbell, (1856) 6 E1 & B1 370, 371.
181 Gangabai v Chhababai, AIR 1982 SC 20 : (1982) 1 SCC 4 : (1982) 1 SCR 1176 : 1982 Mah LJ

1 . Followed in Bimbadhar Rout v Kuna Senapati, AIR 1995 Ori 258 .
182 Dada Honaji v Babaji Jagushet, (1865) 2 BHC (ACJ) 38; Ady v Administrator-General, Burma,

(1938) 40 Bom LR 1075 : (1938) Ran 417 (PC).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
183 Khitish Chandra v Rajkishore Sahu, AIR 1980 Ori 11 .
184 Narandas v Papammal, AIR 1967 SC 333 : 1966 Supp SCR 88.
185 Ady v Administrator-General, Burma, (1938) 40 Bom LR 1075 : (1938) Ran 417 PC; Bhogi

Ram v Kishori Lal, (1928) 50 All 754 ; Ali Jawad v Kulanjan Singh, (1922) 44 All 421 ; Dowlatram v
Vasdeo, (1942) Kar 516 .
186 Sahdeo v Namdeo, (1948) Nag 900.
187 Sah Lal v Indrajit, (1900) 2 Bom LR 553 : 27 IA 93: 22 All 370.
188 Goseti Subba Row v Varigonda Narasimham, (1903) 27 Mad 368, 370.
189 Goseti Subba Row v Varigonda Narasimham, ibid.
190 Mayandi Chetti v Oliver, (1889) 22 Mad 261.
191 Maung Myat Tun Aung v Maung Lu Pu, (1925) 3 Ran 243.
192 Ramlal Chandra Karmokar v Gobinda Karmokar, (1900) 4 Cal WN 304; Mahim v Ram Dayal,

(1925) 42 Cal LJ 582 : 30 Cal WN 371; Srimati Bhaba Sundari v Ram Kamal Dutta, (1925) 44 Cal
LJ 269 ; Balasundra Naiker v Ranganatha Aiyar, (1929) 53 Mad 127; Munuswami Mudaliar v
Govindaraja Chettiar, (1934) 58 Mad 371.
193 Jagannath v Shankar, (1919) 44 Bom 55: 22 Bom LR 39; Ghanaya Lal v Rallia Ram, (1928) 9

Lah 597. But see Sukhlal v Jetha, (1928) 30 Bom LR 1455 .
194 Sukhlal v Jetha, (1928) 30 Bom LR 1455 , 1462.
195 Collector of Etah v Kishori Lal, (1930) 53 All 157 FB; Jwala Prasad v Mohan Lal, (1926) 48 All

705 , disapproved.
196 S Saktivel v M Venugopal Pillai, AIR 2000 SC 2633 : (2000) 7 SCC 104 .
197 KM Rajendran v Anil Prakasam, AIR 1998 Mad 336 .
198 Jaggat Singh v Devi Ditta Mal, (1883) PR No. 169 of 1883 (Civil).
199 Lakhu Ram v Amir Khan, (1888) PR No. 14 of 1889 (Civil).
200 Ma Shwe Pee v Maung San Myo, (1928) 6 Ran 573; Abdul Karim v Hakam Mal-Tani Mal,

(1933) 14 Lah 688; Kalyanji Dhana v Dharamsi Dhana & Co, (1934) 37 Bom LR 230 .
201 Lachhman Das v Baba Ramnath Kalikamliwala, (1921) 44 All 258 .
202 Kailash Chandra Nath v Sheikh Chhenu, (1914) 42 Cal 546 .
203 Mark D'Cruz v Jitendra Nath Chatterjee, (1919) 46 Cal 1079 ; Karampalli Unni Kurup v Thekku

Vittil Muthorakutti, (1902) 26 Mad 195.
204 Roshan Lal v Munshi Ram, AIR 1981 P&H 73; Ram Chandra v Manjal Singh, AIR 1981 P&H

94.
205 Raval & Co v KG Ramachandran, AIR 1974 SC 818 : 1974(1) SCC 424 .
206 Philips, 407.
207 Best, 12th Edn, section 228, p 213; Lu Gale v Maung Mo, (1904) 2 LBR 268; KMPRNM Firm v

Somasundaram Chetty & Co, (1924) 48 Mad 275.
208 Belapur Co v Mah. State Farming Corpn., (1968) 74 Bom LR 246 . See also PB Bhat v VR.

Thakkar, (1971) 74 Bom LR 509 .
209 Ganpatrao v Bapu, (1919) 22 Bom LR 831 : 44 Bom 710; The Punjab National Bank, Ltd v Mr

SB Chaudhry, (1943) 19 Luck 265 . See Firm Bolumal v Venkatachelapathi Rao, AIR 1959 AP 612 .
Where the clauses of an agreement were clear and decisive, oral evidence was not allowed to
deduce their meaning Hindustan Lever v MRTPC., AIR 1977 SC 1285 : 1977(3) SCC 227 .
210 Martand v Amritrao, (1925) 27 Bom LR 951 : 49 Bom 662.
211 Bank of New Zealand v Simpson, (1900) AC 182 . NAS Ansari v T Ramalingam, AIR 2003 SC

286 , interpretation of power of attorney and a ﬁnding that the document was a general power of
attorney.
212 Simla Bank Corp, Ltd v HT Ball, (1883) PR No. 2 of 1884 (Civil).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
213 Raj Kumar Rajinder Singh v State of HP, (1990) 4 SCC 320 : AIR 1990 SC 1833 . Followed in

Madalsa Devi v Mridula Chandra, AIR 1994 Pat 91 .
214 At p 339.
215 274 (Halsham, Edn, Vol 10, para 343).
216 The passage was cited in Abdulla Ahmed v Animendra Kissen Mitter, AIR 1950 SC 15 : 1950

SCR 30 .
217 [1990] 4 SCC at 339.
218 Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd v UOI, (1979) 49 Com Cas 419 : 1979 Tax LR 2064 .
219 Krishnabai v Appasaheb, (1979) 4 SCC 60 : AIR 1979 SC 1880 .
220 Ram Narain v Manki Singh, (1954) 33 Pat 638.
221

Manindra Nath Bose, (1956) 1 Cal 59 ; Balachandran v Gopalan, AIR 2001 Ker 337 ,

construction of the document of tenancy.
222 Gouranga Sahu v Magnu Dei, AIR 1991 Ori 151 .
223 Hanif-un-nisa v Faiz-un-nisa, (1911) 13 Bom LR 391 : 39 IA 85: 33 All 340. See Maung Kyin v

Ma Shwe La, (1911) 38 IA 146 : 13 Bom LR 797; Serajuddin Haldar v Isab Haldar, (1921) 49 Cal
161 .
224 Badhawa Mal v Hira, (1883) PR No. 30 of 1884 (Civil).
225 Narasingerji Gyanagerji v Panuganti Parthyasaradhi, (1924) 51 IA 305 : 47 Mad 729: 27 Bom

LR 4.
226 Kishan Lal v Ram Lal, (1927) 50 All 59 .
227 ST Industries, Surat v Chief Controlling Revenue Authority (SB), AIR 1994 Guj 153 .
228 Hindu Public v Rajdhani Puja Samithee, AIR 1999 SC 964 : (1999) 2 SCC 583 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 93] Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.—
When the language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective,
evidence may not be given of facts which would show its meaning or supply its
defects.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for "Rs. 1,000 or Rs. 1,500." Evidence

cannot be given to show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show

how they were meant to be ﬁlled.

COMMENT
Sections 93–98 deal with rules for construction of documents with the aid of extrinsic
evidence. Sections 91 and 92 deﬁne the cases in which documents are exclusive
evidence of the transactions which they embody. Sections 93–99 deal with the
interpretation of documents by oral evidence.
There are two sorts of ambiguities of words—the one is ambiguitas patens and other
latens. Patens is that which appears to be ambiguous upon the deed or instrument;
latens is that which seems certain and without ambiguity, for anything that appears
upon the deed or instrument; but there is some collateral matter out of the deed that
breeds the ambiguity.229 A good test of the difference is to put the instrument into the
hands of an ordinary intelligent educated person. If, on perusal, he sees no ambiguity,
but there is nevertheless an uncertainty as to its application, the ambiguity is latent; if
he detects the ambiguity from merely reading the instrument it is patent. Thus, in
illustration (b), the blanks would be patent ambiguities and they could not be ﬁlled in by
parole testimony as to the intention of the parties, etc. In the illustration to section 95
no one could detect any ambiguity from merely reading the instrument. The ambiguity
does not consist in the language, but is introduced by extrinsic circumstances.230

[s 93.1] Principle.—
This section deals with patent ambiguities. If the language of a deed is, on its face,
ambiguous or defective, no evidence can be given to make it certain.231
The duty of the court is always interpretation; to ﬁnd out not what really was the
intention of the parties, as distinguished from what mere words expressed but merely
to ﬁnd out the meaning of the words used by them.232 Under this section it is the
language of the document alone that will decide the question and it would not be open
to the parties or the court to attempt to remove the vagueness by relying upon any

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
extrinsic evidence. Such an attempt would really mean the making of a new contract
between the parties.233 In a contract of transport made with the Food Corporation of
India, the column for transport charges was left blank, the attempt of both sides to give
evidence of the oral agreement on the point was not accepted, since blank spaces
cannot be ﬁlled by oral agreements.234 The charges for services rendered may be
recovered under section 70 of the Contract Act.
Extrinsic evidence of every material fact which will enable the court to ascertain the
nature and qualities of the subject matter of the instrument, or, in other words, to
identify the person and things to which the instrument refers, is admissible.235 Thus,
where there is a written agreement to deliver a quantity of grain at a particular time,
parole evidence is admissible under certain limitations to show what kind of grain the
contracting parties had in their contemplation at the time the contract was made.236

229 Best, 12th Edn, 226, p 211.
230 Norton, section 633, pp 351, 352.
231 Deojit v Pitambar, (1876) 1 All 275 .
232 Doe dem. Gwillim v Gwillim, (1833) 5 B & Ad. 122, 129.
233 Lallubhai Patel v Lalbhai Trikumlal Mills, (1958) SCJ 866 .
234 Food Corp of India v Birendra Nath Dhar, AIR 1989 NOC 119 (Cal).
235 Valla Hataji v Sidoji Kondaji, (1868) 5 BHC (ACJ) 87.
236 Ibid. Pradeep Kumar v Mahaveer Pershad, AIR 2003 AP 107 , sections 93, 94, 95, 96, 97 are

about patent and latent ambiguities and interpretation of documents. Sections 93 and 94 deal
with patent ambiguity while sections 95, 96 and 97 deal with latent ambiguity.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 94] Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts.
—
When language used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately to
existing facts, evidence may not be given to show that it was not meant to apply to
such facts.
ILLUSTRATION
A sells to B, by deed, "my estate at Rampur containing 100 bighas." A has an estate at
Rampur containing 100 bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact that the estate
meant to be sold was one situated at a different place and of a different size.

COMMENT
[s 94.1] Principle.—
The words of a written instrument must be construed according to their natural
meaning, and no amount of acting by the parties can alter or qualify words which are
plain and unambiguous. No principle has ever been more universally or rigorously
insisted upon than those written instruments, if they are plain and unambiguous, must
be construed according to the plain and unambiguous language of the instruments
themselves.237
Under this section evidence to show that common words, whose meaning is plain, not
appearing from the context to have been used in a peculiar sense, have been in fact so
used, is not admissible.238 Where the language in its ordinary sense properly applies to
the facts without any diﬃculty, evidence to show that it bears a different meaning will
be rejected, as it contradicts the document.
Where in a lease agreement with the Government, payment of interest on arrears of
rent was stipulated but mode of payment was not stipulated, the Collector was not
prevented by section 94 from deciding the mode.239 A promissory note was not
allowed to be explained away as a deposit.240
This section applies only when the execution of the document is admitted and there
are no vitiating circumstances against it. Oral evidence of witnesses in proceedings
before the Board was admissible.241

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
237 North Eastern Railway v Hastings (Lord), (1900) AC 260 , 263; Babu v Sitaram, (1901) 3 Bom

LR 768 ; Narayan v The Co-op Central Bank, Malkapur, (1938) Nag 604.
238 Stephen's Dig., Article 91.
239 Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd v State of Bihar, AIR 1996 Pat 37 .
240 A Rangappa v P Krishnamurthy, 1996 AIHC 4488 (Kant).
241 General Court Martial v Col Anitej Singh, AIR 1998 SC 983 : (1999) 3 SCC 60 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 95] Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts.—
When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to
existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
ILLUSTRATION
A sells to B, by deed, "my house in Calcutta".
A had no house in Calcutta, but it appears that he has a house at Howrah, of which B
had been in possession since the execution of the deed.
These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the house at Howrah.

COMMENT
[s 95.1] Principle.—
Where the language of a document is plain in itself but is unmeaning in reference to
existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense. It is
based upon the maxim falsa demonstratio non necet (a false description does not
vitiate the document). Section 97 is a part of the rule in this section, and both the
sections must be read together. The illustration to this section shows that if A sells to B
"my house in Calcutta," and if A has no house in Calcutta but has a house in Howrah, of
which B has been in possession since the execution of the deed, these facts may be
proved to show that the deed related to the house in Howrah.242 Where a sale deed
describes the land sold by wrong survey numbers, extrinsic evidence is admissible to
show that the lands intended to be sold and actually sold and delivered were lands
bearing different survey numbers.243 Where suﬃcient description of the premises is
set forth by giving the name of the particular ﬁeld or otherwise, a false description
added thereto (e.g., the mention of a wrong survey number) may be rejected.244

242 Karuppa Goundan alias Thoppala Goundan v Periathambi Goundan, (1907) 30 Mad 397, 399.
243 Ibid. See also Basavapunnareddy v Krishnayya, AIR 1966 AP 260 .
244 Santaya v Savitri, (1902) 4 Bom LR 871 ; Mahabir Prasad v Masiatulah, (1915) 38 All 103 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 96] Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of
several persons.—
When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply to
any one, and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons
or things, evidence may be given of facts which show which of those persons or
things it was intended to apply to.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for Rs. 1,000, "my white horse". A has two white horses.

Evidence may be given of facts which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Haidarabad. Evidence may be given of facts

showing whether Haidarabad in the Dekkhan or Haidarabad in Sind was meant.

COMMENT
[s 96.1] Principle.—
Where the description in the document applies equally to any one of two or more
subjects, evidence to explain its language is admissible. Where the language of a
document, though intended to apply to one person or thing only, applies equally to two
or more, and it is impossible to gather from the context which was intended, an
equivocation arises, e.g., when the same name or description ﬁts two persons or things
accurately; when the same name or description ﬁts one exactly and the other but
tolerably; when the same name or description ﬁts two objects equally but subject to a
common inaccuracy, provided that the inaccuracy be a mere blank or applicable to no
other person or thing.
This section modiﬁes the rule laid down in section 94 by providing that where the
language of a document correctly describes two sets of circumstances but could not
have been intended to apply to both, evidence may be given to show to which set it was
intended to apply. Here the language is certain. The doubt as to which of similar
persons or things the language applies has been introduced by extrinsic evidence.245

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
245 Doe D Hiscocks v Hiscoks, (1839) 5 M&W 363; Nga Cho v Mi Se Mt, (1916) 2 UBR 110;

Stephen's Dig., Article 91.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 97] Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to
neither of which the whole correctly applies.—
When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly to
another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either,
evidence may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
ILLUSTRATION
A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the occupation of Y". A has land at X, but not in the
occupation of Y, and he has land in the occupation of Y, but it is not at X. Evidence may
be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.

COMMENT
This section is based upon the maxim falsa demonstratio non necet. It is only an
extension of the provision of section 95. Sections 95, 96 and 97 all deal with latent
ambiguity. "Where in a written instrument the description of the person or thing
intended is applicable with legal certainty to each of several subjects, extrinsic evidence,
including proof of declarations of intention, is admissible to establish which of such
subjects was intended by the author."246 The rule rejecting erroneous description not
substantially important is applicable only where there is enough to show the intention
clearly.
The illustration to this section shows that if A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the
occupation of Y", and A has land at X but not in the occupation of Y, and has land in the
occupation of Y but it is not at X, evidence may be given to show which was intended to
be sold. Another common case is where land within certain boundaries is sold and is
wrongly described as containing a certain area, the error in area is regarded as a mere
misdescription and does not vitiate the deed. The maxim falsa demonstratio non necet
applies.247

246 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1226, p 787.
247 Karuppa Goundan alias Thoppala Goundan v Periathambi Goundan, (1907) 30 Mad 397.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 98] Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.—
Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly intelligible
characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local and provincial expressions, of
abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
ILLUSTRATION
A, a sculptor, agrees to sell to B, "all my mods". A has both models and modelling tools.
Evidence may be given to show which he meant to sell.

COMMENT
[s 98.1] Principle.—
Evidence as to the meaning of illegible characters (e.g., shorthand-writer's notes) or of
foreign obsolete, technical, local and provincial expressions and of words used in a
peculiar sense may be given. In such cases the evidence cannot properly be said to
vary the written instrument; it only explains the meaning of expressions used.
Mercantile usage has given special meanings to many ordinary words. Evidence of the
meaning which these words bear in mercantile transactions can be given under this
section.
The principle upon which words are to be construed in instruments is very plain—
where there is a popular and common word used in an instrument, that word must be
construed prima facie in its popular and common sense. If it is a word of a technical or
legal character it must be construed according to its technical or legal meaning. If it is
a word which is of a technical and scientiﬁc character, then it must be construed
according to that which is its primary meaning, namely, its technical and scientiﬁc
meaning. But before you can give evidence of the secondary meaning of a word, you
must satisfy the court from the instrument itself or from the circumstances of the case
that the word ought to be construed, not in its popular or primary signiﬁcation, but
according to its secondary intention.248
Where the point in dispute is as to the meaning of a particular word in the document,
evidence may be admitted to show in what peculiar sense that particular word was
used, and extrinsic evidence including the evidence regarding the subsequent conduct
of the parties is admissible to determine the effect of the instrument as well as the
intention of the parties.249
In a Government grant of land which involved questions of interpretation of the
Government orders, that was held to be a question of fact.250

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 98.2] Document in foreign language.—
Where a document was written in an uncommon or foreign (Persian) language, it was
held that the court could rely on ability and knowledge of the judge hearing the case to
decipher such language and the meaning of words like Huzoor, burzurgan, moris,
biradari, minjoomle requisite in the context.251

248 Holt & Co v Collyer, (1881) 16 Ch D 718 , 720.
249 State of Rajasthan v Bundi Electric Supply Co, AIR 1970 Raj 36 ; State of Bihar v Radha

Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 2 SCC 118 , meaning of Persian words used in a
document, reliance on the competence of the trial judge to ﬁnd out the meaning.
250 Anayatullah v Commissioner of Muslim Waqf of Jammu, (1991) Supp 1 SCC 396.
251 State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, (1983) 3 SCC 118 : AIR 1983 SC 684 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 99] Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.—
Persons who are not parties to a document, or their representatives in interest, may
give evidence of any facts tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the
terms of the document.
ILLUSTRATION
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on
delivery. At the same time they make an oral agreement that three months' credit shall
be given to A. This could not be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C,
if it affected his interest.

COMMENT
Section 92 forbids the admission of evidence of an oral agreement for the purpose of
contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, the terms of a written document
as between the parties to such document or their representatives in interest. The rule
of exclusion laid down in the section does not apply to the case of a third party who is
not a party to the document. On the contrary, this section distinctly provides that
persons who are not parties to a document may give evidence tending to show a
contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document.252
The principle of section 92 does not apply to third persons. If it were otherwise, third
persons might be prejudiced by things recited in the writings, contrary to the truth,
through the ignorance, carelessness, or fraud of the parties, and, therefore, ought not to
be precluded from proving the truth, however contradictory it may be to the written
statements of others.253

[s 99.1] Varying.—
In this section the word "varying" only is used, while in section 92 the words are
"contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from". But it is diﬃcult to see that in
using the term "varying" only, anything less could have been meant than what is
conveyed by the several expressions in section 92 and as every "contradicting", "adding
to", or "subtracting from" would necessarily be a "varying" of the instrument, the
legislature apparently used that expression as suﬃcient to convey all that is denoted by
the other different expressions occurring in the earlier section.254

[s 99.1.1] CASES.—
The plaintiff sued to recover one-fourth of the price of a house alleged to have been
sold by the ﬁrst defendant, the claim being based upon a local custom. The transaction
between the defendants was ostensibly not a sale but a usufructuary mortgage. It was
held that the plaintiff, not being a party to the transaction, was entitled to give evidence

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
to show that what purported to be a usufructuary mortgage was not in reality such, but
was in fact a sale.255
In the case of an alienation of land in which a document has been executed purporting
to be a deed of gift or mortgage, it is open to a third party claiming to exercise a right of
pre-emption to prove that the transaction was in reality one of sale, and that the
document sought to be impugned was executed in order to conceal its real nature and
to defraud him of his legal rights.256

252 Bageshri Dayal v Pancho, (1906) 28 All 473 , 474.
253 Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1149, p 735.
254 Pathammal v Syed Kalai Ravuthar, (1903) 27 Mad 329, 331; Tarachand v Baldeo, (1890) PR

No. 117 of 1890 FB (Civil).
255 Bageshri Dayal v Pancho, (1906) 28 All 473 ; Rahiman v Elahi Baksh, (1900) 28 Cal 70 ,

dissented from Pathammal v Syed Kalai Ravuthar, (1903) 27 Mad 329.
256 Tara Chand v Baldeo, (1890) PR No. 117 of 1890 FB. (Civil); Parmanand v Airapat Ram,

(1899) PR No. 20 of 1899 (Civil); Megha Ram v Makhan Lal, (1912) PR No. 67 of 1912 (Civil).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART II ON PROOF
CHAPTER VI OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
[s 100] Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to wills.—
Nothing in this Chapter contained shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the
Indian Succession Act (10 of 1865) as to the construction of wills.

COMMENT
Act X of 1865 is replaced by Act XXXIX of 1925.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 101] Burden of proof.—
Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent
on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist.
When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of
proof [s 101.1] lies on that person.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A

says B has committed.
A must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the

possession of B, by reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be
true.
A must prove the existence of those facts.

COMMENT
The burden of proof lies on the party who substantially asserts the aﬃrmative of the
issue and not upon the party who denies it. This rule of convenience has been adopted
in practice, not because it is impossible to prove a negative, but because the negative
does not admit of the direct and simple proof of which the aﬃrmative is capable.
Moreover, it is but reasonable and just that the suitor, who relies upon the existence of
a fact, should be called upon to prove his own case. In the application of this rule,
regard must be had to the substance and effect of the issue, and not to its grammatical
form, for in many cases the party, by making a slight alteration in the drawing of his
pleadings, may give the issue a negative or aﬃrmative form, at his pleasure.1.
It is a settled law that parties are governed by their pleadings and the burden lies on the
person who pleads to prove and further the plaintiff has to succeed on the strength of
his case and cannot depend upon the weakness of the defendant's case.2.
The party, on whom the onus of proof lies must, in order to succeed, establish a prima
facie case. He cannot, on failure to do so, take advantage of the weakness of his
adversary's case. He must succeed by the strength of his own right and the clearness
of his own proof. He cannot be heard to say that it was too diﬃcult or virtually
impossible to prove the matter in question.3. For example, a mere suspicion is not a
proof of benami.4. The initial burden is upon the claimant to establish that a person is
his debtor.5. Where a member of a family claims that a particular part of the joint

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
property is his "personal", burden lies on him to prove that fact.6. A person claiming
through adoption has to prove the fact of it.7. Burden of proof as to an oral will is
heavily on the propounder.8. The burden of proving his caste is upon the claimant.9.
Where a party accepts the burden which is laid upon it by the trial court without any
demur or protest and allows the case to proceed on that basis throughout the trial, it
cannot, when it fails to discharge it, turn around and say in appeal that the burden
should not have been placed upon it.10.
The general rule that a party who desires to move the court must prove all facts
necessary for that purpose (sections 101–105) is subject to two exceptions:—
(a) he will not be required to prove such facts as are especially within the knowledge of
the other party (section 106); and he will not be required to prove so much of his
allegations in respect of which there is any presumption of law (sections 107–113), or
in some cases, of fact (section 114) in his favour. For example, a very old man donated
land and later sued for possession on the ground that the gift was not voluntary. The
burden was upon the donee.11.

[s 101.1] "Burden of proof".—
This expression means two different things. It means sometimes that a party is
required to prove an allegation before judgment can be given in its favour; it also
means that on a contested issue one of the two contending parties has to introduce
evidence. The burden of proof is of importance where by reason of not discharging the
burden which was put upon it, a party must eventually fail.12. This burden will, at the
beginning of a trial, lie on one party, but during the course of the trial it may shift from
one side to the other.13. At the end of a case when both the parties have led evidence
and the conﬂicting evidence can be weighed to determine which way the issue can be
decided, the abstract question of burden of proof becomes academic.14. Where in an
eviction proceeding the fact of sub-tenancy was established and though the sub-tenant
had left the ground it was not thereby wiped out, the court said that either party was
free to prove his case and all questions as to burden of proof were no longer there.15.
The question of burden of proof also becomes irrelevant when the entire evidence on
the matter is already on record.16.
The term onus probandi, in its proper use, merely means that if a fact has to be proved,
the person whose interest it is to prove it should adduce some evidence, however
slight, upon which a court could ﬁnd the fact he desires the court to ﬁnd. It does not
mean that he shall call all conceivable or available evidence. It merely means that the
evidence he lays before the court should be suﬃcient, if not contradicted to form the
basis of a judgment and decree upon that point in his favour.17. Where there is an
admission by a party the burden of proof shifts and it is for the party making the
admission to explain it away.18.
In the matter of proof, in a civil case, a defendant cannot take up the same stand as an
accused in a criminal case. In civil cases, unlike criminal ones, it cannot be said that
the beneﬁt of reasonable doubt must necessarily go to the defendant. Even the
preponderance of probabilities may serve as a good basis for decision.19. The Supreme
Court has held that in a civil case involving allegation of charges of criminal or
fraudulent character insistence on proving charges clearly and beyond reasonable
doubt is wrong.20. In a tort action for malicious prosecution, the plaintiff failed to prove
that the criminal complaint was lodged against him without any reasonable and
probable cause. His suit failed.21.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Deposit of money in wife's name does not amount to a gift. It is a resulting trust. If
anybody says it was a gift he must prove it.22. Where the question was of proving the
corrupt practice of undue inﬂuence under the Representation of the People Act, 1951,
the Supreme Court said,23. "There is no ritualistic formula nor a cut and dried test to lay
down as to how a charge of undue inﬂuence can be proved but if all the circumstances
taken together lead to the irresistible inference that the voters were pressurised,
threatened or assaulted at the instance of either candidate, that should be suﬃcient to
vitiate the election while insisting on standard of strict proof, the court should not
extend or stretch this doctrine to such an extent as to make it well-nigh impossible to
prove an allegation of corrupt practice. Such an approach would defeat and frustrate
the very laudable and sacrosanct object of the Act in maintaining purity of the electoral
process." Where an assessee of property tax pleaded that the contractual rent should
not be regarded as standard rent and that therefore rateable value had not been
properly ﬁxed, the onus of proof was on the assessee.24. Where the person claiming
tenancy produced a certiﬁed copy of admission of his tenancy given by landlord,
burden of proof lay on the landlord to disprove the admission.25. Where the tenant took
the plea that the suit premises were not vacated by him, burden of proof to establish
his plea would be on him.26. In determining whether a temple/trust is public or private,
the burden of proof lies on the person asserting that it is a private one.27. Merely
because a will is registered its genuineness cannot be presumed.28.
In a claim of damages for breach of contract, the burden is on the complainant to show
the basis on which the damages claimed by him have been quantiﬁed.29.
A party cannot be relieved from its burden of proving a fact only on the ground of
hardship in the matter of proof. Where a sale deed was alleged to be forged and
fabricated and, therefore, the party who made such allegation had to prove it, the court
said that it was not proper for the court to shift the burden of proof because of
hardship and require the other party to prove even to begin with that the allegation was
false.30.

[s 101.2] Criminal trial.—
In a criminal trial the burden of proving the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable
doubts always rests on the prosecution and on its failure it cannot fall back upon the
evidence adduced by the accused in support of his defence to rest its case solely
thereon.31. In criminal cases it is for the prosecution to bring the guilt home to the
accused.32. When two views are possible, the view favourable to the accused should be
adopted.33. It is not correct to say that when the prosecution has adduced such
evidence as the circumstances and nature of the case require, it is for the accused to
establish his innocence for the reason that there is no burden laid on the prisoner to
prove his innocence and it is suﬃcient if he succeeds in raising a doubt as to his
guilt.34. Prosecution cannot succeed just by showing that the defence raised is
suspicious.35. Where the prosecution could not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused was connected with the destruction of a ﬁlm, the accused was given the
beneﬁt of doubt.36.
Recovery of articles by itself does not connect anybody with the crime. Connection of
the accused with the articles must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.37. Even total
silence of the accused as to any defence on his part does not lighten the prosecution
burden to prove its case satisfactorily.38. More serious the crime, more strict proof
would be requisite.39.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
As against this heavy burden on the prosecution the accused can claim the beneﬁt of
his defence just by showing a balance of probabilities. He has not to prove his defence
beyond a reasonable doubt. The prosecution proved in a case that an oﬃcial had
accepted a sum of money which was intended to be a bribe. The Supreme Court said
that the accused must prove his justiﬁcation and he can do so on a balance of
probabilities and need not prove beyond reasonable doubt.40. Prosecution cannot
derive any advantage from falsity or other inﬁrmities of the defence version, so long as
it does not discharge its initial burden of proving its case beyond all reasonable
doubt.41.
Where the accused is under the burden of proving a fact for rebutting a statutory
presumption, it should not be as heavy as on the prosecution but even so it would have
to be of somewhat greater probability than the ordinary balance of probabilities.42.
Where the accused claimed that he was acting in private defence of property and the
sale deed showed transfer of possession in favour of the father of the accused, the
court said that the possession of the accused had remained undisturbed.43.

[s 101.3] Offence under NDPS Act.—
The possession of a small quantity of psychotropic substance for personal use
requires the prosecution to prove its allegation of commercial possession beyond
reasonable doubt. It is enough for the accused in his defence to satisfy the judicial
mind on a preponderance of probability.44.

[s 101.4] Plea of Alibi.—
Where the accused raises the plea of alibi (his presence elsewhere), burden lies on him
to substantiate that fact at least to the extent of a reasonable probability. Even if the
evidence produced is capable of creating a doubt whether the accused was there at the
time of the happening, he becomes entitled to the beneﬁt of doubt.45. The court cited
the decision of the Supreme Court in Soma Bhai v State of Gujarat46. where it was taken
to be a settled law that a plea of alibi has got to be proved to the satisfaction of the
court. The court also noted the observation of the Supreme Court in State of UP v
Sughar Singh47. to the effect that the burden of substantiating such a plea and making
it reasonably probable is on him (the accused), and in State of Maharashtra v
Narsingarao Gangaram Pimple48. to the effect that "the plea of alibi must be proved with
absolute certainty so as to completely exclude the possibility of the presence of the
accused at the place of occurrence," and again in Dudh Nath Pandey v State of UP49.
that "the plea can succeed only if it is shown that the accused was so far away at the
relevant time that he could not be present at the place where the crime (in question)
was committed."

[s 101.5] Food Adulteration.—
Where a person was charged under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 for
selling sub-standard Heeng, and it was shown by him that the article was meant only
for animal consumption, the pricing factor as well as report of the public analyst
showed that it was being marketed for use of animals, the court said that the burden to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
show otherwise was upon the food inspector who had taken the sample from the
accused.50.

[s 101.6] Election Petition.—
Where an election was challenged on the ground that the result was vitiated by the fact
that the nomination of a candidate wrongly accepted, the Supreme Court held that the
burden lay upon the petitioner to prove that the votes cast in favour of the wrongly
accepted candidate would have gone in his favour to such an extent that he would have
been returned and that though this fact is very diﬃcult to prove the rules relating to
burden of proof will remain whether it is diﬃcult or virtually impossible to prove the fact
in question.51. Stating the effect of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, Singh J
said:52.
Section 100(1)(d)(i) provides for setting aside the election of the returned candidate on the
ground of improper acceptance of any nomination paper provided the result of the election
of the returned candidate is materially affected by reason of such improper acceptance of
nomination of a candidate other than the returned candidate. Improper acceptance of
nomination of any candidate does not ipso facto render the election of the returned
candidate void. [It must be] found that the result of the election of the returned candidate
was materially affected on the ground of such improper acceptance. The burden of proving
[this] is on the election petitioner. Unless this burden is discharged by [him], the result of the
returned candidate cannot be declared void.53.

Following an earlier case, the court said that in such a case it was impossible to
foresee what the result would have been if the improperly nominated candidate had not
been in the ﬁeld. Since it was not possible to anticipate the result, the election
petitioner must discharge the burden of proving that fact and on his failure to prove
that fact the election of the returned candidate must be allowed to stand.

[s 101.7] Constitutionality.—
In the petition challenging the constitutionality of a statute, the allegations regarding
the violation of the constitutional provision should be speciﬁc, clear and unambiguous
and burden of proof is on the person challenging its constitutionality.54.
In Gauri Shanker v UOI,55. The Supreme Court stated that:—
(a) there is always a presumption in favour of constitutional validity of an

enactment and the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that there has
been clear transgression of the constitutional principles;
(b) it must be presumed that the Legislature understands and correctly appreciates

the need of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest
by experience and that its discriminations are based on adequate grounds;
(c) in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality the court may take into

consideration matters of common knowledge, matters of common report, the
history of the times and may assume every date of facts which can be
conceived existing at the time of legislation.

[s 101.8] Reasonableness of restrictions.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the right to trade as guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution is sought
to be subjected to certain restrictions, such as, for example, prohibition on sale of
sugarcane juice in Municipal Limits, the burden lies on the State to convince the court
of the reasonableness of the restriction.56.

[s 101.9] Matrimonial Cases.—
In matrimonial cases principles of burden of proof relating to civil cases are
applicable.57.

[s 101.10] Blank Signature.—
Where the defendant said that he had put his signature only on a blank paper, it was
held that the evidence adduced by the plaintiff to the effect that the defendant had
executed a document, if found reliable, would discharge the burden of the plaintiff and
put the burden on the defendant to show that he had not executed any document.58.

[s 101.11] Whole evidence on record, burden irrelevant.—
Where both parties have already produced whatever evidence they had, the question of
burden of proof ceases to be of any importance.59.
Where the motion is at the discretion of the court and both the parties have led
evidence, the question of burden of proof would become relegated to the position of
secondary importance.60.
Burden of proof means that a party has to prove an allegation before he is entitled to a
judgment in his favour. The one or the other of the contending parties has to introduce
evidence on a contested issue. The question of onus is material only where the party
on which it is placed would eventually lose if he failed to discharge the same. Where
parties joined the issue, led evidence, such evidence could be weighed in order to
determine the issue. The question of burden would become academic.61.
It is always open to the defendant not to lead any evidence where the onus is upon the
plaintiff but after having gone into evidence, he cannot ask the court not to look at and
act on it. The question of burden of proof at the end of the case when both parties have
tendered evidence is not of any great importance and the court has to come to a
decision on the consideration of all materials. In examining the question whether the
plaintiff had succeeded in proving the negative fact, it was open to the court to
consider the entire evidence on record when both the parties have completed their
evidence. No part of the evidence can be left out. A ﬁnding based on consideration of
the whole of the evidence cannot be said to be vitiated.62.
The question of burden of proof remains of no importance at the end of the case when
both have already adduced the whole of the evidential material which they desired to
produce.63.

[s 101.12] Motive.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where certain land was alienated shortly prior to the enforcement of the ceiling act,
burden lay on the landlord to prove that the alienation was not done with a view to
avoid the ceiling law.83

[s 101.13] Proof of good faith.—
Where executant of the sale deed was an old, illiterate and blind woman and no
consideration passed at the time of sale, onus lay on the purchaser to prove that the
sale deed was not executed under undue inﬂuence.64. Though in the execution of a gift
deed by a "pardanashin" lady, fraud was not established, still onus was on the
defendant to establish the fact that the document was read over and explained to
her.65.
Where a coal company's property was sold to the wife of a director and it was alleged
that the sale was not a genuine transaction but a sham, it was held that the burden was
upon the company to prove the bona ﬁdes of the transaction.66. Those who wanted to
take advantage under sale deeds executed by an illiterate person were put under the
burden of proving the bona ﬁdes of the transaction by showing that the contents of the
deed were read over and explained to the executant.67.

[s 101.14] Presumption as to consideration.—
Section 118, Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, creates a number of presumptions, one
of them being that every negotiable instrument shall be presumed to be transacted for
consideration. This affects the position as to burden of proof. The party liable would
have to show that there was no consideration. In this case, the party liable was not able
to show absence of consideration. Therefore, the claimant was held to be entitled to
the beneﬁt of the presumption.68.

[s 101.15] Suit for recovery of possession.—
In a suit for recovery of possession based upon the plaintiff's possessory title, onus is
on him to establish the fact of his possession within the preceding 12 years from the
date of adverse possession. Once this fact was established, the onus would be shifted
on to the defendant to show that he was entitled to retain his possession on the basis
of a superior title.69.

[s 101.16] Adverse possession.—
The entire burden of proving that the possession is adverse to the plaintiff is on the
defendant.70.

[s 101.17] Burden of proving slum area as against landlord.—
A tenant wanted to save himself from eviction on the ground that the property in
question was located in a slum area which was protected against eviction under the TN

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Slum Area (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1971. The landlady denied this fact. It
was held that the burden of proving slum area situation was on the tenant. He failed to
do so. The order that he was not entitled to the beneﬁt of the Act was, therefore,
proper.71.

[s 101.18] Landlord's burden to prove personal need.—
Where the proceeding was for eviction of the tenant on the ground of the landlord's
personal need, the court said that a mere desire of the landlord to have his premises
back from the tenant would not be suﬃcient to constitute a bona ﬁde personal need.
The need is to be tested objectively. The burden lies upon the landlord to convince the
court that he genuinely requires the accommodation.72.

[s 101.19] Dishonour of cheques [Special Statutory Provisions].—
Section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, lays special rules of evidence one
of which is that every negotiable instrument shall be presumed to be supported by
consideration. The same Act provides in sections 138 and 139 that a cheque shall be
deemed to have been issued for the discharge of a debt or liability. On the basis of
these provisions read with those of sections 101 and 104 of the Evidence Act, the
Supreme Court held in KN Beena v Muniyappan73. that where a cheque issued by a
party has been dishonoured, the court has to presume that the cheque was issued for a
consideration, namely for the discharge of a debt or liability and, therefore, burden of
proof would be on the party issuing a cheque to show that there was no debt or liability
for the discharge of which the cheque was issued.
It is the accused person who has to prove the absence of mens rea.74.

[s 101.20] Gift deed.—
A woman gifted her property to her grandson. The lady was more than 90 years, but
she was fully intelligent and not inﬁrm. The gift was due to the ﬂow of a natural love as
the donee had lost his mother and the step mother started torturing him. The suit was
ﬁled by the donor lady and her son. The burden of proof was held to be on the person
who alleged that there was a fraud in the transaction.75.

[s 101.21] Will.—
Where the execution of a Will was surrounded by suspicious circumstances and there
was also the allegation of coercion, the court said that the burden of proof was on the
party who alleged coercion.76.

[s 101.22] Title.—
The plaintiff in a suit for declaration of title and possession could succeed only on the
strength of its title and that could be done only by adducing suﬃcient evidence to
discharge the onus on it, irrespective of the question whether the defendants have

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
proved their case or not. Even if the title set up by the defendants is found against
them, in the absence of establishment of the plaintiff's own title, the plaintiff must be
non-suited.77.

[s 101.23] Joint property.—
The burden of proof that certain property was excluded from the partition of the joint
property is on the party that alleges the same to be a joint property.78.

[s 101.24] Caste Claim.—
Where a candidate claimed that she belonged to a tribe which has been designated in
the Scheduled Tribe Order, the court said that the burden of establishing such fact was
upon the claimant.79.

[s 101.25] Exercise of statutory power.—
In cases where the exercise of a statutory power is subject to the fulﬁlment of a certain
condition, then a recital in the order that the condition has been fulﬁlled, raises a
presumption about fulﬁlment of such condition. The burden is on the person who
challenges the validity of the order to show that the condition was not fulﬁlled. Where
the order does not contain such a recital, the burden to prove that the condition was
fulﬁlled would be on the authority passing the order.80.

[s 101.26] Burden and onus.—
The illustrations to the section show that the provision applies to civil as well as
criminal cases. Viscount Dunedin explained in Robins v National Trust Co81. the true
function of "onus" in civil cases: "Onus is always on a person who asserts a proposition
or a fact which is not self-evident. To assert that a man who is alive was born requires
no proof. The onus is not on the person making the assertion, because it is self-evident
that he had been born. But to assert that he was born on a certain date, if the date is
material requires proof: the onus is on the person making the assertion. Now, in
conducting any inquiry, the determining tribunal will often ﬁnd that onus is sometimes
on the side of one contending party, sometimes on the side of the other, or, as it is
often expressed, that in certain circumstances onus shifts."
The same distinction has been further exempliﬁed by the Gujarat High Court.82. "There
is an essential distinction between "burden of proof" and "onus of proof"; burden of
proof lies on the person who has to prove a fact and it never shifts, but the onus of
proof shifts.83. Such a shifting of onus is a continuous process in the evaluation of
evidence.84. The court said: Burden of proof has two distinct meanings, namely, (i) the
burden of proof as a matter of law and pleadings, and (ii) burden of proof as a matter
of adducing evidence. Section 101 deals with the former and section 102 with the
latter. The ﬁrst remains constant, but the second shifts. In a claim application (as the
present case was) the burden of proof, in the ﬁrst instance, certainly lies on the
claimant. If his evidence is found to be acceptable, the onus shifts to the tort-feasor to
prove circumstances, if any, which disprove the assertions of the claimant. The victim

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the accident died 7 months after the happening. The injuries sustained by him
created urinary trouble from the very beginning and ultimately proved fatal. The
defendant was not able to discharge the burden of showing that the death was due to
some remote or isolated cause.
In a matter under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, the Supreme Court again
emphasized:85. "The expression "burden of proof" has two distinct meanings: (1) the
legal burden, i.e. burden of establishing the gift, and (2) the evidential burden, i.e., the
burden of leading evidence. In a subsequent decision, the Supreme Court added one
more point to the concept of burden; it said: A distinction exists between burden and
onus of proof. The right to begin follows onus probandi. It assumes importance in the
early stage of the case. The question of onus of proof has greater force where the
question is as to which party is to begin. The concept of burden of proof is used in
three ways:
(i) to indicate the duty of bringing forward evidence in support of a proposition at

the beginning or later;
(ii) establishing a proposition as against all counter evidence, and
(iii) an indiscriminate use in which it may mean either or both of the others.86.

In a criminal trial, the burden of proving everything essential to establish the charge
against the accused lies upon the prosecution, and that burden never shifts.
Notwithstanding the general rule that the burden of proof lies exclusively upon the
prosecution, in the case of certain offences, the burden of proving a particular fact-inissue may be laid by law on the accused. The burden resting on the accused in such
cases is, however, not so onerous as that which lies on the prosecution and is
discharged by a proof of balance of probabilities. Under the scheme of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, burden lies upon the accused to account for his possessions."

[s 101.27] Benami transactions.—
When a person purchases property in another person's name and also gets it registered
in that person's name (benami), if subsequently he wishes to assert his ownership, the
burden would be upon him to prove that fact. In a case of this kind, the Supreme Court
observed as follows:87.
It is well settled that the burden of proving that a particular sale is benami and the apparent
purchaser is not the real owner, always rests on the person asserting it to be so. The
essence of a benami is the intention of the parties concerned; and not unoften such
intention is shrouded in a thick veil which cannot be easily pierced through. But such
diﬃculties do not relieve the person asserting the transaction to be a benami of the serious
onus that rests on him, nor justify the acceptance of a mere conjecture or surmises, as a
substitute for proof.

[s 101.28] Search and Seizure.—
It is the burden of the prosecution to prove that the accused was informed under the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 of his rights under section
50(1) about search and seizures, compliance of those provisions being mandatory.88.

[s 101.29] Burden of proving contempt of Court.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The common legal phraseology "he who asserts must prove" has the due application in
the matter of the proof of the allegation that there has been contempt of court. As
regards the standard of proof, a proceeding under the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
court under the Contempt of Courts Act is of a quasi-criminal nature. The standard of
proof required is that of a criminal proceeding. The offence would have to be
established beyond all reasonable doubt.89.

[s 101.30] Purchase of property in partner's name.—
A person was carrying on business in partnership with his sons. A property was
purchased in the name of his most senior son. There was no joint family nucleus.
Consideration for the purchase was paid from the business. The court said that the
presumption was that the property belonged to the partner in whose name it was
purchased and a further presumption that payment was made from the share of the
partner. The other partners who claimed that the purchase was for the beneﬁt of all the
partners had to prove that fact. It was their burden to show that the property was
intended to belong to the ﬁrm.90.

1. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 364, p 252.
2. State of MP v Ushadevi, (2015) 8 SCC 672 , para 33.
3. Shiv Charan Singh v Chandra Bhan Singh, AIR 1988 SC 637 : 1988(2) SCC 12 .
4. Drigpal Singh v Wife of Laldhari Ojha, AIR 1985 Pat 110 .
5. TS Kotagi v Tahsildar, AIR 1985 Kant 365 . See also Avadesh Kumar v Sheo Shanker, AIR 1985

All 104 which discusses the mode of proving whether a person has become a Sanyasi.
6. Ram Kunwar Bai v Rani Bahu, AIR 1985 MP 73 .
7. Madhusudan Das v Narayani Bai, AIR 1983 SC 114 : 1983(1) SCC 35 : 1983 MahLJ 402.
8. Shantilal v Mohan Lal, AIR 1986 J&K 61.
9. NB Rao v Principal, Osmania Medical College, AIR 1986 AP 196 .
10. Raman Lal v Ram Gopal, (1954) 4 Raj 262 .
11. Ajmer Singh v Atma Singh, AIR 1985 P&H 315; Mallo v Bakhtawari, AIR 1985 All 160 , gift by

an old widow; Clara Auroro de Branganca v SA Alvares, AIR 1985 Bom 372 , deed executed by a
person of unsound mind. Heirs Kantilal Purshottamdas Patel v Dahiben Jagdish Rathod, AIR 2003
Guj 82 , matters pleaded by the plaintiff and controverted by the defendant, the plaintiff has
postively to prove those matters. It is not for the defendant to negatively disprove them.
12. Narayan v Gopal, AIR 1960 SC 100 : 1960(1) SCR 773 ; Abdul Shukoor v Arji Papa Rao, AIR

1963 SC 1150 : 1963 Supp (2) SCR 55 ; Devadattam v UOI, AIR 1964 SC 880 : 1964(4) SCR 191 .
Reiterating these principles in State of Maharashtra v Wasudeo Ram Chandra Kaidalwar, AIR 1981
SC 1186 : 1981 Cr LJ 884 : (1981) 3 SCC 199 : (1981) 3 SCR 675 , the court said: "The
expression "burden of proof" has two distinct meanings, (1) the legal burden, i.e., the burden of
establishing the guilt, and (2) the evidential burden, i.e. the burden of leading evidence. In a
criminal trial, the burden of proving everything essential to establish the charge against the
accused lies upon the prosecution, and that burden never shifts. Notwithstanding the general

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
rule that the burden of proof lies exclusively upon the prosecution, in the case of certain
offences, the burden of proving a particular fact in issue may be laid by law upon the accused.
The burden resting on the accused in such cases is, however, not so onerous as that which lies
on the prosecution and is discharged by proof of a balance of probabilities.
13. Pannu Jeegania v Devi Prashad, AIR 1963 MP 15 . Deena v UOI, AIR 1983 SC 1155 : 1983 Cr

LJ 1602 : (1983) 4 SCC 645 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 879 , after looking at the entire material, the court
can decide the question whether the respective burdens have been fully discharged.
14. Narayan v Gopal, AIR 1960 SC 100 : 1960(1) SCR 773 . See also MMB Catholicos v T Paulo

Avira, AIR 1959 SC 31 ; Paras Nath v Mohani Das, AIR 1959 SC 1204 : 1960(1) SCR 271 ;
Devadattam v UOI, AIR 1964 SC 880 .
15. Raghunathi v Raju Ramappa, AIR 1991 SC 1040 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 267 .
16. Ram Saroop Rai v Lilavati, 1980 All LJ 651; Ramji Dayawala & Sons P Ltd v Invest Import, AIR

1981 SC 2085 : (1981) 1 SCC 80 ; Deena v UOI, AIR 1983 SC 1155 : 1983 Cr LJ 1602 .
17. Unkar Nath v Mittu Lal, (1898) 18 AWN 107.
18. Chandra Kunwar v Narpat Singh, (1906) 29 All 184 : 34 IA 27: 9 Bom LR 267; Dukh Haran

Nath Zutshi v Commercial Credit Corp Ltd, (1939) 15 Luck 191 .
19. Himmat Mal v Shah Magaji Khubaji, (1953) 3 Raj 815 .
20. Gulabchand v Kudilal, AIR 1966 SC 1734 : (1966) 3 SCR 623 ; Latel v State of MP, 1994 Cr LJ

1122 , the accused has not to prove his defence plea beyond all reasonable doubt.
21. Philip v Hindu Madhan Dharma Paripalana Sabha, AIR 2003 Ker 205 .
22. P Narayana Menon v PB Amma, AIR 1985 Ker 14 .
23. Ram Saran Yadav v Thakur Muneshwar Nath Singh, AIR 1985 SC 24 at 25 : (1984) 4 SCC 649

; Takvi Devi v Rama Dogra, AIR 1984 HP 11 , proof of undue inﬂuence.
24. Municipal Corp, Ahmedabad v Oriental F&G Insurance Co Ltd, AIR 1994 Guj 167 .
25. Damu Ganu Bendale v Arvinda Dhondu Talekar, AIR 1994 SC 1303 : 1995 Supp 1 SCC 182.
26. Hardit Singh Chadha v Jagtar Singh Grover, AIR 1994 Del 189 .
27. Kanteisuni Thakurani, Bije Rampur Kaitha v Babudhar Rout, AIR 1995 Ori 197 .
28. Vattakam Purath Parambil Ananda Bhai v Kanaka Bhai, AIR 1995 Ker 208 .
29. Usha Beltron Ltd v Nand Kishore Parasramka, AIR 2001 Cal 137 . The case required proof of

market price for assessment of damages.
30. Anil Rishi v Gurbaksh Singh, AIR 2006 SC 1971 : (2006) 5 SCC 558 : (2006) 6 Mah LJ 280 .
31. Jarnail Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1996 SC 755 : 1996 Cr LJ 1139 ; Mahender Singh Dhayia

v State (CBI), 2003 Cr LJ 1908 (Del), the prosecution cannot take undue advantage of the
defence put by the accused even if the same was found to be false and improbable.
32. SD Soni v State of Gujarat, AIR 1991 SC 917 : 1992 Supp (1) SCC 567 ; State of UP v Krishna

Gopal, 1989 Cr LJ 288 : AIR 1988 SC 2154 : (1988) 4 SCC 302 .
33. State of Gujarat v Jayrajbhai Punjabhai Varu, AIR 2016 SC 3218 , para 13.
34. Mangilal v The State of Rajasthan, (1953) 3 Raj 706 ; Followed in Nirmala v Rukminibai, AIR

1994 Kant 247 . For other cases, see M Rangarajulu, Re, AIR 1958 Mad 368 ; Chottan v State of
Bihar, AIR 1959 Pat 326 ; State of Rajasthan v Madho, AIR 1991 SC 1065 : 1991 Cr LJ 1343 .
Proof that the accused was in possession of a forged note would not have the effect of shifting
burden to the accused of proving his innocence. Knowledge reasonable to believe on the part of
the accused that the note was forged must also be established. Madan Lal Sarma v State of
West Bengal, 1990 Cr LJ 215 (Cal).
35. JA Naidu v State of Maharashtra, 1979 Cr LJ 962 SC : AIR 1979 SC 1537 ; Jagdish v State of

Rajasthan, AIR 1979 SC 1010 : (1979) 3 SCR 428 : 1979 Cr LJ 888 , where the prosecution could
not explain injuries on the person of the accused which were caused at the time of occurrence;

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Shanker Lal v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1981 SC 765 : 1981 Cr LJ 325 , falsity of defence does
not establish prosecution case; State of Punjab v Bhajan Singh, AIR 1975 SC 258 : 1975 Cr LJ
282 , suspicion, however strong, cannot take the place of proof. State of Maharashtra v
Champalal Punjaji Shah, AIR 1981 SC 1675 : 1981 Cr LJ 1273 : (1981) 3 SCC 610 : 1981 SCC
(Cri) 762 , an unreasonable explanation by the defence of the facts established by the evidence
for the prosecution.
36. State (Delhi Admn.) v VC. Shukla, AIR 1980 SC 1382 at 1390 : (1980) 2 SCC 665 .
37. Nagappa Dondiba v Kant, AIR 1980 SC 1753 : 1980 Cr LJ 1270 .
38. Bishandas v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 573 at p 578 : 1975 Cr LJ 461 .
39. Paramjeet Singh v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2011 SC 200 : (2010) 10 SCC 410 .
40. MP Gupta v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1974 SC 773 : 1974 Cr LJ 509 . See also NP Lotlikar v

CBI, 1993 Cr LJ 2051 (Bom). Kishore Chandra Patel v State of Orissa, AIR 1993 Ori 259 , section
16, Orissa Special Courts Act, 1992, burden upon the accused to show how he acquired
property. MS Narayana Menon v State of Kerala, (2006) 6 SCC 39 : (2006) 3 KLT 404 : (2006) 5
Mah LJ 676 : (2006) 4 MPLJ 97 , the accused has not to disprove the prosecution case in its
entirety. The onus on the accused is not as heavy as on the prosecution; it may be compared
with that on the defendant in a civil case. See further under section 106.
41. Md. Alimuddin v State of Assam, 1992 Cr LJ 3287 (Gau); M Krishna Reddy v State Dy Supdt.

of Police, (1992) 4 SCC 45 : AIR 1993 SC 313 , initial burden on prosecution, when this is fully
discharged only then any sort of burden shifts to the accused person. Ram Swarup v State of
Haryana, 1993 Supp 4 SCC 344 : 1994 SCC Cri 29 , real onus on prosecution to prove its case
which includes the manner of occurrence and the proof should be beyond all reasonable doubt.
The accused has only to create a doubt about the prosecution case in the mind of the judge or
to satisfy him that his version of the occurrence was probable. Lakh Ram v State of Punjab, 1993
Supp 4 SCC 361 : 1993 SCC Cri 1227 , the burden of proving the prosecution case never shifts
except to the extent to which shifting may take place under a presumption.
42. Sanjay Dutt v State (through CBI), (1994) 5 SCC 410 : 1994 SCC Cri 1433 .
43. Deepa v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 413 (MP).
44. Ouseph v State of Kerala, (2004) 4 SCC 446 .
45. Jagarnath Giri v State of Bihar, 1992 Cr LJ 648 Pat.
46. Soma Bhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1975 SC 1453 : 1975 Cr LJ 1201 .
47. State of UP v Sughar Singh, AIR 1978 SC 191 : 1978 Cr LJ 141 .
48. State of Maharashtra v Narsingarao Gangaram Pimple, 1984 Cr LJ 4 : (1984) 1 SCC 446 : AIR

1984 SC 63 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 109 : 1984 Mad LJ (Cri) 207. Plea of alibi not proved, conviction,
held proper, Surjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 1389 : 1992 Cr LJ 1952 : 1993 Supp (1)
SCC 208 . See also State v Balakrishnan, 1992 Cr LJ 1872 (Mad).
49. Dudh Nath Pandey v State of UP AIR 1981 SC 911 : 1981 Cr LJ 618 : (1981) 2 SCC 166 : 1981

SCC (Cri) 379 : 1981 All LJ 228.
50. Rajesh Kumar v State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 2093 (All).
51. Shiv Charan Singh v Chandra Bhan Singh, (1988) 2 SCC 12 : AIR 1988 SC 637 .
52. Ibid at p 18.
53. The court followed Vashist Narain Sharma v Dev Chandra, AIR 1954 SC 513 : (1955) 1 SCR

509 , where it was pointed out that there should be proof as to which way the wasted votes
would have gone and that this question cannot be left to surmises, the court also considered
Paoki Hookip v Rishang, AIR 1969 SC 663 : (1969) 1 SCR 637 where the election was set aside
on proof of blatant violation of the Act.
54. Amrit Banaspati Co Ltd v UOI, AIR 1995 SC 1340 : (1995) 3 SCC 335 , relied on VS Rice and

Oil Mills v State of AP, AIR 1964 SC 1781 and R.K Garg v UOI, AIR 1981 SC 2138 : (1981) 4 SCC

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
676 .
55. Gauri Shanker v UOI, 1994 AIR SCW 4059. Rakesh Bansal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2002 NOC

68 (Raj) : (2002) 2 Raj LR 153 , a taxing statute imposing 4 times more ﬁne than the amount of
tax evaded, was held to be valid, the burden of proving otherwise was upon the person
challenging it.
56. Bhagwan Dass v MC of Delhi, AIR 1995 Del 17 .
57. A v B AIR 1985 Guj 121 ; Dastane v Dastane, AIR 1975 SC 1534 : (1975) 2 SCC 326 .
58. Kuttadan Velayudhan Re, AIR 2001 SC 123 .
59. Premlata v Arhant Kumar, AIR 1973 SC 626 : (1973) 3 SCC 718 ; Babban v Shiv Nath, AIR

1986 All 185 ; In M Equipment v N L Kanodia, AIR 1986 Del 36 . See also Gangamma v
Krishnappa, 1996 AIHC 264 (Kant), following Narayan Bhagwantrao Gosavi Balajiwale v Gopal
Vinayak Gosavi, AIR 1960 SC 100 : (1960) 1 SCR 773 ; Kartick Pd. Gorai v Neami Pd Gorai, AIR
1998 Cal 278 , a sale deed was challenged, both parties had full knowledge of the respective
cases and led evidence, question of burden of proof became a question of academic value only.
60. Ramji Dayawala & Sons P Ltd v Invest Import, AIR 1981 SC 2085 : (1981) 1 SCR 899 : 1981 1

SCC 80 .
61. Bala Shankar Maha Shanker Bhattjee v Charity Commr., Gujarat State, AIR 1995 SC 167 :

(1995) 1 Guj LR 711 : (1994) 2 GCD 830.
62. Lakhan Sao v Dharamu Chaudhary, (1991) 3 SCC 331 : (1991) 1 Guj LH 288 : (1991) 17 ALR

363 .
63. Revathinnal Balagopala Varma v Padmanabha Dasa Bala Rama Varma, (1993) Supp 1 SCC

233. Rebti Devi v Ram Dutt, AIR 1998 SC 310 : (1997) 11 SCC 714 , both sides led their respective
evidence, the question of burden of proof paled into insigniﬁcance. Arunmugham v Sundarambal,
AIR 1999 SC 2216 : (1998) 5 SCC 381 , both parties adduced their oral as well documentary
evidence, the question of burden of proof became insigniﬁcant.
64. Sethani v Bhana, AIR 1993 SC 956 : (1992) 2 JT 427 .
65. Kishore Ray Thakur Bije v Basanti Kumar Das, AIR 1994 Ori 113 ; Subhas Chandra Bhowmik v

Kalyani Bhowmik, AIR 1998 Gau 96 , mother sold minor daughters' share of property to her sons
for a very small amount. Burden upon the buyers to show good faith and legal necessity. DM's
permission not taken. Burden not discharged. Baban Girju Bangar v Namdeo Girju Bangar, AIR
1999 Bom 46 , the purchase of the suit property by the plaintiff was not disputed. The defendant
alleged that the purchase price was paid out of joint family funds. The court said that the
burden was on the defendant to prove that fact.
66. Subhra Mukherjee v Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, AIR 2000 SC 1203 : (2000) 3 SCC 312 .
67. Kartik Pd. Gorai v Neami Pd. Gorai, AIR 1998 Cal 278 . There were contradictory statements

on their part. Failure to prove deeds inferred.
68. TN Boopathy v TA Sattu, AIR 2002 Mad 177 .
69. Kantilal v Shanti Devi, AIR 1997 Raj 230 .
70. Janata Dal Party v Indian National Congress, (2014) 16 SCC 731 , para 17 : 2014 (1) Scale

533 .
71. Neelkantan v Mallika Begum, AIR 2002 SC 827 .
72. SJ Ebenezer v Velayudhan, AIR 1998 SC 746 : (1998) 1 SCC 633 .
73. KN Beena v Muniyappan AIR 2001 SC 2895 : 2001 Cr LJ 4745 .
74. Sadhu Ram Singh v State, 2002 Cr LJ 2760 (Del).
75. Krishna Prasad v Gopal Prasad, AIR 2001 Pat 1 .
76. Savithri v Karthyayani Amma, AIR 2008 SC 300 : (2007) 11 SCC 621 .
77. UOI v Vasavi Cooperative Housing Society Ltd, (2014) 2 SCC 269 (para 19).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
78. Kesharbai v Tarabai Prabhakarrao Nalawade, (2014) 4 SCC 707 (para 22).
79. Shilpa Vishnu Thakur v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 NOC 2737 (Bom).
80. State of Haryana v Hari Ram Yadav, AIR 1994 SC 1262 : (1994) 2 SCC 617 .
81. Robinsv National Trust Co, (1927) AC 505 at p 510 (PC) See also State Bank of India v

Shyama Devi, AIR 1978 SC 1263 : (1978) 3 SCC 399 .
82. Ranchodbhai Somabhai v Babubhai, AIR 1982 Guj 308 , 310.
83. The Supreme Court laid down in Abdulla Mohammed v State, (1980) 3 SCC 110 : AIR 1980

SC 499 : (1980) 1 SCR 604 , that onus of proof of the existence of every ingredient of the charge
is on the prosecution and never shifts on the accused.
84. Citing Raghavamma v Chenchamma, AIR 1964 SC 136 : (1964) 2 SCR 933 .
85. State of Maharashtra v Vasudeo Ramchandra Kaidalwar, (1981) 3 SCC 199 : AIR 1981 SC

1186 .
86. Anil Rishi v Gurbaksh Singh, (2006) 5 SCC 558 : AIR 2006 SC 1971 : (2006) 6 Mah LJ 280 .
87. Jaydayal Poddar v Bibi Hazra, AIR 1974 SC 171 : (1974) 1 SCC 3 . This was followed, in Janja

Singh v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 1978 : 276, 279 (Del); Mushtaq Ahmad v Mohd. Shaﬁ, AIR 1983 J&K
44. Rama Kanta Jain v MS Jain, AIR 1999 281 (Del), wherein the person who claimed to be the
owner and the registered owner to be only his benamidar could not prove that fact. KR
Sathyanarayana Rao v KR. Venkoba Rao, AIR 1998 Mad 276 , father and son carrying on business
in partnership, property purchased in the name of the son, presumption that it was the son's
property, burden upon father to show that purchase was for family purposes.
88. Shanta Bai v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 1945 (MP).
89. Chhotu Ram v Urvashi Gulati, 2001 Cr LJ 4204 (SC). To the same effect are observations of

the Supreme Court in All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam v LK Tripathi, AIR 2009 SC 1314
: (2009) 5 SCC 417 .
90. KR Sathyanaraynan Rao v KR Venkoba Rao, AIR 1998 Mad 276 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 102] On whom burden of proof lies.—
The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no
evidence at all were given on either side.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left

to A by the will of C, B's father.
If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled to retain his
possession. Therefore the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond.

The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was obtained by fraud,
which A denies.
If no evidence were given on either side, A would succeed, as the bond is not
disputed and fraud is not proved.
Therefore the burden of proof is on B.

COMMENT
[s 102.1] Shifting of onus of proof.—
The phrase "burden of proof" has two meanings—one, the burden of proof as a matter
of law and pleading, and the other the burden of establishing a case; the former is ﬁxed
as a question on the basis of the pleadings and is unchanged during the entire trial,
whereas the latter is not constant but shifts as soon as the party adduces suﬃcient
evidence to raise a presumption in his favour.91. This section lays down a test for
ascertaining on which side the burden of proof lies. The section makes it clear that the
initial onus is on the plaintiff. If he discharges that onus and makes out a case which
entitles him to relief, the onus shifts on to the defendant to prove those circumstances,
if any, which would disentitle the plaintiff to the same. There is an essential distinction
between burden of proof and onus of proof: burden of proof lies upon the person who
has to prove a fact and it never shifts but the onus of proof shifts. Such a shifting onus
is a continuous process in the valuation of evidence.92.
The burden of proof lies upon the party, whether plaintiff or defendant, who
substantially asserts the aﬃrmative of the issue. This rule, derived from the maxim of
Roman law, ei qui aﬃrmat, non ei qui negat, incumbit probatio, is adopted partly because
it is but just that he who invokes the aid of the law should be the ﬁrst to prove his case;
and partly because, in the nature of things, a negative is more diﬃcult to establish than

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
an aﬃrmative.93. The phrase "burden of proof" is used in two distinct meanings in the
law of evidence, viz., the burden of establishing a case and the burden of introducing
evidence. The burden of establishing a case remains throughout the trial where it was
originally placed; it never shifts. The burden of evidence may shift constantly as
evidence is introduced by one side or the other.
One has to prove title by one's own evidence and not by any weakness in the case of
the defendant.94. A person who claims rights of reversion on genealogy basis has to
prove that fact.95.
In criminal cases the prosecution has to prove the ingredients of the offence.96. In a
criminal complaint for unauthorised construction, it was held that the onus was on the
complaining authority to prove that the land belonged to it and the accused put up
construction on it.97. The value of goods and extent of damage have to be proved by
the claimant because the railway certiﬁcate is not the ﬁnal thing.98. The burden of
proving contributory negligence is on the defendant.99. Where cheques were
dishonoured, burden lay upon those issuing them to show that they were issued by
mistake.100. A debtor transferred his property. Creditors alleged and proved it to be a
fraudulent transfer. The burden was now on him to show that the transfer was within
any of the exceptions.101.
To prove the validity of transfer of land of a member of scheduled tribe and perfection
of title over it by adverse possession, the burden is on the transferee.102. The plaintiff
would not succeed automatically without establishing his case on mere failure of the
defendant to establish his case.103.

[s 102.2] Illegal gratiﬁcation.—
The consistent view of the courts as well as the Apex Court from the beginning has
been that the burden of proof under section 4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 is cast on an accused person to rebut the presumption created by that section.
This burden cannot be equated with the degree and character of proof which rests on
the prosecution to prove the case, namely the receipt of money as bribe. The accused
may rebut the presumption by showing a mere preponderance of probability in his
favour. It is not necessary for him to establish his case beyond a reasonable doubt.104.

[s 102.3] CASES.—
In a suit on a bond, the plaintiff accounted for the non-production of the bond, by
alleging that the defendant had stolen it. The defendant admitted the execution of the
bond, but alleged he had paid it. It was held that the defendant was bound to begin and
prove payment, either by the production of the bond or other evidence or by both.105.
Where an unregistered document, the execution of which is admitted or proved,
contains an admission of the payment of the consideration, the onus lies on the person
executing the document to prove that what he himself admitted to be true was, as a
matter of fact, false and that he did not receive the consideration.106.
An insurance company pleaded breach of a term of the policy in that the driver did not
have a valid licence, but produced no evidence of the lack of licence. The company's
case failed.107. Where a contract term provided that breach of any term by one would

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
entitle the other party not to perform the contract, it was held that the party seeking to
be relieved of the contract would have to show the breach of such term.108. Where
there was no direct evidence to prove that a person purchased ticket and boarded a
train or that he died in the accident, the claim for compensation failed.109. Where
railways had to prove that the goods were not lost within seven days of the end of
transit and offered no evidence, their case failed.110. Where the landlord proved that
the tenant was not in exclusive possession of the premises, it was held that the burden
was upon the tenant to show what was the nature of the right of the person with whom
he was sharing possession.111. In a suit for eviction against a sub-tenant, the tenant
did not contest the suit nor appeared as a witness. The landlord also did not appear but
produced witnesses on his behalf. Decree was claimed on the basis of a document
(sulenama) entered into between the landlord and the tenant. Contents of the sulenama
were not proved. It was held that the sulenama could not be relied upon and the onus
squarely lay on the landlord to prove sub-tenancy. Eviction decree was set aside.112.
Where a disputed property was proved to be a joint family property, the members who
pleaded that it was purchased from the separate income of their father, onus was on
them to prove that fact.113. Where a person ﬁled a petition for a declaration that a
particular institution was a Sikh Gurudwara, it was held that the burden of proving the
requirements of a Gurudwara and that the place in question satisﬁed those
requirements was on the petitioner.114. Where there was delay in ﬁling a suit, onus was
on the plaintiffs to show that their suit was within time.115.
A party challenging an arbitration award must satisfy the court that the grounds
contained in section 34(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 do exist. A very
heavy onus lies on the party in this respect.116.

91. Kundan Lal v Custodian, Evacuee Property, AIR 1961 SC 1316 .
92. Raghavamma v Chenchamma, AIR 1964 SC 136 : (1964) 2 SCR 933 ; T Shesha Reddy v

Managing Committee, Jame Masjid, AIR 2002 NOC 164 (AP) : 2002 AHIC 1811, normally, the
plaintiff has to prove his case dehors the averments of the defendant and the evidence adduced
by him. But in the case of a suit and a cross-suit by the defendant being tried jointly, the principle
of shifting of burden of proof would not apply. The matter has to be considered on the basis of
materials and documents available on record.
93. Phipson, 10th Edn, p 92.
94. Lalita James v Ajit Kumar, AIR 1991 MP 15 .
95. State of Bihar v Radha Krishna Singh, AIR 1983 SC 684 : (1983) 3 SCC 118 .
96. Tukaram v State of Maharashtra, (1979) 1 SCR 810 : AIR 1979 SC 185 : 198 Cr LJ 1864.
97. Special Development Area v Pooranlal, 1997 Cr LJ 3484 (MP).
98. UOI v Madan Mohan, AIR 1981 Ori 9 : LNIND 1980 Ori 8 .
99. Krishana Goods Carriers v UOI, AIR 1980 Del 92 .
100. J & KRT Co v 3 A Enterprises, AIR 1981 J&K 64. Those who issued pronotes must show that

they did so under undue inﬂuence. Ram Raja Ram v Dhruba Charan Das, AIR 1982 Ori 264 .
101. Basaregowda v S. Narayana Swamy, AIR 1984 Kant 225 .
102. Trilochan Dandsena v State (FB), AIR 1995 Ori 239 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
103. Nirakar Das v Gourhari Das, AIR 1995 Ori 270 ; Surma Valley Saw Mills Pvt Ltd v Arati Das,

AIR 2002 Gau 108 , the defendant contended in a title suit that the Court had shifted the burden
of proving his title to the defendant. The Court rejected the argument because the impugned
judgment did not reﬂect that the trial court had shifted the burden. The court also said that the
shifting of onus of proof is a constant feature of any litigation and cannot be complained of
unless there is an order against the provisions of the Act.
104. Periyaswamy v Inspector, Vigilance and Anti-Corruption, 1999 Cr LJ 2944 (Mad.)
105. Chuni Kuar v Udai Ram, (1883) 6 All 73 .
106. Ram Chand v Chhunnu Mal, (1925) 6 Lah 470 (FB), disapproving; Wazir Singh v Jai Gopal,

(1887) PR No. 17 of 1888 (Civil).
107. NV Kamat v AAD Martina, AIR 1985 SC 1281 : (1985) 2 SCC 574 ; United India Insurance Co

Ltd v O Jameela Beevi, AIR 1991 Ker 380 , insurer failing to prove wilful breach of terms of policy.
108. Narchinva V Kamat v Alfredo, Antonio Doe Martins, AIR 1985 SC 1281 : (1985) 2 SCC 574 :

1985 SCC (Cri) 274 .
109. Sudha Srivastva v Commr, NR, AIR 1985 All 52 .
110. Raman & Co v UOI, AIR 1985 Mad 37 ; UOI v Ram Pd, AIR 1982 Raj 253 .
111. Kishan Chand v Banarsi Dass, AIR 1990 P&H 160.
112. Dibyeddu Bhowmik v Jogesh Chandra Nath, 1996 AIHC 557 (Gau).
113. Parkash Chand v Hans Raj, AIR 1994 HP 144 , Murlidhar Bapuji Valve v Yellappa, AIR 1994

Bom 358 , section 19(b), Speciﬁc Relief Act, the onus to prove the exception is on the
subsequent purchaser. Kulwant Singh v Makhan Singh, AIR 2003 P&H 142, the plea that an item
of property owned by a member of the family was in fact a joint Hindu family property. The
burden would rest upon him to prove that fact.
114. Mahant Premdass v SGPC, AIR 2003 NOC 127 (P&H) : 2002 AIHC 3594 .
115. Triro v Dev Raj, AIR 1993 J&K 14.
116. HPSIDC v R.P Verma, AIR 2003 NOC 253 (HP) : (2003) 1 Sim LC 144.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 103] Burden of proof as to particular fact.—
The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the Court
to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact
shall lie on any particular person.
ILLUSTRATION
A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft to C.
A must prove the admission.
B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question, he was elsewhere. He must
prove it.

COMMENT
This section ampliﬁes the general rule laid down in section 101. It differs from section
101. By section 101 the party has to prove the whole of the facts which he alleges to
entitle him to judgment when the burden of proof is on him. This section provides for
the proof of some one particular fact. The illustration suﬃciently points out the
meaning. All the facts, however numerous and complicated, which go to make up the
accused's guilt, must be proved by the prosecution. If the accused wishes to prove a
particular fact, his alibi for instance, he must prove it. If the prosecutor wishes to prove
the case, not by independent oral testimony, but by the isolated fact of the accused's
admission, or if he wishes to throw that in as an additional fact, he must prove it.117.
The plea of alibi must be substantiated by the accused. The trial court pointed out
several suspicions throwing considerable doubts about the truth of the plea. The
Supreme Court did not interfere.118.
As an instance of provision of law that the proof of a particular fact shall be upon a
particular person, see section 39 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which says that all
persons shall give information of the commission of certain offences to the nearest
police oﬃcer or Magistrate, and throws upon such persons the burden of proving
reasonable excuse for not doing so.
Where a person claims a right of way, he must prove that he acquired the right and it is
not for the other party to show that he does not have any such right.119. Where a
person is protesting against nationalisation of a route, burden lies upon him to show
that the scheme would not serve national purpose.120. A person who claimed that his
licence could not have been revoked without notice, the burden was held to be upon
him to prove that fact.121. Onus to prove payment of rent lies on the tenant and mere
oral testimony is not suﬃcient for discharging the onus.122.
Where the defendant alleged that the suit property was a public trust property, the
plaintiff did not accept this fact throughout the proceedings. Thus, it became a fact

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
which was asserted by the defendant and was denied by the plaintiff. The court said
that the onus of proving the same was on the defendant.123.
The burden of proving a particular fact lies on the party as indicated in the section
irrespective of the fact whether it is an aﬃrmative or negative of the issue. In the tort
action of malicious prosecution, for example, the burden of proving that the plaintiff
was prosecuted without reasonable and probable cause is on him although it is the
negative of the issue.

[s 103.1] Examination of Party.—
The plaintiff categorically averred in his plaint that the mortgage amount had been
tendered to the defendant as also to her husband. The defendants denied it. The court
said that having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case she should
have supported her denial by getting herself examined.124.

[s 103.2] Claim against carrier for damage to consignment.—
In a claim against the railway for damage to consignment, it was contended by the
railway that the damage was due to rainfall, i.e., an act of God. The court said that rain
is normally an expected natural phenomenon against which precautions can be taken
for saving property. Railway would have to prove what care and caution was taken and
how it could be said that the operation of nature was irresistible.125. In a claim against
a carrier for non-delivery of goods, the court said that the burden was not on the
plaintiff but on the defendant carrier to prove that there was no negligence on his
part.126.

[s 103.3] Claim for setting aside gift deed.—
The plaintiff ﬁled a suit for a declaration that the gift deed relating to his property was
null and void because at the time of its execution he was a minor. His birth certiﬁcate
was neither exhibited nor proved through other witnesses. It was for him to prove his
age and not for the defendant. The suit was ﬁled 3 years after attaining majority. He
was held not entitled to the relief claimed.127.

117. Norton, 289.
118. State of UP v Sughar Singh, AIR 1978 SC 191 : 1978 Cr LJ 141 : 1978 All LJ 466.
119. Mer Nagiam Asha v Punja Kana, AIR 1981 Guj 141 .
120. Prakash Chandra v Managing Director, ORTCO, AIR 1980 Ori 122 .
121. Sri Upendra Mandal v Sri Bhajahari Mandal, AIR 1991 NOC 107 (Gau).
122. Raghubir Prasad v Rajendra Kumar Gurdev, AIR 1993 All 326 .
123. Champalal v Thakurji Shri Gopalji, AIR 1998 Raj 220 .
124. Tulsi v Chandrika Prasad, AIR 2006 SC 3359 : (2006) 8 SCC 322 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
125. General Manager, Southern Rly v Agarwal Traders, AIR 2001 Kant 366 .
126. Karnataka Transport Corp v National Insurance Bank Ltd, AIR 1999 Kant 233 .
127. Habib Ullah Bhat v Juna, AIR 2003 J&K 32.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 104] Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.—
The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any person
to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A

must prove that the document has been lost.

COMMENT
[s 104.1] Principle.—
Whenever it is necessary to prove any fact, in order to render evidence of any other fact
admissible, the burden of proving that fact is on the person who wants to give such
evidence. The illustrations explain the meaning of the section. A person seeking to
recover possession has to prove that he was dispossessed within 12 years.128. A
father admitted that the girl whose legitimacy was in question was his daughter but
that she was illegitimate. There being a presumption of legitimacy, burden lay upon
father to prove otherwise.129. In dealings with pardanashin women there is a
presumption that the contract was the result of undue inﬂuence. Hence, the burden lies
on the other party to prove that the transaction was fair and free.130. A pardanashin
woman transferred her lands to her son subject to certain conditions as to
maintenance etc. But the deed was altered so as to remove the conditions, the burden
to prove that the alteration was with the consent of the woman was upon those who
were trying to take advantage of the deed.131. An illiterate woman contended that the
sale deed which she executed was not read over to her. It was held that the burden was
upon the other party to prove that she was made fully aware of the contents of the
document.132. Burden lies upon the plaintiff to prove all the points of the right of preemption.133. A telegram by itself is not an authentic document. It is like an
unsigned/anonymous communication. Unless a telegram is conﬁrmed by a subsequent
signed application, representation or an aﬃdavit, contents of a telegram have no
authenticity at all.134.
Where the railways contention was that the person who died by falling from a train was
not a bona ﬁde passenger being without ticket, the court said that it was for the
railways to prove that fact.135. Where a vehicle was transferred prior to its accident, the
fact that the insured failed to make an application for transfer of insurance was to be
pleaded and proved by the insurer when the claimant is third party.136. Where the
rented premises were found to be in the possession of a stranger and not the tenant,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the burden was upon the tenant to disprove the inference of sub-letting as he alone had
the special knowledge of facts.137. In a case of transfer of property by an ostensible
owner, burden to prove that the ostensible owner under registered sale deed was only a
benamidar, was upon the party who set up benami.138. Burden of proof of material
impairment to the value or the utility of the building as a result of unauthorised
construction or alteration is on the landlord.139. Where the guarantor alleged that the
hypothecated goods were lost due to negligence of the creditor bank, onus to prove
negligence was on the guarantor.140.

[s 104.2] Res Ipsa Loquitur.—
Where the vehicle suddenly went off the road, overturned and killed the victim, doctrine
of res ipsa loquitur was attracted and onus was shifted from the claimant to the driver
to prove his non-negligence or vigilance.141.
This section should be read with clause 2 of section 136 and with the illustrations
attached to that section.

128. Kalooram v Mangilal, AIR 1984 MP 147 .
129. Hoovayya K Shetty v Renuka, AIR 1984 Bom 229 .
130. Chaitan Charan Parida v Maheshwar Parida, AIR 1991 Ori 125 .
131. Rankanidhi Sahu v Nandkishore Sahu, AIR 1990 Ori 64 : LNIND 1989 Ori 156 .
132. Sri Siya Ram v Lilawati, AIR 1990 All 75 .
133. Pyare Mohan v Rameshwar, AIR 1980 Raj 116 .
134. Distt. Magistrate v G Jothisankar, AIR 1993 SC 2633 .
135. Mahaboob Sab v UOI, AIR 2011 Kar 8 .
136. Oriental Insurance Co Ltd v Joshy, 1996 AIHC 1150 (Ker).
137. Gur Dayal Khanna v Malti Devi, AIR 1993 All 90 .
138. Mirza Mahboob Baig v DV Narasimha Reddy, 1996 AIHC 3070 (AP).
139. Ratanlal Bansilal v Kishorilal Goenka (FB), AIR 1993 Cal 144 , relying on Om Pal v Anand

Swaroop, (1988) 4 SCC 545 : 1988 Supp (3) SCR 391 .
140. Gopal Chandra Bagaria v State Bank of India, AIR 1994 Ori 329 .
141. Sumati Debnath v Sunil Kumar Sen, AIR 1994 Gau 59 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 105] Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.—
When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of
circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions[s 105.2] in the
Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860), or within any special exception[s 105.6] or proviso
contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law deﬁning the offence, is
upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not

know the nature of the act.
The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was

deprived of the power of self-control.
The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code provides that whoever, except in the case

provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be subject to
certain punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under section 325.
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under section 335
lies on A.

COMMENT
In criminal cases the burden of proof, using the phrase in its strictest sense, is always
upon the prosecution and never shifts whatever the evidence may be during the
progress of the case. When suﬃcient proof of the commission of a crime has been
adduced and the accused has been connected therewith as the guilty party, then the
burden of proof, in another and quite different sense, namely in the sense of
introducing evidence in rebuttal of the case for the prosecution is laid upon him.142.
The onus of establishing an exception shifts to the accused when he pleads an
exception.143. This onus can be discharged either by aﬃrmatively establishing the plea
taken by an accused person or by eliciting such circumstances which would create a
doubt in the mind of the court that the reasonable possibility of the accused acting
within the protection of the exception pleaded is not eliminated.144. If on a
consideration of the evidence as a whole a reasonable doubt is created in the mind of
the court as to the guilt of the accused he would be entitled to acquittal.145.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In a case where s. 84 was invoked by the accused, it was held that the burden of
bringing his/her case under section 84 IPC lies squarely upon the person claiming the
beneﬁt of that provision. It was further held that the standard of proof which the
accused has to satisfy for the discharge of the burden cast upon him under section
105 of the Evidence Act is not the same as is expected of the prosecution, which has to
prove the charges beyond reasonable doubt. Where the accused has led no evidence in
defence to support the plea of legal insanity, it is open to an accused to rely upon the
material brought on record by the prosecution to claim the beneﬁt of the exception.
Evidence in defence may be a surplusage in cases where the defence can make out a
case for the acquittal of the accused based on the evidence adduced by the
prosecution.146.
The burden on the accused to prove his defence stands discharged by showing
preponderance of probability in his favour.147.
Where the plea of insanity is invoked by an accused it is for him to establish that
fact.148. But the burden of proof upon the accused is no higher than one which rests
upon a party to civil proceedings.149.
Where a part of a section of an Act has been held unenforceable by the court, it is for
the prosecution to establish to the satisfaction of the judge that the case comes within
the enforceable part; no onus is cast on the accused to prove that his case falls under
that part of the section which has been declared unenforceable.150.
The Supreme Court has laid down, in Yogendra Morarji v Gujarat151. that the burden of
proving defences arises only when the prosecution discharges its initial and traditional
burden of establishing the complicity of the accused. Even under this section the
standard of proof required for establishing a defence is that of a prudent man as laid
down in section 3.152. But within that standard there are degrees of probability. The
nature of the burden on an accused person is not as onerous as the general burden of
proving the charge beyond reasonable doubt. The accused may discharge his burden
by establishing a mere balance probabilities in his favour with regard to the alleged
crime.153.

[s 105.1] Presumption of innocence.—
In criminal cases, the rule is that the legal burden of proving every element of the
offence and the guilt of the accused, lies from ﬁrst to last on the prosecution. Where a
fact is especially within the knowledge of the accused, burden lies upon him to prove
that fact. Thus in a prosecution for ticketless travel, the fact whether a ticket was
bought or not being especially within the knowledge of the accused, he must prove that
fact. [see section 106 Illustration (b)]. This principle has been held to be not applicable
to a case of a person who has lost his life in a railway accident. How can a dead person
discharge any such burden. The presumption of innocence must prevail. Though the
court would have to prove that he was without ticket and therefore not a bona ﬁde
passenger, the fact should remain that a person lost his life in the tragic circumstances
of an accident for which railways cannot shirk blame and that the unfortunate person
was there with the implicit railway permission. The opportunity to board trains without
ticket is due to railway generosity.154.

[s 105.2] "General Exceptions".—
The General Exceptions here referred to are those applicable to all crimes, and are laid
down in Chapter IV of the Indian Penal Code.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
This section is a general provision which imposes the burden of bringing himself within
an exception upon the person who relies upon the exception; and there is no distinction
between a case in which the exception is contained in the body of the statute imposing
the prohibition and a case in which it is not so included.155.

[s 105.3] Burden of Proving Exception.—
The basic principles underlying the subject of proving defence or exception were
restated by the Supreme Court:156. "The doctrine of burden of proof in the context of
the plea of insanity may be stated in the following propositions: (1) the prosecution
must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had committed the offence with
the requisite mens rea; and the burden of proving that always rests on the prosecution
from the beginning to the end of the trial; (2) there is a rebuttable presumption that the
accused was not insane when he committed the crime; the accused may rebut it by
placing before the court all the relevant evidence oral, documentary or circumstantial,
but the burden of proof upon him is no higher than that which rests upon a party to civil
proceedings; (3) even if the accused was not able to establish conclusively that he was
insane at the time when he committed the offence, the evidence placed before the
court may raise a reasonable doubt in the mind of the court as regards one or more of
the ingredients of the offence, including mens rea and in that case the court would be
entitled to acquit the accused."
The principles stated by the Supreme Court were restated by Fazal Ali J, in Rabindra
Kumar Dey v State of Orissa:157. In our opinion three cardinal principles of criminal
jurisprudence are well settled, namely:—
(1) that the onus lies aﬃrmatively on the prosecution to prove its case beyond

reasonable doubt and it cannot derive any beneﬁt from weakness or falsity of
the defence version while proving its case;
(2) that in a criminal trial the accused must be presumed to be innocent unless he

is proved to be guilty; and
(3) that the onus of the prosecution never shifts.

It is true that under section 105 of the Evidence Act the onus of proving exceptions
mentioned in the Indian Penal Code lies on the accused, but the section does not at all
indicate the nature and standard of proof required. The Evidence Act does not
contemplate that the accused should prove his case with the same strictness and
vigour as the prosecution is required to prove in a criminal charge. It is suﬃcient if the
accused is able to prove his case by the standard of preponderance of probabilities
envisaged by section 5 of the Evidence Act as a result of which he succeeds not
because he proves his case to the guilt but because probability of the version given by
him throws doubt on the prosecution case and, therefore, the prosecution cannot be
said to have established the charge beyond reasonable doubt.158.
Where the accused relies upon provocation in diminution of his responsibility, he has to
prove that fact.159.
The accused taking a plea in defence against the charge is not required necessarily to
produce evidence in support of his plea. He can establish his plea by reference to
circumstances as they emerge from the prosecution evidence itself.160.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 105.4] Presumption of absence of exception.—
The Supreme Court stated the effect of the provisions as follows:161. From a combined
reading of sections 105 and 4 of the Act, it may be inferred that where the existence of
circumstances bringing the case within the exception is pleaded or is raised the court
shall presume the absence of such circumstances as proved unless and until it is
disproved. Taking section 105 as a whole the "burden of proof" and the presumption
have to be considered together. The accused may raise a plea of exception either by
pleading the same speciﬁcally or by relying on the probabilities and circumstances
obtaining in the case. He may adduce evidence in support of his plea directly or rely on
the prosecution case itself or he can indirectly introduce such circumstances by way of
cross-examination and also rely on the probabilities and the other circumstances. Then
the initial presumption against the accused regarding the non-existence of the
circumstances in favour of his plea gets displaced and on an examination of the
material if a reasonable doubt arises, the beneﬁt of it should go to the accused. The
accused can also discharge the burden under section 105 by preponderance of
probabilities in favour of his plea. In respect of the general exceptions, special
exceptions, provisos contained in the Penal Code or in any law deﬁning the offence, the
accused by one of these processes would be discharging the burden contemplated
under section 105 but in cases of the exceptions covered by special statutes and
where the burden of proof is placed on the accused to establish his plea, he will be able
to discharge the same by preponderance of probabilities and not by merely creating a
doubt. In the case of general exceptions, special exceptions, provisos contained in the
Penal Code or in any law deﬁning the offence, the court, after due consideration of the
evidence in the light of the above principle, if satisﬁed, would state, in the ﬁrst instance,
as to which exception the accused is entitled, then see whether he would be entitled to
a complete acquittal of the offence charged or would be liable for a lesser offence. The
court may convict him accordingly. These principles cannot be made applicable to a
case where the accused sets up alibi. There the burden entirely lies on him and the plea
of alibi does not come within the meaning of these exceptions. Circumstances leading
to alibi are within his knowledge and as provided under section 106 of the Act he has to
establish the same satisfactorily. Likewise, in the case where the statute throws special
burden on the accused to disprove the existence of the ingredients of the offence, he
has to discharge the burden, for example, in cases arising under Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954, if the accused pleads a defence under section 19, the burden is
on him to establish the same since the warranty on which he relies is a circumstance
within his knowledge.
The plea of self-defence cannot be denied to an accused person on the ground that he
did not speciﬁcally raise it in his statement under section 313, CrPC and because the
injured accused did not enter the witness box.162.

[s 105.5] Beneﬁt of doubt.—
The phrase "burden of proof" is not deﬁned in the Act. In respect of criminal cases, it is
an accepted principle of criminal jurisprudence that the burden is always on the
prosecution and never shifts. This ﬂows from the cardinal principle that the accused is
presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty by the prosecution and the accused is
entitled to the beneﬁt of every reasonable doubt. Section 105 to some extent places the
onus of proving any exception in a penal statute on the accused. The burden of proving
the existence of circumstances bringing the case within the exceptions mentioned
therein is upon him. The section further lays down that the court shall presume nonexistence of circumstances bringing the case within an exception. The words "burden
of proving the existence of circumstances" occurring in the section are very signiﬁcant.
"This burden" which rests on the accused does not absolve the prosecution from

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
discharging its initial burden of establishing the case beyond all reasonable doubts.
The accused need not set up a speciﬁc plea against the offence and adduce
evidence.163.

[s 105.6] "Special exception".—
Special exceptions are those which are restricted to a particular crime.
Section 113A raises a presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman by
her husband or his relatives. Similarly section 114A raises presumption of absence of
consent in a rape case. Several statutes also provide for putting evidential burden on
the accused.164.

142. The question of the accused being called upon to explain his defence arises only when the

prosecution crosses the barrier of innocence. Where the allegation was that a mother
simultaneously killed her four children and the prosecution did not bring out a medical report as
to whether she was capable of entertaining a mental state essential for the alleged crime, the
question of calling upon her to establish her defence did not arise. Bai Ramilaben v State of
Gujarat, 1991 Cr LJ 2219 (Guj); See generally, Khuraijam Somoi Singh v State of Manipur, 1997 Cr
LJ 1461 (Gau); Ushman v State, 1997 Cr LJ 2457 (Mad); Solanki C.B v Srikanta Parashar, 1997 Cr
LJ 3050 (Kant).
143. The Court never presumes the existence of circumstances which entitle the accused to his

defence. Subodh Tiwari v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 223 (Gau). See also Kuzhiyaramadiyil
Madhavan v State of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 450 (Ker).
144. Babu Lal v State of UP, AIR 1960 All 223 . See also State of Gujarat v Kolis Hira, AIR 1961 Guj

8 ; Lakshmanan v Lakshmanan, AIR 1964 Mad 418 ; Bhan Singh v State of MP, 1990 Cr LJ 1861
(MP), thus the burden on the accused is of very light nature.
145. Brindaban Prasad v State of Bihar, AIR 1964 Pat 138 .
146. Elavarasan v State, (2011) 7 SCC 110 . Also see Surendra Mishra v State of Jharkhand,

(2011) 11 SCC 495 wherein it was held that the burden of proof in the face of S. 105 of the
Evidence Act is on the accused. Though the burden is on the accused but he is not required to
prove the same beyond all reasonable doubt, but merely satisfy the preponderance of
probabilities. The onus has to be discharged by producing evidence as to the conduct of the
accused prior to the offence, his conduct at the time or immediately after the offence with
reference to his medical condition by production of medical evidence and other relevant factors.
Even if the accused establishes unsoundness of mind, section 84 of the Penal Code will not
come to his rescue, in case it is found that the accused knew that what he was doing was wrong
or that it was contrary to law. In order to ascertain that, it is imperative to take into consideration
the circumstances and the behaviour preceding, attending and following the crime. Behaviour of
an accused pertaining to a desire for concealment of the weapon of offence and conduct to
avoid detection of crime go a long way to ascertain as to whether, he knew the consequences of
the act done by him.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
147. Rizam v State of Chhatisgarh, 2003 Cr LJ 1227 : AIR 2003 SC 976 .
148. Bhikari v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 1 : 1966 Cr LJ 63 ; Kannakunnummal v State of Kerala,

AIR 1967 Ker 92 .
149. Dahyabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1964 SC 1563 : (1964) 2 Cr LJ 472 .
150. Behram Khurshid Pesikaka v State of Bombay, (1954) 56 Bom LR 575 : AIR 1955 SC 123 :

1955 Cr LJ 215 .
151. Yogendra Morarji v Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 660 , at 666 : 1980 Cr LJ 459 .
152. See Dahyabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1964 SC 1563 : (1964) 2 Cr LJ 472 . See also

Sankaran v State of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 1173 (Ker).
153. Also to the same effect Mohd. Ramzani v State of Delhi, AIR 1980 SC 1341 : 1980 Cr LJ

1010 ; Darshan Lal v State, 1990 Cr LJ 2751 (Del), the accused failed to make out his right of
private defence even to the extent of probability. See also Valummel Thommachan v State of
Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 1738 (Ker).
154. Asharani Das v UOI, AIR 2009 Cal 205 . UOI v Hari Narayan Gupta, AIR 2007 Raj 38 ,

accidental fall from train, burden on railways to prove that he was without ticket.
155. Emperor v Dahyabhai Savchand, (1941) 43 Bom LR 519 ; Government of Bombay v Samuel,

(1946) 48 Bom LR 746 (SB).
156. Dayalbhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1964 SC 1563 at p 1568 : (1964) 2 Cr LJ 472 followed in

Periasami v State of TN, (1996) 6 SCC 457 : 1997 Cr LJ 219 . Followed in Bhikari Singh v State of
UP, AIR 1966 SC 1 ; Mohar Rai v State of Bihar, (1968) 3 SCR 525 : AIR 1968 SC 1281 . The court
considered Parbhoo v Emperor, AIR 1941 All 402 : 1941 All LJ 619; Rishi Kesh Singh v State, AIR
1970 All 51 ; Behram Khurshed Pesikaka v State of Bombay, AIR 1955 SC 123 : 1955 CrL 215;
Vijayee Singh v State of UP¸ AIR 1990 SC 1459 : (1990) 3 SCC 190 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 , where in
the case of death in police custody, it was necessary for the police to prove that the accused
was elsewhere at the time of death. Partap v State of UP, (1976) 2 SCC 798 : AIR 1976 SC 966 ;
KM Nanavati v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1962 SC 605 at p 617 : 1962 Supp 1 SCR 567. Siddhapal
Kamala Yadav v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2009 SC 97 : (2009) 1 SCC 124 , burden of proving
unsoundness of mind which is on the accused is no higher than that resting on the plaintiff or
defendant in civil cases. Surendra Mishra v State of Jharkhand, AIR 2011 SC 627 , the accused,
who shot down a person, was running a medical shop. Afterwards he threatened the driver, ran
away, threw the gun into a well. The court said all this showed that he understood the nature
and consequences of his act. Also see, Elavarasan v State, (2011) 7 SCC 110 .
157. Rabindra Kumar Dey v State of Orissa, (1976) 4 SCC 233 : AIR 1977 SC 170 .
158. The Court relied upon Harbhajan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1966 SC 97 : (1966) Cr LJ 82 ;

State of UP v Ram Swaroop, (1974) 1 SCC 764 . To the same effect is Pratap v State of UP, (1976)
2 SCC 798 ; Strong v Dowtry, (1961) 1 WLR 841 ; Man Singh v Delhi Admn. AIR 1979 SC 1455 :
1979 Cr LJ 1118 , Chaturdas R. Lal v State of Gujarat, AIR 1976 SC 1497 : 1976 Cr LJ 1180 . The
burden of proving that the case comes within any of the general exceptions can be discharged
by showing a preponderance of probability. Bhupendra Singh v State of Gujarat, AIR 1997 SC
3790 : 1998 Cr LJ 57 : (1998) 2 SCC 603 . State of MP v Ramesh, AIR 2005 SC 1186 : (2005) 9
SCC 705 : 2005 Cr LJ 652 , the same principles restated.
159. R v Padola, (1860) 1 QB 325 (CCA) : Bhikhari v State of UP, AIR 1966 SC 1 : 1966 Cr LJ 63 .
160. Raghbir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2009 SC 1223 : (2008) 16 SCC 33 .
161. Vijayee Singh v State of UP, AIR 1990 SC 1459 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 : (1990) 3 SCC 190 .
162. Kashi Ram v State of MP, AIR 2001 SC 2902 , following Vijayee Singh v State of UP, AIR

1990 SC 1459 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 ; Bahadur Singh v State of Punjab, (1992) 4 SCC 503 : AIR 1993
SC 70 : 1992 Cr LJ 3709 .
163. Vijayee Singh v State of UP, (1990) 3 SCC 190 : AIR 1990 SC 1459 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
164. PN Krishna Lal v Govt of Kerala, 1995 Supp (2) SCC 187 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 466 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 106] Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.—
When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving
that fact is upon him.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the

character and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that
intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving

that he had a ticket is on him.

COMMENT
This section applies only to parties to a suit.165.

[s 106.1] Principle.—
Where the knowledge of the subject-matter of an allegation is peculiarly within the
province of one party to a suit the burden of proof must lie there also. Thus, for
example, sales of consignments entrusted to commission agents and particulars of
those sales are matters which lie especially within their knowledge.166. Similarly, in a
case of a servant charged with misappropriation of goods of his master, if the failure to
account was due to an accidental loss, the facts being within the servant's knowledge,
it is for him to explain the loss.167. In a claim for maintenance the claimant can quote a
ﬁgure of income on guess work because the fact of exact income is especially within
the knowledge of the other party.168. Where a person was found in possession of gold
with foreign markings, the Supreme Court held that burden lay upon him to account for
his possession.169. Where a shopkeeper had at his shop unmarked and unveriﬁed
measure along with regular measures, it was held that an offence under the Weights
and Measures law was made out unless he could show that they were not in use.170.
Burden lies upon the licensee to show that he used the goods for the licensed purpose.
But it being a penalty matter, those seeking to impose penalties must give some
evidence to show a different use.171. In a prosecution under the Essential Commodities
Act, the dealer accused has to show how broken rice came to be mixed with the whole
rice, because that matter is especially within his knowledge.172. Where the sample of
maida taken from a grocery shop was found to be substandard and the accused took
the plea that it was kept not for human consumption but for pasting purposes, it was
held that it was a special knowledge of the accused and it was for him only to prove
such a knowledge and having not done so it could not be said that the burden cast on
him had been successfully discharged.173. "The principle underlying section 106, which

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is an exception to the general rule governing burden of proof, applies only to such
matters of defence which are supposed to be especially within the knowledge of the
defendant. It cannot apply when the fact is such as to be capable of being known also
by persons other than the defendant". In this case the carrying of voters free of charge
was obviously known to many others too.174.
It is the bounden duty of a party, personally knowing the whole circumstances of the
case, to give evidence on his own behalf and to submit to cross-examination. His nonappearance as a witness would be the strongest possible circumstance going to
discredit the truth of his case.175. But in a criminal case even where the facts lie
peculiarly within the knowledge of the accused the burden of proof lies on the
prosecution though very slight evidence may be suﬃcient to discharge the burden.176.

[s 106.2] Scope.—
This section does not cast any burden on an accused person to prove that no crime
was committed by proving facts especially within his knowledge; nor does it warrant
the conclusion that if anything is unexplained which the court thinks the accused could
explain, he ought therefore to be found guilty.177. It does not affect the onus of proving
the guilt of the accused. That onus rests on the prosecution and is not shifted on to the
accused by reason of this section.178. It is only in cases where the facts proved by the
evidence give rise to a reasonable inference of guilt unless the same is rebutted and
such inference can be negatived by proof of some fact which in its nature can be
negatived by proof of some fact which in its nature can only be within the special
knowledge of the accused that the burden of proving the fact is on the accused.179.
This section cannot be used to shift the onus of establishing an essential ingredient of
the offence on the accused.180.
So, section 106 of the Evidence Act is not intended to relieve the prosecution of its
burden to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, but it would apply
only to cases where the prosecution has succeeded in proving facts from which a
reasonable inference can be drawn regarding the existence of certain other facts,
unless the accused by virtue of his special knowledge regarding such facts, failed to
offer any explanation which might drive the court to draw a different inference.181. It is
designed to meet certain exceptional cases, in which, it would be impossible for the
prosecution to establish certain facts which are particularly within the knowledge of
the accused.182.
A statute may impose limited onus on an accused person to prove matters especially
within his knowledge. Such a statute does not violate Article 14 or 21 of the
constitution.183.

[s 106.3] Burden of proving negligence and res ipsa loquitur.—
It has been considered by the Privy Council that the burden of proving negligence
always rests with the plaintiff, even when the maxim res ipsa loquitur applies.184. Once
the initial burden of showing the setting of the mishap is discharged, this maxim will
relieve the plaintiff of showing further evidence of negligence.
Acting upon this maxim and following the decision of the Supreme Court in Sayed
Akbar v State of Karnataka185. the Kerala High Court held that where a live wire was
hanging on the road from an electric pole, it must be presumed that it must have been

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
due to negligent management creating liability to the dependents of the pedestrian who
was electrocuted.

[s 106.4] Terminal tax.—
Octroi duty was paid for bringing petroleum goods within the limits of a Municipal
Corporation. Subsequently refund of the amount was claimed on the ground that the
goods were brought within municipal limits only to be taken out. It was held that the
burden lay upon the claimant to prove that he had not sold the goods locally and had
taken them out.186.

[s 106.5] Professional qualiﬁcation.—
Where a person was displaying on the signboard of his nursing home and on his
professional papers certain qualiﬁcations about which the prosecution alleged that he
did not possess, the burden was on him to show facts which justiﬁed him in the use of
those qualiﬁcations, that fact being specially known only to him.187.

[s 106.6] Taking away dead body.—
Where the corpus delicti (dead body) was not found but there was the direct evidence
of eyewitnesses that the victim was killed by accused persons before they took away
the dead body. No explanation was offered by the accused persons as to what they had
done with the dead body. The court said that they could be convicted by drawing the
presumption that they had a reason to cause disappearance of the dead body and that
reason must have been that the death was caused by them.188.

[s 106.7] Spurious Liquor.—
In a case of spurious liquor, the prosecution has the initial burden of suggesting of
knowing that the accused person was involved in the business of illicit liquor and that
he knew the nature thereof. It is only then that the burden would shift to the accused to
prove that he had no means to know about the nature of the business or the fact that
the liquor was being mixed with a noxious substance like methanol.189.

[s 106.8] Dowry death.—
Where the prosecution proved that there was a strong motive for the crime, that the
deceased woman was last seen alive in the company of the accused and that the death
was unnatural and homicidal, it was held that the burden to account for the
circumstances of the death was shifted to the person in whose care the woman met
her death. He alone must be in possession of the knowledge of those
circumstances.190.

[s 106.9] Death in custody.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
When once it was established that the victim was taken into police custody it was their
responsibility to show how the prisoner went out of their custody. There was not even a
whisper from the side of the accused as to what happened to the deceased after he
was taken into custody by them.191. Due to lack of direct evidence in such cases, the
Supreme Court stated the approach to be followed in such cases: Exaggerated
adherence to and insistence upon requiring the truth to be established by proof which
is beyond every reasonable doubt would in such cases often result in miscarriage of
justice and make the justice delivery system suspect and vulnerable. Torture in police
custody receives encouragement by this type of unrealistic approach because it
reinforces the belief in the police mind that no harm would come to them if one
prisoner dies in the lockup because there would be hardly any evidence available to the
prosecution to directly implicate them in the torture. Given the serious nature of the
crime and its far reaching consequences, the court must deal with such cases in a
realistic manner and with the sensitivity they deserve. The court suggested the rule of
rebuttable presumption to be adopted.192.

[s 106.10] Maintenance.—
In a suit for maintenance, onus lies upon the husband to disclose his income.193. The
claim to interim maintenance of the child cannot be defeated merely by saying that he
being an already married man, his marriage with the child's mother was void. He did not
produce a copy of his income tax return from which the court presumed that he did not
want to disclose his income. The wife was able to show that she was working nowhere.
The award of Rs 5,000 a month for maintenance of the child and mother was held to be
not excessive. Against the claim of a Hindu wife for maintenance the husband pleaded
that he was already a married man and, therefore, his marriage with the claimant was
void. It was held that the burden of proving his earlier marriage was upon the husband
and he had failed to discharge his burden. The claim to maintenance was accordingly
allowed.194.

[s 106.11] Payment of rent.—
In an eviction proceeding on the ground of default in payment of rent, the burden lies on
the tenant to prove payment.195.

[s 106.12] Land Acquisition.—
Whenever acquisition of land is challenged on the ground that the notiﬁcation has not
been published as per the mandate of the statute, the authority defending acquisition is
under an obligation to produce evidence in the form of documents to prove that
requirement of publication has been complied with. In the absence of such evidence,
the court cannot decide challenge to the acquisition proceedings by assuming that the
particular notiﬁcation had been published as per the requirement of law. In the given
case, no material was produced before the High Court or before Supreme Court to
show that the Notiﬁcation issued under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894,
had been published in the Oﬃcial Gazette. Therefore, it was held by Supreme Court that
the High Court was not justiﬁed in declining relief to the land-owners/appellants by
assuming that the said notiﬁcation must have been published in the Oﬃcial Gazette
because other notiﬁcations including the one issued under section 6 were published in
the Oﬃcial Gazette.196.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 106.13] Alibi.—
Circumstances leading to alibi are within the knowledge of the accused and as
provided in section 106 of the Act he has to establish the same satisfactorily. The
burden of proving alibi rests on the accused.197.

[s 106.14] Last seen together.—
The theory of "last seen alive" comes into play when the time gap between when the
accused and the deceased were last seen together, and the deceased was found dead
was so small, that the possibility of any other person committing the murder becomes
impossible. Thus, on the principle that the person who is last found in the company of
another is dead or missing, the person with whom he was last found alive has to
explain the circumstances in which he parted company.198.
In the case of "last seen together", the prosecution is exempted to prove the exact
happening of the incident, as the accused himself would have special knowledge of the
incident and thus, would have burden of proof as per section 106 of the Evidence Act,
1872. Therefore, "last seen together" itself is not a conclusive proof but along with
other circumstances surrounding the incident, like relations between the accused and
the deceased, enmity between them, previous history of hostility, recovery of weapon
from the accused, etc. non-explanation of the death of the deceased, may lead to a
presumption of guilt.199.

[s 106.15] Knowledge about licenced ﬁrearm.—
Where licenced pistol was alleged to have been used in a murder case, it was held that
the onus would be on the accused to show where it was and in whose possession that
being in his special knowledge. He failed to produce it and gave evasive answers.
Adverse inference could be drawn against him under section 106.200.

[s 106.16] Claim under Motor Vehicles Act.—
The Supreme Court observed in a claim petition that it is not possible for a claimant to
give a strict proof of the accident. The claimants have to establish their case merely on
the touchstone of preponderance of probability. The standard of proof beyond
reasonable doubt cannot be applied.201.

[s 106.17] Industrial Dispute.—
Whilst it is true that the provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872 per se are not applicable
in an industrial adjudication, it is trite that its general principles do apply in proceedings
before Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court, as the case may be. In any proceeding, the
burden of proving a fact lies on the party that substantially asserts the aﬃrmative of
the issue, and not on the party who denies it. Therefore, it follows that where an
employer asserts misconduct on the part of workman and dismisses or discharges him
on that ground, it is for the employer to prove misconduct by workman before Industrial
Tribunal or Labour Court, as the case may be, by leading relevant evidence before it and
it is open to the workman to adduce evidence contra. In the ﬁrst instance, a workman

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
cannot be asked to prove that he has not committed any act tantamounting to
misconduct. In the given case, since no enquiry was conducted before the service of a
workman was terminated, the onus to prove that it was not possible to conduct the
enquiry and that the termination was justiﬁed because of misconduct by the employee,
was on management. It was for management to prove, by adducing evidence, that the
workman was guilty of misconduct and that the action taken by it is proper. Therefore,
the order passed by the Labour Court, shifting the burden on the workmen was held to
be fallacious is the inevitable conclusion.202.

165. Mahabir Singh v Rohini Ramanadhwaj Prasad Singh, (1933) 35 Bom LR 500 (PC).
166. Mayen v Alston, (1893) 16 Mad 238, 245.
167. Krishan Kumar v UOI, AIR 1959 SC 1390 : 1959 Cr LJ 1508 .
168. Maganbhai v Maniben, AIR 1985 Guj 187 .
169. Shah Guman Mal v AP, AIR 1980 SC 793 : 1980 Cr LJ 557 ; Labhchand v Maharashtra, AIR

1975 SC 182 : 1975 Cr LJ 246 ; Collector of Customs v D Bhoormul, AIR 1974 SC 859 : 1975 Cr LJ
545 . Where goods are seized as a result of search or seizure, within or outside powers, the
burden of showing that the possession was innocent would be upon the accused. State of
Maharashtra v Natwarlal Damodardas Soni, (1980) 2 SCR 340 : 1980 Cr LJ 429 : AIR 1980 SC 593
.
170. State of TN v Radhakrishnan, 1989 Cr LJ 1161 (Mad).
171. Polestar Electronics P Ltd v Additional CST, 1978 Tax LR 1907 .
172. State of AP v B Prakash, AIR 1976 SC 1845 : 1976 Cr LJ 1387 .
173. State of TN v Arunachalam, 1992 Cr LJ 3930 (Mad).
174. Razik Ram v JS Chauhan, AIR 1975 SC 667 : (1975) 4 SCR 769 , per Sarkaria J at 668.
175. Gurbaksh Singh v Gurdial Singh, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1392 PC.
176. Provincial Govt, Central Provinces and Berar v Champalal, (1946) Nag 504; Gullegar Setty v

State of Mysore, (1953) Mys 298.
177. King-Emperor v U Damapala, (1936) 14 Ran 666 FB; Shewaram v Crown, (1940) Kar 249 ;

Enamul Huq, (1951) 1 Cal 204 .
178. Crown v Santa Singh, (1945) 26 Lah 137.
179. Narayan v Executive Oﬃcer, C.P Board, AIR 1965 Ker 73 . See also Re Naina Mohamed, AIR

1960 Mad 218 which was referred with approval in State of Rajasthan v Kashi Ram, AIR 2007 SC
144 : (2006) 12 SCC 254 . Further referred with approval in Sathya Narayanan v State, (2012) 12
SCC 627 .
180. Jethalal v State of Gujarat, AIR 1968 Guj 163 .
181. Tulshiram Sahadu Suryawanshi v State of Maharashtra, (2012) 10 SCC 373 .
182. Prithipal Singh v State of Punjab, (2012) 1 SCC 10 .
183. K Veeraswami v UOI, (1991) 3 SCC 655 : 1991 SCC (Cr) 734. A Jayaram v State of AP, AIR

1995 SC 2128 : 1995 Cr LJ 3663 . prosecution proved that the fertilisers were not transported by
dealers as alleged by them. Burden was accordingly upon dealers to show the mode of
transport which was different from that mentioned in their bills.
184. Ng Chun Pui v Lec Chuen Tat, The Times, May 25, 1988 PC; 1988 CLY 1582.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
185. Sayed Akbar v State of Karnataka, AIR 1979 SC 1848 : 1979 Cr LJ 1374 .
186. Indore Municipal Corpn. v Caltex (India) Ltd, AIR 1991 SC 454 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 707 .
187. State of Kerala v CK Bharathan (Dr), 1989 Cr LJ 2025 (Ker).
188. Ram Gulam Chaudhury v State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 4632 : AIR 2001 SC 2842 .
189. Chandran v State of Kerala, (2011) 5 SCC 161 .
190. Amarjit Singh v State of Punjab, 1989 Cr LJ (NOC) 13 (P&H). Compare with Trilochan Panika

v State of Orissa, 1989 Cr LJ (NOC) 168 (Ori), where the prosecution was able to prove nothing
more than this that the accused and deceased were last seen together and the special burden
under section 106 did not arise.
191. Dalip Singh v State of Haryana, 1993 Supp. (3) SCC 336 , 341 : 1943 SCC (Cri) 1005 : AIR

1993 SC 2119 : 1993 Cr LJ 2092 .
192. Munshi Singh Gautam v State of MP, AIR 2005 SC 402 : (2005) 9 SCC 631 : (2005) Cr LJ

320 , court found evidence to convict the guilty oﬃcer.
193. Anil Kumar v Laxmi Devi, AIR 1994 NOC 61 (Raj).
194. Vimla v Veerasamy, (1991) 2 SCC 375 : (1991) 2 Ker LJ 162 : (1991) 1 Guj LH 380.
195. Sukhanand v IV Additional District Judge, Bulandshahr, AIR 1994 All 59 .
196. Lalrinvenga v State of Mizoram, (2011) 13 SCC 190 .
197. Vijayee Singh v State of UP, (1990) 3 SCC 190 : AIR 1990 SC 1459 : 1990 Cr LJ 1510 .
198. Kiriti Pal v State of WB, (2015) 11 SCC 178 , paras 16 and 17.
199. Ashok v State of Maharashtra, (2015) 4 SCC 393 (para 12), relying on Rohtash Kumar v

State of Haryana, (2013) 14 SCC 434 and Kanhaiya Lal v State of Rajasthan, (2014) 4 SCC 715 .
See also Paramasivam v State, (2015) 13 SCC 300 , para 35. Time gap not so small as to draw
inference against accused, Nizam v State of Rajasthan, (2016) 1 SCC 550 , para 17. See also
Rambraksh v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2016 SC 2381 , para 10.
200. Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6

SCC 1 .
201. Bimla Devi v Himachal Road Transport Corp, AIR 2009 SC 2819 : (2009) 13 SCC 530 .
202. Amar Chakravarty v Maruti Suzuki (I) Ltd, (2010) 14 SCC 471 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 107] Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive within
thirty years.—
When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was alive
within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who aﬃrms
it.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 108] Burden of proving that a person is alive who has not been heard of for
seven years.—
203.[Provided that when] the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is

proved that he has not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally
have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is 204.
[shifted to] the person who aﬃrms it.

COMMENT
Sections 107 and 108 must be read together because the latter is only a proviso to the
rule contained in the former, and both constitute one rule when so read together.205.
There is no presumption in law that a person was alive for seven years from the time
when he was last heard of. These sections deal with the procedure to be followed when
a question is raised before a court, as to whether a person is alive or dead, but do not
lay down any presumption as to how long a man was alive or at what time he died.
Assuming that the court could make a presumption that a person was alive for seven
years after he was last heard of, it depends on the circumstances of each case,
whether the court could draw such a presumption or not.206.

[s 108.1] Presumption of survivorship—Burden of proving death [Section 107].
—
This section provides that if it appears that a person, whose present existence is in
question, was alive within 30 years, and nothing whatever appears to suggest the
probability of his being dead, the court is bound to regard the fact of his still being alive
as proved. Dealing with the facts of a case the Supreme Court observed that in view of
the fact that Sardul Singh was alive on 24 May 1960, it shall be presumed that he was
not dead on 24 May 1970. The appellant has alleged that Sardul Singh was dead on
that date. The onus to prove that fact shall be on him.207. But as soon as anything
appears which suggests the probability of his being dead, the presumption disappears,
and the question has to be determined on the balance of proof.208.
The presumption is not a very strong one. It may be rebutted by slight evidence to the
contrary, for example, seven years' absence. The court may not act upon it until positive
proof of the person being still alive is offered.

[s 108.2] Presumption of death [Section 108].—
If a person has not been heard of for seven years, there is a presumption of law that he
is dead,209. and the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the other side.210.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
But at what time within that time he died is not a matter of presumption, but of
evidence, and the onus of proving that the death took place at any particular time
within the seven years lies upon the person who claims a right to the establishment of
which that fact is essential.211. The presumption of death does not extend to the date
of death.212.
The exact date of death after the expiry of 7 year period is not a matter of inference.
This is a matter of evidence. Onus of proof lies on the person who claims a right which
arises consequent upon death.213.
Where only a period of 4½ years had elapsed since the mother of the missing person
registering an FIR alleging abduction of her missing son, the Supreme Court declined to
accept the presumption drawn by High Court against police.214.
The earliest date to which the death can be presumed can only be the date when the
suit to claim that right is ﬁled. It cannot have a further retrospective effect.215. Where a
suit was ﬁled exactly after the expiry of seven years, the court said that without proof
of the fact that death occurred before the enforcement of the 1937 Act, rights under
the Act could not be acquired.216. The Supreme Court observed in a case before it217.
that the presumption about the death of Sardul Singh, even if raised, would be
restricted to the date of the ﬁling of the petition. The court cited the Privy Council
decision to the effect that "there is only one presumption, and that is that when these
suits were instituted in 1916 Bhagwan Gir was no longer alive. There is no presumption
at all as to the time he died. That, like any other fact, is a matter of proof."218. Where the
plaintiff respondent was kidnapped during the pendency of appeal and could not be
traced, the High Court exercising its inherent powers allowed his wife and children to
ﬁle the second appeal even before the lapse of seven years to meet the ends of
justice.219. The court can presume the date of death of an unheard person on the basis
of attending circumstances and the reliable material on record of a case.220.
The presumption of Muhammadan Law that, when a person has disappeared and has
not been heard of for a certain number of years, he is dead, and further that, as regards
property coming to him by inheritance, he must be deemed to have died at the date of
his disappearance, is a rule of evidence only and is superseded by this section.221. The
rule of Muhammadan Law that a missing person is to be regarded as alive till the expiry
of 90 years from the date of his birth is overruled by this section.222. So is the rule of
Hindu Law that 12 years must elapse before an absent person, of whom nothing has
been heard during this period, can be presumed to be dead.
Where a woman obtained certiﬁcate of widowhood on the completion of seven years of
the absence of her husband and obtained admission to MBBS course on that basis, it
was held that the certiﬁcate was liable to be cancelled on her husband turning out to be
alive.223.
Where the certiﬁcate of death was taken on proving the completion of the statutory
period and the Life Insurance claim lodged, it was held that if the insurer contended
that the insured was still alive he would have to prove that fact. The fact that premiums
were kept up for some years after disappearance was considered to be not
material.224.

[s 108.3] Simultaneous death.—
When two individuals perish in a common calamity (e.g. shipwreck, train collision, air
crash, earthquake etc.) and the question arises who died ﬁrst, in the absence of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
evidence on the point, there is no presumption in law that the younger survived the
elder. Such a question is always from ﬁrst to last a pure question of fact, the onus
probandi lying on the party who asserts the aﬃrmative.225. See also section 21 of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956, in the case of simultaneous death.

[s 108.4] CASES.—Division of estate among heirs.—
A person was not heard of more than 18–20 years. Though the defendant claimed that
he was writing letters to him, he could not produce any of such letters. The court said
that presumption of his death could be drawn. The distribution of his property among
his brothers and sisters was held to be permissible.226. Whereabouts of an account
holder in a bank were not known for years. His wife and children ﬁled a writ petition for
an order permitting to withdraw the money from the account and also to collect the
contents of the locker, they being not able to ﬁle a case for succession certiﬁcate. The
court said that they could not be denied such relief. They were allowed to collect their
inheritance as being heirs of the ﬁrst degree.227.

[s 108.4.1] Joining as party to proceeding.—
In a tenancy proceeding, an application was made by the mother of the tenant for her
addition as a party on the ground that her son was not heard of for more than 13 years
and should be presumed to be dead. The court said that section 108 does not provide
any procedure to be followed, hence a separate suit for getting the declaration that the
original tenant was dead was not necessary.228.

203. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, sec. 9, for "When".
204. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, sec. 9, for "on".
205. State of Punjab v Bachan Singh, (1956) Pun 1232.
206. Veeramma v Chenna Reddi, (1021) 37 Mad 440. Saroop Singh v Banto, AIR 2005 SC 4407 :

(2005) 8 SCC 330 , there is no presumption that such person died seven years ago.
207. Surjit Kaur v Jhujhar Singh, AIR 1980 SC 274 . LIC of India v Anuradha, AIR 2004 SC 2070 :

(2004) 10 SCC 131 : (2004) 2 KLT 351 , restating the import of the two provisions. Presumption
arises on the completion of seven years up to the last day and not at any time earlier.
Presumption arises only when the court, tribunal or when any other authority is called upon to
decide whether a particular person was alive or dead. There is no presumption as to time of
death.
208. Markby, 83.
209. Ramrati Kuer v Dwarka Prasad, AIR 1967 SC 1134 .
210. HJ Bhagat v LI Corp, AIR 1965 Mad 440 : (1965) 2 Mad LJ 185; to the same effect, Shailesh

N Shah v Regional Commr., Employees' Provident Fund, (1993) 1 Mad LJ 328, followed in
Nagalakshmi v Thirugnansambhandan, AIR 1995 Mad 120 , burden of proof in a suit for partition.
211. Rango v Mudiyeppa, (1898) 23 Bom 296, 306; Narayan v Shriniwas, (1905) 8 Bom LR 226 ;

Jayawant Jivanrao v Ramachandra Narayan, (1915) 40 Bom 239 : 18 Bom LR 14; Gopal Bhimji v

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Manaji Ganuji, (1922) 47 Bom 451 : 25 Bom LR 134; Lalchand Marwari v Mahanth Ramrup Gir,
(1925) 5 Pat 312 : 28 Bom LR 855 : 53 IA 24; Ganesh Das Aurora, Re, (1926) 54 Cal 186 ; Dharup
Nath v Govind Saran, (1886) 8 All 614 ; Fani Bhushan Banerji v Surjya Kanta Roy Chowdhry, (1907)
35 Cal 25 ; Narki v Lal Sahu, (1909) 37 Cal 103 ; Basharat v Najib Khan, (1917) PR No. 38 of 1918
(Civil); Tirathpathi v Ranjit Singh, (1930) 6 Luck 407 ; Punjab v Natha, (1931) 12 Lah 718 (FB)
overruling Tani v Rikhi Ram, (1920) 1 Lah 554; Rowther Abdul Rahiman v Narayana Pillai, (1957)
Ker 53 ; Re V Seshi Ammal, AIR 1958 Mad 463 ; Mukunda Behera v Subarna Bewa, AIR 1962 Ori 3 ;
Parikhit Muduli v Champa Dei, AIR 1967 Ori 70 .
212. Ganesh Bux Singh Thakur v Mohammad, (1944) 19 Luck 581 ; Venkata Subba Rao v G Subba

Rao, AIR 1964 AP 326 ; Narayan Pillai v Velayuthan, AIR 1963 Mad 385 ; AV Narayana Vadhyar v
Venkateswara, AIR 1971 Ker 85 (FB). See also N Jayalakshmi Ammal v R. Gopala Pathar, AIR
1995 SC 995 : 1995 Supp (1) SCC 27 .
213. Hemant Kishore v Brij Raj Kishore, AIR 1998 All 328 . In this case even presumption of

death could not be raised because while the legal heirs testiﬁed to no whereabouts for seven
years, the father testiﬁed about his whereabouts Barn v Tej Pal, AIR 1998 All 230 here also no
presumption could be raised because the requirement of 7 year unheard absence was not
proved. Adoption deed, which was sought to be challenged for that reason, was not set aside.
214. Sahdeo v State of UP, (2010) 3 SCC 705 .
215. Jeshankar v Bai Divali, (1919) 22 Bom LR 771 .
216. R. Gopala Pathar v N Jayalakshmi Ammal, AIR 1984 Mad 340 . An appeal before the

Supreme Court, Jayalakshmi Ammal N v Gopala Pathar, AIR 1995 SC 995 : 1995 AIR SCW 983.
217. Surjit Kaur v Jhujhar Singh, AIR 1980 SC 274 .
218. Lal Chand v Ramrup Gir, AIR 1926 PC 6 . See also Mathru v Rami, AIR 1986 HP 6 ,

presumption of death for succession. Followed in Eliamma Simon v Seven Seas Transportation
Ltd, AIR 2002 Ker 219 , date of death has to be proved in the same manner as any other fact is
proved. The section does not automatically give rise to the presumption as to the exact date of
death of the missing person. The Court cannot presume the date of death as the date that
immediately followed the lapse of seven years from the date of his disappearance. Other cases
on the same point, Bhargavi Ammal v Bhaskara Pillai, (1988) 2 Ker LT 537 ; Appula Vadhyar v
Venkateswara Vadhyar, AIR 1971 Ker 85 : 1970 Ker LT 976 (FB); Darshan Singh v Gujjar Singh, AIR
2002 SC 606 , there is no presumption of exact time of death. The plaintiff obtained succession
to the estate of one J, the Court said that burden was upon him to show the date of death. The
person in question who was not heard of for more than 7 years, he could not be presumed to be
dead only on the date on which the suit was ﬁled. The provisions of sections 107 and 108 were
also. considered by the Supreme Court in Sri Vidya Mandir Education Society v Malleswaram
Sangeetha Sabha, AIR 1994 SC 775 : 1994 AIR SCW 82 : 1995 Supp. 1 SCC 27.
219. Chanda Devi v Shrinath Sharma, AIR 1993 Pat 105 .
220. Subhash Ramchandra Wadekar v UOI, AIR 1993 Bom 64 , dissenting from Ram Kali v Narain

Singh, AIR 1934 Oudh 298 . The Court referred to Ram Singh v Board of Revenue, UP, Allahabad,
AIR 1964 All 310 : 1993 All JJ 851.
221. Mairaj Fatma v Abdul Wahid, (1921) 43 All 673 ; Azizul Hasan v Mohammad Faruq, (1933) 9

Luck 401 .
222. Mazhar Ali v Budh Singh, (1884) 7 All 297 (FB).
223. N Prem Ananthi v Tahsildar, Coimbatore, AIR 1989 Mad 248 .
224. Bhanumati Dayaram Mhatri v LIC, AIR 2008 Bom 196 .
225. Agha Mir Ahmad v Mudassir Shah, (1944) 71 IA 171 .
226. Kalyan Kumar Bhattacharjee v Pratibha Chakraborty, AIR 2010 NOC 646 (Gau).
227. Pooja V Raichandani v State Bank of India, AIR 2009 NOC 685 (Guj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
228. Panchanan Chandra v Kamala Biswas, AIR 2000 NOC 19 (Cal) : 2000 AIHC 566 . Chami

Narayanan v VR Krishna Iyer, AIR 1998 Ker 365 , impleading of legal heirs after seven years' of
absence, civil death taken place on the expiry of the period and not on the last breath.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 109] Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and
tenant, principal and agent.—
When the question is whether persons are partners, [s 109.2] landlord and tenant, [s
109.3] or principal and agent, [s 109.4] and it has been shown that they have been acting

as such, the burden of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each
other in those relationships respectively, is on the person who aﬃrms it.

COMMENT
[s 109.1] Principle.—
When the existence of a personal relationship, or a state of things, is once established
by proof, the law presumes that the relationship or state of things continues to exist as
before, till the contrary is shown, or till a different presumption is raised, from the
nature of the subject in question. A partnership, tenancy, or agency, once shown to
exist, is presumed to continue, till it is proved to have been dissolved.

[s 109.2] "Partners".—
Partnership once shown to exist is presumed to continue until the contrary is
proved.229.
After a ﬁrm is dissolved, the partners continue to be liable to third parties for any act
done which would have been an act of the ﬁrm if done before the dissolution, until
public notice of dissolution is given (section 45, Indian Partnership Act, 1932).

[s 109.3] "Landlord and tenant".—
Where the relationship of landlord and tenant is admitted or proved to exist it will be
presumed to continue until it is shown by aﬃrmative proof that it has ceased to exist.
Mere non-payment of rent, though for many years, is not suﬃcient to show that such
relationship has ceased.230. The mere entry in the record of tenancy rights Register
does not by itself confer any right on a person as a cultivating tenant.231.

[s 190.4] "Principal and agent".—
Where an authority to do an act is once shown to exist, it is presumed to continue until
the contrary is proved. Sections 182–238 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, deal with the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
relationship of principal and agent. Section 206 provides that a reasonable notice must
be given of revocation or renunciation of agency. Section 208 provides when the
authority of an agent is terminated.

229. Liladhar Ratanlal v Holkarmal, (1958) 60 Bom LR 203 .
230. Rungo Lall Mundul v Abdool Guffoor, (1878) 4 Cal 314 ; The British India Steam Navigation

Co v Hajee Mahomed Esack and Co, (1881) 3 Mad 107; Attar Singh v Ramditta, (1881) PR No. 110
of 1881 (Civil); Harish Chandra v Ghisa Ram, AIR 1981 SC 695 : (1981) 1 SCC 431 , recorded in
Jamabandi as a tenant, presumption. Raees Ahmed v Shrigopal Prakash, AIR 2002 NOC 178
(Raj) : 2002 AIHC 2152 , denial of landlordship, burden on the tenant. The right of the landlord
was otherwise also suﬃciently proved.
231. JM Jeyachandran Samuel v GSS Masilamani, AIR 2007 NOC 1853 (Mad).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 110] Burden of proof as to ownership.—
When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is shown to
be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person who
aﬃrms that he is not the owner.

COMMENT
This section gives effect to the principle that possession is prima facie evidence of
complete title; anyone who intends to oust the possessor must establish a right to do
so.232. This is to be presumed from lawful possession until the want of title or a better
title is proved.233.
Longer the possession, stronger is the presumption. This observation occurs in a
judgment of the Supreme Court: A presumption of an origin in lawful title can be
drawn… in order to support possessory rights, long and quietly enjoyed, where no actual
proof of title is forthcoming. It is not a mere branch of the law of evidence. It is
resorted to because of the failure of actual evidence. The matter is one of presumption
based upon the policy of law. A presumption should be allowed to ﬁll in gaps disclosed
in the evidence. The presumption, not to supplement but to contradict the evidence
would be out of place. It is not a presumption to be capriciously made nor is it one
which a certain class of possessor is entitled to, de jure." In a case such as the one in
question where it was necessary to indicate what particular kind of lawful title was
being presumed, the court must be satisﬁed that such a title was in its nature
practicable and reasonably capable of being presumed without doing violence to the
probabilities of the case. It is the completion of a right to which circumstances clearly
point where time had obliterated any record of the original commencement. The longer
the period within which and the remoter the time when ﬁrst a grant might be reasonably
supposed to have occurred the less force there is in an objection that the grant could
not have been lawful.234.
The principle of the section does not apply where the possession has been obtained by
fraud or force. The term "possession" in this section is to be understood as opposed to
juridical possession and to denote actual present possession.
A person in possession of land without title has an interest in the property which is
heritable and good against all the world except the true owner, an interest which unless
and until the true owner interferes, is capable of being disposed of by deed or will, or by
execution sale, just in the same way as it could be dealt with if the title were
unimpeachable.235.
Possession is prima facie proof of ownership; it is so, because it is the sum of acts of
ownership. This applies both to prior and to present possession. Possession has a twofold value; it is evidence of ownership, and is itself the foundation of a right to
possession. To recover possession a plaintiff must show a better right in himself to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
possession than is in the defendant. He may, within the period prescribed by the
Limitation Act, 1963, succeed in a case where he is dispossessed, either by
establishing title or by showing a prior legal possession entitling him to be restored to
the same.236.
There is a conﬂict of opinion between the High Courts as to whether a plaintiff in a suit
for possession of immovable property, other than a suit under section 9 of the Speciﬁc
Relief Act (I of 1877), is entitled to succeed merely upon proof of previous possession
and dispossession by the defendant within 12 years prior to the suit, or whether he is
bound to prove title.
A Full Bench of the Bombay High Court has held that possession is a good title against
all persons except the rightful owner, and entitles the possessor to maintain ejectment
against any person other than such owner who dispossesses him.237. A person,
although suing more than six months after the date of dispossession and without
resorting to a possessory suit,238. is entitled to rely on the possession previous to his
dispossession as against a person who has no title.239. The view of the Bombay High
Court is in accordance with the English law. The effect of the Bombay cases is that
when there is wrongful ouster of the person in possession, the person who comes into
Court to oust such tort-feasor need not prove more than his possession of the land in
dispute, and that he had been ousted by the defendant, and that the plaintiff's prior
possession was prima facie evidence of his title. According to this view, it is not
necessary to show title in the absence of any title shown by the defendant. The word
"possession" denotes actual present possession. In Hanmantrav v The Secretary of
State for India240. Jenkins CJ, said:
To say that a possession is not within the meaning of section 110, unless it is a possession
according to title, would be to render that section meaningless, and to introduce a doctrine
subversive of the established principles of property law.

But Ranade J, struck a different note: Under section 110, possession, when long and
continued up to a recent date, leads to a presumption of title. Where the conﬂict is
between mere previous possession and recent actual possession, the fact of previous
possession will not entitle plaintiff to a decree except in suits under section 9, Act I of
1877, brought within six months from dispossession. Where this period is exceeded
before a suit is brought, and is less than the limitation law requires, he must make out a
prima facie title... And section 110 [Evidence Act] refers to the presumption to be made
of ownership based on the circumstance of such possession, and allows the plaintiff
with such prima facie title to claim a decree where no superior title is proved on the
other side. It is in reference to such cases that it has been held that possession is
evidence of title, and the plaintiff who proves such possession and subsequent
disturbance, shifts the burden of proof on the defendant when the prima facie title is
made out...Where no such title is made out, and plaintiff comes to the court and asks
for a declaratory decree, he cannot obtain that decree on the mere ground that he was
in possession and the defendant had no title. Mere wrongful possession is insuﬃcient
to shift the burden of proof.241. This means that possession must be of such a
character as leads to a presumption of title.242.
A suit on a possessory title must be distinguished from a suit ﬁled under section 6 of
the Speciﬁc Relief Act, 1963, within six months of dispossession. The latter type of suit
cannot be resisted on the ground of title, so that the suit can be maintained even
against a true owner if he has dispossessed the plaintiff otherwise than in due course
of law. A suit on possession title, on the other hand, can be ﬁled within 12 years of
dispossession (Article 64 of the Limitation Act, 1963) and the plaintiff can maintain it
against any person who does not have a better title.243.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The Calcutta High Court held that mere previous possession will not entitle a plaintiff
to a decree for the recovery of possession except in a suit under section 9 of the old
Speciﬁc Relief Act.244. In a suit to recover possession brought more than six months
after the date of dispossession, the plaintiff must prove title, and mere previous
possession for any period short of the statutory period of 12 years cannot be suﬃcient
for the purpose.245. Thus, in cases other than possessory suits under the Speciﬁc
Relief Act the plaintiff must show title or such adverse possession as confers a title
under the Limitation Act.
To succeed on the plea of adverse possession, the plaintiff should disclose and prove
as to when the adverse possession started and when it was perfected.246.
The Madras High Court held that, as against a wrong-doer, prior possession of the
plaintiff in an action of ejectment was a suﬃcient title, even if the suit be brought more
than six months after the act of dispossession complained of, and the wrong-doer
could not successfully resist the suit by showing that the title and right to possession
were in a third person. It was immaterial however short or recent the plaintiff's
possession was.247.
The Allahabad High Court held that section 9 of the old Speciﬁc Relief Act did not
debar a person who had been ousted by a trespasser from the possession of
immovable property to which he had merely a possessory title, from bringing a suit in
ejectment on his possessory title after the lapse of six months from the date of his
dispossession.248.
The Patna High Court held that a plaintiff who had omitted to sue under section 9 of
the old Speciﬁc Relief Act, when ﬁrst dispossessed, was not debarred from relying, in a
suit for ejectment, on this section. As soon as he proved that the defendant had
dispossessed him the onus was thrown upon the latter to prove his title.249.
The Privy Council laid down in a case in which the plaintiff was a purchaser in
possession and the defendant had no title at all, that lawful possession of land is
suﬃcient evidence of right as owner, as against a person who has no title whatever,
and who is a mere trespasser. The former can obtain a declaratory decree and an
injunction restraining the wrong-doer.250. In this case the plaintiff was in possession
when he brought his suit and he asked for a decree declaring his right, and an
injunction restraining the defendant from disturbing his possession.
Proof of the fact of possession varies with the nature of the property which is under the
scrutiny of the court. It can be proved by credible oral evidence as well.251.

[s 110.1] Chose-in-action.—
In the context of the word "anything", it has been held that a chose-in-action or
actionable claim (bends in this case) is not a thing which is capable of being
possessed. The reversal of burden of proof does not apply to the case of a chose-inaction.252.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
232. Churharmal v CIT, AIR 1988 SC 1384 : 1988 Tax LR 1205 : (1988) 172 ITR 250 : (1988) 3

SCC 588 ; Ramchandra Apaji v Balaji Bhaurav, (1884) 9 Bom 137; Hassan v Fazal Wahid, (1882)
PR No. 121 of 1882 (Civil); Pir Baksh v Jhanda Mal, (1882) PR No. 157 of 1882 (Civil); Nihal
Chand v Teju, (1883) PR No. 74 of 1883 (Civil); Nihal Singh v Jiwanda, (1888) PR No. 116 of 1888
(Civil); Ram Chand v Bhana Mal, (1900) PR No. 71 of 1900 (Civil); U Nyo v Ma Shwe Meik, (1899)
PJLB 514; Ma Ba v Maung Kun, (1889) SJLB 474; Maung Ya Baing v Ma Kyin Ya, (1895) 2 UBR
(1892-96) 234; Ma Hla Gywe v Ma Thaik, (1896) 2 UBR (1892-96) 377; Maung Thit v Maung Kin,
(1898) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 412; Maung Nwe v Maung Po Gyi, (1897) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 416;
Maung Lu Pe v Maung Lu Gale, (1899) 2 UBR (1897-1901) 418; Ma Ngwe Zan v Mi Shwe Taik,
(1910) 1 UBR (1910-1913) 61.
233. Jadh Singh v Sundar Singh, (1882) PR No. 122 of 1882 (Civil).
234. Vatticherukuru Village Panchayat v Nori Venkatarama Deekshithulu, 1991 Supp (2) SCC 228 .
235. Gobind Prasad v Mohan Lal, (1901) 24 All 157 .
236. Hari v Dhondi, (1905) 8 Bom LR 96 ; Phool Chand v Amrit Lal, AIR 1980 P&H 122, party

claiming under a will, unable to prove it. State of Gujarat v Allauddin Babumiya Shaikh, AIR 1990
SC 2220 , the plaintiff in possession of the land over 60 years period to the institution of the
proceedings.
237.

Pemraj Bhavaniram v Narayan Shivaram Khisti, (1882) 6 Bom 215 (FB); Ramchandra

Narayan v Narayan Mahadev, (1886) 11 Bom 216; Krishnacharya v Lingawa, (1895) 20 Bom 270;
Ambalal v The Secretary of State, (1899) 1 Bom LR 45 ; Basapa v Basapa, (1900) 2 Bom LR 410 ;
Fatan v Emad, (1901) 3 Bom LR 246 .
238. Speciﬁc Relief Act, section 9.
239. Krishnarav Yashwant v Vasudev Apaji Ghotikar, (1884) 8 Bom 371; Pemraj Bhavaniram v

Narayan Shivaram Khisti, (1882) 6 Bom 215 (FB) followed, and Dadabhai Narsidas v The SubCollector of Broach, (1870) 7 BHC (ACJ) 82, dissented from; Wa Tha v Pe Hlaw, (1905) 3 LBR 27.
240. Hanmantrav v The Secretary of State for India, (1900) 25 Bom 287, 290 : 2 Bom LR 1111,

1114; Ali v Pachubibi (1903) 5 Bom LR 264 ; Rajaram v Nanchand, (1903) 5 Bom LR 225 , 227.
241. Hanmantrav v The Secretary of State for India, (1900) 25 Bom 287, 303 : 2 Bom LR 1111,

1126; Achut v Shivajirao, (1936) 39 Bom LR 224 . In an ejectment suit the defendant, though a
trespasser, is entitled to require the plaintiff who seeks to eject him to prove that he has a
superior title: Kalu v Barsu, (1894) 19 Bom 803. Plaintiff in an action of ejectment must recover
by the strength of his own title, not the weakness of his adversary's: Jowala Buksh v Dharum
Singh, (1866) 10 Moo Ind App 511 ; Thakur Basant Singh v Mahabir Pershad, (1913) 15 Bom LR
525 , 530 : 40 IA 86 : 35 All 273; Dharani Kanta v Gabar Ali, (1912) 15 Bom LR 445 (PC);
Ramchandra v Vinayak, (1914) 16 Bom LR 863 , 900 : 41 IA 290: 42 Cal 384; Bapuji v Bhagvant,
(1918) 20 Bom LR 346 : 42 Bom 357. The plaintiff must establish such title as carries a present
right to possession: Sitaram v Sadhu, (1913) 16 Bom LR 132 : 38 Bom 240.
242. Vasta v Secretary of State for India, (1920) 45 Bom 789 : 23 Bom LR 238.
243. Mariumbi Aslamkhan v Vithoba, (1969) 72 Bom LR 142 .
244. Ertaza Hossein v Bany Mistry, (1882) 9 Cal 130 ; Debi Churn Boido v Issur Chunder Manjee,

(1882) 9 Cal 39 ; Purmeshur Chowdhry v Brijo Lall Chowdhry, (1889) 17 Cal 256 .
245. Nisa Chand Gaita v Kanchiram Bagani, (1899) 26 Cal 579 , 584; Shama Churn Ray v Abdul

Kabeer, (1898) 3 Cal WN 158. Doubted in Shyama Charan Ray v Surya Kanta Acharya, (1910) 15
Cal WN 163; Manik Borai v Bani Charan Mandal, (1910) 13 Cal LJ 649 ; and Adhar Chandra Pal v
Dibakar Bhuyan, (1913) 41 Cal 394 . Approved in Naba Kishore Tilakdas v Paro Bewa, (1922) 50
Cal 23 .
246. State of MP v Nomi Singh, (2015) 14 SCC 450 , para 13.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
247. Narayana Row v Dharmachar, (1902) 26 Mad 514. See Krishna Aiyar v The Secretary of State

for India, (1909) 33 Mad 173.
248. Wali Ahmad Khan v Ajudhia Kandu, (1891) 13 All 537 . See Lachho v Har Sahai, (1887) 12 All

46 ; Gobind Prasad v Mohan Lal, (1901) 24 All 157 .
249. Haradhan Mondal Modak v Iswar Das Marwari, (1916) 2 PLJ 61 ; Bodha Ganderi v Ashloke

Singh, (1926) 5 Pat 765.
250. Ismail Ariff v Mahomed Ghouse, (1893) 20 IA 99 : 20 Cal 834; Sundar v Parbati, (1889) 12 All

51 : 16 IA 186.
251. Kantilal v Shanti Devi, AIR 1997 Raj 230 .
252. Standard Chartered Bank v Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd, (2006) 6 SCC 94 : AIR 2006

SC 3626 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 111] Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of
active conﬁdence.—
Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of
whom stands to the other in a position of active conﬁdence, [s 111.2] the burden of
proving the good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active
conﬁdence.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an attorney is in question in a suit brought by
the client. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the attorney.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit
brought by the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the
father.

COMMENT
[s 111.1] Principle.—
The principle of the rule embodied in this section which was called "the great rule of the
Court" is "he who bargains in a matter of advantage with a person placing conﬁdence in
him is bound to show, that a reasonable use has been made of that conﬁdence; a rule
applying to trustees, attorneys, or anyone else."253. Where a ﬁduciary or quasi-ﬁduciary
relationship exists, the burden of sustaining a transaction between the parties rests
with the party who stands in such relation and is beneﬁtted by it. The plaintiff having
been entirely in the hands of the defendant, would be destitute of the means—of
proving aﬃrmatively the mala ﬁdes of the transaction; whilst the defendant in such a
transaction may fairly be subjected to the duty not only of dealing honestly but of
preserving clear evidence that he has done so.254. In such cases it is seldom, if ever,
possible to prove speciﬁc acts of deception, or of exercise of authority amounting to
moral coercion. Yet the risk of abuse is obviously great. The law therefore reverses its
usual rule of evidence in dealings between man and man. Commonly we do not
presume, without speciﬁc indications, that there is anything contrary to good faith in
transactions which on the face of them are regular...But this is the rule as between
equals, persons who are capable of dealing with one another, as the accustomed
forensic phrase goes, "at arm's length." When one party habitually looks up to the other
and is guided by him, he can no longer be supposed capable, without special
precautions, of exercising that independent judgment which is requisite for his consent
to be free.255. A person who claims to have acted under a bona ﬁde belief must himself
appear as a witness to establish his claim. The version of other persons in that respect
may not be suﬃcient.256.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 111.2] "Active conﬁdence".—
These words indicate that the relationship between the parties must be such that one
is bound to protect the interests of the other. This had been held to apply to a trustee,
an executor, an administrator, a guardian, an agent, a minister of religion, a medical
attendant, an auctioneer, and attorney. Persons standing in a conﬁdential relation
towards others cannot entitle themselves to hold beneﬁts which those others may have
conferred upon them unless they can show to the satisfaction of the court that the
person by whom the beneﬁts have been conferred had competent and independent
advice in conferring them.257.

[s 111.3] Pardanashin ladies.—
In the case of deeds and powers executed by pardanashin ladies, it is requisite, that
those who rely upon them should satisfy the court that they had been explained to, and
understood by those who executed them.258.
In the case of a pardanashin lady the law throws around her a special cloak of
protection. It demands that the burden of proof shall in such a case rest not with those
who attack, but with those who found upon a deed executed by her, and the proof must
go so far as to show aﬃrmatively and conclusively that the deed was not only
executed, but was explained to and was really understood by her.259. Even in cases
where a pardanashin lady had independent advice the court will scrutinize the
transaction very closely to see that it is a fair one.260. Her free and intelligent consent
to a transaction is necessary.261. The rule of special protection of a pardanashin, old
and illiterate woman should not be applied in each and every case but should be
applied in the light of the facts of each case.262. The expression "pardanashin" is not to
be confused with a lady observing pardah. The word has special legal signiﬁcance and
means one who is unable to understand the transaction by virtue of the manner in
which she has been brought up.263.
A pardanashin lady accused will not be exempted from personal attendance at Court as
a matter of right. But at the same time the court must reasonably use the discretion of
granting such exemption under section 205 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
after due consideration of all the attending circumstances including the social status,
custom and practice of the accused as well as the necessity of her personal presence
having regard to the nature of the offence and the stage of the trial. No strict test as to
the pardanashin status can be laid down, and non-observance of rigidity with regard to
pardah, e.g. attending social and religious functions or going to bathe in the river, etc.
with veils on would not take the accused out of that category. The court is to be guided
by the prevailing habits and customs.264. An illiterate and rustic village woman is
entitled to the same beneﬁts as are available to a pardanashin. An old woman suffering
from inﬁrmity, ignorance, illiteracy, mental deﬁciency, inexperience and dependence
upon others, intended to create a wakf and not a sale, heavy burden of proof lay upon
those who alleged it to be sale.265. Similar burden lay upon those who dealt with a
person suffering from apparent mental or physical incapacity.266.

[s 111.4] Blind.—
Mere signature of a blind person on the sale-deed cannot have any force. Where an
illiterate and blind woman is alleged to have executed a sale-deed, the execution of
which is denied by her, a heavy burden is laid on the purchaser to prove that she not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
only agreed to sell but she knew what was being written and the document was in
accordance with the terms of the agreement.267.
The presumption under the section cannot go beyond the relations stated therein. Any
other presumption has to be brought under section 114.268.

253. Gibson v Jeyes, (1801) 6 Ves Jun 266, followed in Nisar Ahmad Khan v Mohan Manucha :

Mohan Monucha v Nisar Ahmad Khan, (1940) 43 Bom LR 465 , 469 (PC).
254. Markby.
255. Pollock's Law of Fraud In British India, pp 63-64.
256. Jawahar Lal Wali v State of J&K, (1993) 2 SCC 381 .
257. Raghunathji v Varjiwandas, (1906) 8 Bom LR 525 : 30 Bom 578; Hoti Lal v Mussammat Ram

Piari, (1903) PR No. 77 of 1903 (Civil). Anil Rishi v Gurbaksh Singh, AIR 2006 SC 1971 : (2006) 5
SCC 558 , the relationship of active conﬁdence has to be proved in the ﬁrst place before anyone
can be put under the burden of proving his good faith. Krishna Mohan Kul v Pratima Maity, AIR
2003 SC 4351 : (2004) 9 SCC 468 , burden on the dominant party enjoying the position of active
conﬁdence to show that the gift deed was fair and made of free will.
258. Sudisht Lal v Musummat Sheobarat Koer, (1881) 8 IA 39 : 7 Cal 245; Annoda v Bhuban,

(1901) 3 Bom LR 386 : 28 IA 71 : 28 Cal 546; Shambati v Jago Bibi, (1902) 4 Bom LR 444 : 29 IA
127: 29 Cal 749; Mirza Sajjad Ali v Nawab Wazir Ali, (1912) 14 Bom LR 1055 : 39 IA 156: 34 All
455; Kali Bakhsh v Ram Gopal, (1913) 16 Bom LR 147 : 41 IA 23 : 36 All 81; Sunitabala Debi v
Dharasundari Debi, (1919) 22 Bom LR 1 : 46 IA 272: 47 Cal 175; Kamawati v Digbijai Singh, (1921)
24 Bom LR 626 : 48 IA 381 : 43 All 525; Farid-un-nisa v Mukhtar Ahmed, (1925) 28 Bom LR 193 :
52 IA 342 : 47 All 703; Ramanamma v Viranna, (1931) 33 Bom LR 960 PC; Tara Kumari v Chandra
Mauleshwar Prasad, (1931) 34 Bom LR 222 : 11 Pat 227 : 58 IA 450; Sheoparsan Singh v
Narsingh Sahai, (1932) 34 Bom LR 890 (PC); Kundan Lal v Musharraﬁ Begum, (1936) 38 Bom LR
783 : 63 IA 326 : 11 Luck 346; AV Palanivelu v Neelavathi, (1937) 39 Bom LR 720 (PC); Kharbuja
Kuer v Jangabahadur, AIR 1963 SC 1203 .
259. Bank of Khulna, Ltd v Jyoti Prokash Mitra, (1940) 42 Bom LR 1139 : 67 IA 377; Tulshiram v

Chunilal, (1940) Nag 149; Jaibunisa v Abdul Gafoor, AIR 1984 Pat 257 , a pardanashin lady
pleaded that her signature was obtained by fraud, held, heavy burden of proof lay upon the other
party.
260. Nathusa v Mohammad Siddique, (1941) Nag 418.
261. Hem Chandra Roy Choudhuri v Suradhani Debya Choudharani, (1940) 42 Bom LR 993 : 67 IA

309; Vinayak v Sk. Md. Hanif, (1953) Nag 281; Pathumma v Vadhyar Namboori, (1951) TC 320 .
262. Kulsumun-nisa v Ahmadi Begum, AIR 1972 All 219 .
263. Andhi Kuer v Rajeshwar Singh, AIR 1972 Pat 325 ; Ghulam Zubra v Habla Begum, AIR 1985

J&K 22, a lady leading public life and appearing in courts is not pardanashin.
264. Rajlakshmi Devi v The State, (1953) 1 Cal 78 .
265. Ashok Kumar v Gaon Sabha, AIR 1981 All 222 ; Narayan Mishra v Champa Dibya, AIR 1986

Ori 53 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
266. Daya Shanker v Bachi, AIR 1982 All 376 . The Court explained the meaning and scope of

"ﬁduciary relations".
267. Sivamma v Abdur Rahman, (1952) Hyd 668.
268. Surendra Pal v Saraswati, AIR 1974 SC 1999 : (1974) 2 SCC 600 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
269.[[s 111A] Presumption as to certain offences.—
(1) Where a person is accused of having committed any offence speciﬁed in sub-

section (2), in—
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment, for the

time being in force, making provision for the suppression of disorder
and restoration and maintenance of public order; or
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one month,

extensive disturbance of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a
time when ﬁrearms or explosives were used at or from that place to
attack or resist the members of any armed forces or the forces charged
with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of their
duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such
person had committed such offence.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) an offence under section 121, section 121A, section 122 or section 123

of the Indian Penal Code;
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence

under section 122 or section 123 of the Indian Penal Code.]

269. Section 111-A, inserted by the Terrorist Affected Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1984, (w.e.f.

14-7-1984).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 112] Birth during marriage conclusive proof of legitimacy.—
The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage between
his mother and any man, [s 112.2] or within two hundred and eighty days after its
dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, [s 112.3] shall be conclusive proof that he
is the legitimate son of that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the
marriage had no access to each other [s 112.4] at any time when he could have been
begotten.

COMMENT
[s 112.1] Principle.—
The section is based on the principle that when a particular relationship, such as
marriage, is shown to exist, then its continuance must prima facie be presumed.270.
Under the section the fact that any person was born—
(a) during the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or
(b) within 280 days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried,

shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man unless the parties
had no access to each other at any time when he could have been begotten.
Evidence that a child is born during wedlock is suﬃcient to establish its legitimacy, and
shifts the burden of proof to the party, seeking to establish the contrary.
According to the legislative intention and spirit behind section 112, once the validity of
marriage is proved then there is strong presumption about the legitimacy of children
born from that wedlock. The presumption can only be rebutted by strong, clear,
satisfying and conclusive evidence. The presumption cannot be displaced by mere
balance of probabilities or any circumstance creating doubt. It is well-settled principle
of law that odiosa et inhonesta non sunt in lege praesumenda (nothing odious or
dishonourable will be presumed by the law). The law presumes against vice and
immorality. In a civilised society it is imperative to presume the legitimacy of a child
born during continuation of a valid marriage and whose parents had "access" to each
other. It is undesirable to enquire into the paternity of a child whose parents "have
access" to each other. section 112 is based on presumption of public morality and
public policy.271.
The presumption under this section is a conclusive presumption of law which can be
displaced only by proof of non-access between the parties to the marriage at a time
when according to the ordinary course of nature the husband could have been the
father of the child. Access and non-access connote the existence and non-existence of
opportunities for marital intercourse. Non-access can be proved by evidence direct or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
circumstantial though the proof of non-access must be clear and satisfactory as the
presumption of legitimacy is highly favoured by law.272.
Sections 41, 112 and 113 are the only sections which deal with matters which are to be
regarded as "conclusive proof". No rule of the kind can be based on considerations of
evidence, because enquiry is altogether excluded. The basis of the rule in the ﬁrst case
(section 112) seems to be a notice that it is undesirable to enquire into the paternity of
a child whose parents "have access" to each other. This section refers to the point of
time of the birth of the child as the deciding factor and not to the time of conception of
that child; the latter point of time has to be considered only to see whether the husband
has no access to the mother.273.

[s 112.2] "During the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and
any man".—
The presumption as to paternity in this section only arises in connection with the
offspring of a married couple. The section applies to the legitimacy of the children of a
married person only.274. On the birth of a child during marriage the presumption of
legitimacy is conclusive, no matter how soon the birth occurs after the marriage.275.
There is presumption of valid marriage from the fact of living together as husband and
wife for continuous and long period and sons born to them from such marriage are
legal heirs over the property of the husband.276.
Even children born with only a gestation period of six months have been known to
survive and live. Where a child was born eight months after date of marriage there
could be no doubt that she could very well be the child of the father.277.
A person claiming as an illegitimate son must establish his alleged paternity in the
same manner as any other disputed question of relationship is established.278. The
presumption that children born of a married woman, during the lifetime of her husband
are the legitimate offspring of that woman and her husband, is not conclusive proof of
their legitimacy and must be regarded as fully rebutted where the woman admittedly
lived for years with another person and they both asserted such children to be the
offspring of their union.279. It is upon the person who claims to be the legitimate issue
of his parents to bring forward satisfactory evidence in support of their marriage.280.
Where documentary evidence adduced was suﬃcient to draw the presumption of
marriage between the plaintiffs' mother and their alleged father, the mere fact of nonexamination of independent witnesses would not be fatal to the presumption.281.
Reading section 120 with this section it is clear that there is no prohibition to the
parents of a child from deposing whether or not they had at any time, when the child
would have been begotten, access to one another.282. In a case for maintenance, the
father denied paternity to his second daughter. Evidence showed that his wife was
pregnant when she left the house of her husband and there was no evidence of her
illicit relations with anyone. He had admitted paternity in earlier petition. It was held
that the daughter was entitled to maintenance.283.

[s 112.2.1] Paternity of child—Blood test.—
Section 112 requires the party disputing the paternity to prove non-access in order to
dispel the presumption. "Access" and "non-access" mean the existence or nonexistence of opportunities for sexual contact; it does not mean actual cohabitation. It is
a rebuttable presumption of law under section 112 that a child born during the lawful
wedlock is legitimate, and the access occurred between the parents. This presumption

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
can only be displaced by a strong preponderance of evidence, and not by a mere
balance of probabilities. Thus following is the position as to permissibility of blood test
to prove paternity: (1) That Courts in India cannot order blood test as a matter of
course. (2) Wherever applications are made for such prayers in order to have roving
inquiry, the prayer for blood test cannot be entertained. (3) There must be a strong
prima facie case in that the husband must establish non-access in order to dispel the
presumption arising under section 112. (4) The court must carefully examine as to
what would be the consequence of ordering the blood test, whether it will have the
effect of branding a child as a bastard and the mother as an unchaste woman. (5) No
one can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis.284. The use of DNA test is
an extremely delicate and sensitive aspect. There is an apparent conﬂict between the
right to privacy of a person not to submit himself forcibly to medical examination and
the duty of court to reach the truth. The court must exercise its discretion only after
balancing the interest of the parties. DNA test should be allowed only when it is
eminently needed. It should not be directed as a matter of course or in a routine
manner. Diverse aspects have to be considered including presumption under section
112 and whether it is not possible for the court to reach the truth without resorting to
DNA test.285.
Even the result of a genuine DNA test may not be enough to escape from the
conclusiveness of section 112 of the Evidence Act like a case where a husband and
wife were living together during the time of conception. Therefore, when there is
apparent conﬂict between the right to privacy of a person not to submit himself forcibly
to medical examination and duty of the court to reach the truth, the court must exercise
its discretion only after balancing the interests of the parties and on due consideration
whether for a just decision in the matter, DNA test is eminently needed. DNA test in a
matter relating to paternity of a child should not be directed by the court as a matter of
course or in a routine manner, whenever such a request is made. The court has to
consider diverse aspects including presumption under section 112 of the Evidence Act;
pros and cons of such order and the test of "eminent need" whether it is not possible
for the court to reach the truth without use of such test.286.
Therefore, the direction for a DNA test cannot be granted mechanically. In a case for
maintenance, a prayer for DNA test was made eight years after the birth of the child.
No explanation for the delay was submitted. The court refused to grant the prayer.287.
Where the wife was not able to reach for the test because of her pecuniary inability, the
court said that no adverse presumption could be drawn against her. Even otherwise the
access between the parties was an admitted fact and the delivery was that of a normal
child. The presumption under section 112 was not rebutted in the circumstances.288.
The general view in the courts is that no one can be compelled to undergo blood test.
Blood test should be conducted only with the consent of the person concerned.289. The
courts are also of the view that the alleged father could not be compelled to submit
himself to DNA test.290.
The Karnataka High Court held that the court cannot exercise its inherent power to
nullify the effect of the presumption. The provisions of the Act completely debar
leading of evidence with respect to the fact which the law says is conclusive proof of
the legitimacy and paternity of a child.
To compel a non-consenting person to submit himself for medical test or for blood
group test under the exercise of inherent powers for determining paternity would run
counter to the mandate of Article 21, i.e., interference with the fundamental right of life
and liberty. An order of this kind would create a doubt about the chastity of the woman,
and also about the paternity.291. The Madras High Court has spoken with a different
voice. It observed that passing an order directing the wife to undergo a DNA test is not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
an intervention in her personal liberty, without such test, it is diﬃcult to come to the
conclusion about the divorce application based on the ground of adultery as a result of
which she gave birth to a child.292.
In case of proof of non-access, the court can direct the respondent wife to give blood
sample to determine the paternity of the child born to her and in case of her refusal
from doing so, the court can draw adverse inference against her.293.
Where the husband with the order of the court obtained DNA report, refusal by the
court to let him submit his report was held to be improper. He had a right to tender the
document in evidence.294.
Where the alleged father denied paternity of the child depriving her of the maintenance,
it was held that the presumption under section 112 of the Evidence Act, 1872 does not
bar the DNA test to prove the fatherhood of a child.295. Where the husband claimed
divorce on the ground of unfaithfulness of his wife on the ground that the child born to
her was illegitimate but the wife volunteered to furnish DNA sample of herself and the
child, it was held that the court should have forced the husband to furnish his blood
sample for DNA matching before granting divorce.296.
Section 112 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 was enacted at a time when the modern
scientiﬁc advancements and DNA test were not even in the contemplation of the
legislature. The result of DNA test is said to be scientiﬁcally accurate. Although s. 112
raises a presumption of conclusive proof on satisfaction of the conditions enumerated
therein but the same is rebuttable. The presumption may afford a legitimate means of
arriving at an aﬃrmative legal conclusion. While the truth or fact is known, there is no
need or room for any presumption. Where there is evidence to the contrary, the
presumption is rebuttable and must yield to the proof. The interest of justice is best
served by ascertaining the truth and the court should be furnished with the best
available science and may not be left to bank upon presumptions, unless science has
no answer to the facts in issue. When there is a conﬂict between a conclusive proof
envisaged under law and a proof based on scientiﬁc advancement accepted by the
world community to be correct, the latter must prevail over the former.297. It is in the
process of substantiating his allegation of inﬁdelity of the his wife that the husband
made an application before the Family Court for conducting a DNA test which would
establish whether or not he had fathered the male child born to his wife. He feels that it
is the only way to substantiate his allegations. The Supreme Court observed that DNA
testing is the most legitimate and scientiﬁcally perfect means, which the husband
could use to establish his assertion of inﬁdelity. This simultaneously be taken as the
most authentic, rightful and means also with the wife, for her to rebut the assertions
made by her husband and to establish that she had not been unfaithful, adulterous or
disloyal. It observed that the High Court had rightly directed for the same.298.

[s 112.3] "Within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution, the mother
remaining unmarried".—
The section does not lay down a maximum period of gestation, and therefore does not
bar the proof of the legitimacy of a child born more than 280 days after dissolution of
marriage, the effect of the section being merely that no presumption in favour of
legitimacy is raised, and the question must be decided simply upon the evidence for
and against legitimacy.299. A person born within 280 days after the death of his father
is presumably his legitimate son.300. When a person claims, under this section, to be
the son of deceased person, he must prove that he was born within 280 days after the
death of his father.301.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 112.4] "Unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no
access to each other".—Meaning of access.—
The Supreme Court considered the meaning of the word "access" in Kamti Devi v Poshi
Ram.302. Thomas J said: Earlier there was a controversy as to what is the true import of
the word "access". Some High Courts held that access means actual sexual
intercourse between the spouses. However, the controversy came to a rest when the
Privy Council held in Karapaya Servai v. Mayandi,303. that the word 'access' connotes
only existence of opportunity for marital intercourse. The said legal principle gained the
approval of this Court when a three Judge Bench held in Chilukuri Venkataswarlu v
Chilukuri Venkatanarayana,304. that the law has been correctly laid down therein.
Section 112 of the Evidence Act provides for a presumption of a child being legitimate
and such a presumption can only be displaced by a strong preponderance of evidence
and not merely by a balance of probabilities as the law has to live in favour of an
innocent child from being bastardised. In the given case, as the proof of non-access
between spouses had never been even pleaded, the matter was not examined by the
High Court in correct perspective. It was held by Supreme Court that as per the settled
legal proposition, proof of non-access between the parties to marriage during the
relevant period is the only way to rebut that presumption.305.
The principle of this section does not apply to the case of a paramour and the
presumption can be rebutted when the mother of the child is not a wife but a mistress
and it may be open for the mistress to prove that the real father of the child born during
the period of her concubinage is different from her paramour.306. A married woman
was not allowed to claim maintenance for her child from a person other than her
husband when there was neither divorce nor proof of lack of access to the
husband.307.

[s 112.4.1] Birth within Shorter Period after Marriage.—
The mother of the daughter (plaintiff) stated that before marriage she had relations
with a person and became pregnant of him and gave birth to the daughter after three
months of marriage. The court said that the mother was the best person to prove
paternity of the daughter. The fact that her husband married her knowing that she was
pregnant and took the responsibility of bringing up the daughter could not give the
plaintiff the legal status of being his daughter. She had no right to challenge the "will" of
the husband which did not carry her name.308.

[s 112.5] Standard of proof.—
The Supreme Court observed:309. The standard of proof in such cases must at least be
of a degree in between the two as to ensure that there was no possibility of the child
being conceived through the plaintiff's husband. In Gautam Kundu v State of West
Bengal310. this Court after considering an earlier three-Judge Bench decision in Dukhtar
Jahan v Mohammed Farooq,311. held that this presumption can only be displaced by a
strong preponderance of evidence and not by a mere balance of probabilities.
A dissolution of marriage was sought by the husband on the ground that his wife left
him after eight days of marriage. He also alleged that she had illicit relationship with
another person and also bore him a child. The court said that he failed to prove that
after marriage the wife stayed with him only for eight days and that the marriage was
not consummated. The presumption of marriage could be dispelled by proof of nonaccess, which the husband could not do. Dismissal of the dissolution petition was

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
proper.312. Where non-access was not pleaded and proved, it was held that even a
negative DNA test report could not help to rebut the presumption. The unwillingness of
wife to undergo DNA test could not tilt the scales against her.313.
The court said that the criminal law standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt could
not be applied because it would create the risk of many a children being rendered
homeless.

[s 112.6] Mohammedan law.—
According to Mohammedan law a child born six months after marriage or within two
years after divorce or the death of the husband is presumed to be his legitimate
offspring. If the question for decision be one of evidence only it will be governed by this
section314. and the child will be considered legitimate if born within six months after
marriage of its parents.315. A child born more than 280 days after the dissolution of his
mother's marriage with her ﬁrst husband but less than six months after her marriage
with her second husband was held entitled to inherit as the legitimate son of the
second husband.316.
It was established by evidence that the Muslim male and Hindu women were living
together under one roof as husband and wife. The court said that marriage could be
presumed from prolonged and continuous cohabitation as husband and wife. A child
was born to them. The Birth Register extract showed the Muslim male as the father and
the Hindu woman as the mother. This was a relevant proof of paternity.317.

[s 112.6.1] Birth certiﬁcate.—
Birth certiﬁcate proceedings were taken on the basis of Baptism certiﬁcate. The
proceedings contained the fact that the Baptismal record was read and checked before
the God parents and signed by parents along with God parents. Thus, the Baptism
certiﬁcate was a valid document. The birth certiﬁcate proceedings legally recognised
legitimacy.318. Extracts from birth register were produced to prove paternity of the
child. The information recorded in the birth register was supplied by the mother who
was interested in making maintenance for the child. The court said that the contents of
the birth register cannot be presumed as absolute proof of paternity. But in view of the
other documents like High School certiﬁcate and other documents produced by the
mother in which also the defendant was described as the father of the child, the birth
register could be relied on.319.

[s 112.6.2] Circumstantial Evidence.—
Maintenance was granted on the basis of circumstantial evidence. The mother alleged
sex with the father of the child (boy) on several occasions and the birth was
consequence of that relationship. She produced birth certiﬁcate and baptism
certiﬁcate. There was evidence of her mother and other relatives. She had approached
the local Pariah for help. The man took the plea that she was of loose character but did
not substantiate it. She had no motive against him. The court ordered paternity and
maintenance on the basis of such circumstances.320.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

270. Bhima v Dhulappa, (1904) 7 Bom LR 95 .
271. Sham Lal v Sanjeev Kumar, (2009) 12 SCC 454 .
272. Chilukuri Venkateswarlu v Chilukuri Venkatanarayana, (1954) SCR 424 : AIR 1954 SC 176 .
273. Palani v Sethu, (1924) 47 Mad 706; Pal Singh v Jagir, (1926) 7 Lah 368. Laxmi Kom

Venkanna Nayak v Govt of India, AIR 2002 Kant 54 , the Court noted human experience which
shows that it is very rarely that a woman with children would claim that she was the wife of a
person who was not her husband. The case was about the right of a woman to family pension.
274.

XXX v Ma Son, (1896) 1 UBR (1892-1896) 74. A marriage presumed from a long

cohabitation is also a marriage within the meaning of the section for giving rise to this
presumption. SPS Balasubramanayam v Surattayan, AIR 1952 SC 756 : 1992 Supp (2) SCC 304 .
275. Umra v Muhammad Hayat, (1907) PR No. 79 of 1907 (Civil).
276. Ranganath Parmeshwar P Mali v EG Kulkarni, AIR 1996 SC 1290 : (1996) 7 SCC 681 , ﬁnding

of High Court that such presumption would arise only if factum of marriage is proved, held
improper, decision reversed.
277. Ponnammal v Andi Aiyyan, (1953) TC 726 .
278. Gopalasami Chetti v Arunachelam Chetti, (1903) 27 Mad 32, 33.
279. Bahadur Singh v Viru, (1905) PR No. 28 of 1906 (Civil).
280. Thakur Amjal v Nawab Ali Khan, (1906) 9 Bom LR 264 (PC).
281. Sarangapani v Varadhan, AIR 1995 Mad 188 .
282. Shantabai v Dalchand, (1954) Nag 204.
283. Alpana v Mohanlal, 1993 Cr LJ 1008 (HP).
284. Goutam Kundu v State of WB, AIR 1993 SC 2295 : 1993 Cr LJ 3233 : (1993) 3 SCC 418 . See

also Gomathi v Vijayaraghavan, 1995 Cr LJ 81 (Mad) and Tushar Roy v Sukla Roy, 1993 Cr LJ
1659 (Cal) where the English Law on the subject is discussed.
285. Bhabani Prasad Jena v Convenor Secretary, Orissa State Commission for Women, AIR 2010

SC 2851 : (2010) 8 SCC 633 . Sunil Kumar Jangde v Manju Jangde, AIR 2010 NOC 696 (Chh),
DNA not allowed because they delivered a child 4 months after she was expelled from the
home, they were together before pregnancy and also for major period after it, access not
disproved, presumption prevailed.
286. Bhabani Prasad Jena v Orissa State Commission for Women, (2010) 8 SCC 633 .
287. Kuldeep Singh v Joginder Kaur, AIR 2007 NOC 185 (P&H) : (2007-1) 145 Pun LR 91 ; Banarsi

Dass v Teeku Dutta, (2005) 4 SCC 449 : (2005) 3 SCR 923 , the court did not direct DNA test of a
claimant to property only because one of her brother was saying that she was the daughter of
their father's brother. Kamalamonta v State of TN, AIR 2005 SC 2132 : (2005) 5 SCC 194 , DNA
test of dead foetus ordered to establish paternity in rape case. The expert aﬃrmed paternity by
the test, concurrent ﬁnding of DNA experts was upheld.
288. Devesh Pratap Singh v Sumita Singh, AIR 1999 MP 174 .
289. Sajeera v PK Salim, 2000 Cr LJ 1208 (Ker).
290. Syed Mohd Ghouse v Noorunnisa Begum, 2001 Cr LJ 2028 (AP). Master "X" v "Y", AIR 2003

Delhi 195 , suit by son against father for interim maintenance and praying that father be
subjected to DNA test. There were documents and conversations showing that the plaintiff's
mother was married to some other person. This raised doubt. DNA test and interim
maintenance not ordered.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
291. Ningamma v Chikkaiah, AIR 2000 Kant 50 following Revamma v Sri Shanthappa, AIR 1972

Mys. 157 .
292. VK Bhurvaneswari v N Venugopal, AIR 2007 NOC 158 (Mad) : (2007) 1 LW 318 .
293. Sadashiv M Kheradkar v Nandini S. Kheradkar, 1995 Cr LJ 4090 (Bom). Sadshiv S Kheradkar

v NM Kheradkar, 1995 Cr LJ 4090 , suitable amendment recommended to cover cases of refusal
to submit to blood test.
294. Radhey Shyam v Pappi, AIR 2007 Raj 42 .
295. Babu Remyalayam Veettil v Vidya, 2015 Cr LJ 1049 (para 20) (Ker-DB).
296. Rekha Devi v Sanjeev Kumar Jha, AIR 2015 Pat 177 , para 4 (DB). See also Ranatish Saha v

Soma Saha, AIR 2016 NOC 268 (Cal).
297. Nandlal Wasudeo Badwaik v Lata Nandlal Badwaik, (2014) 2 SCC 576 (para 17).
298. Dipanwita Roy v Ronobroto Roy, (2015) 1 SCC 365 (para 17).
299. Rahmat Ali v Musst Allahdi, (1883) PR No. 1 of 1884 (Civil); Uttamrao Rajaram v Sitaram,

(1962) 64 Bom LR 752 .
300. Ghulam Mohy-ud-din Khan v Khizar Hussain, (1928) 10 Lah 470; Misir Bhairon Prasad v Gopi

Kunwar, (1930) 32 Bom LR 871 (PC).
301. Narendra v Ram Govind, (1901) 4 Bom LR 243 : 29 Cal 11 : 29 IA 17; Karapaya Servai v

Mayandi, (1933) 12 Ran 243 : 36 Bom LR 394 (PC); Zahoor Ahmad v Nadia, 2003 Cr LJ 1393
(J&K), in a claim for maintenance for child, the alleged father disputed the paternity. The child
was born within six months of the dissolution of the marriage and there was nothing to
controvert this fact. It was not made out that the birth was premature. No proof of access of
any stranger to the mother. The paternity of the child was not allowed to be disputed. The order
granting maintenance was proper.
302. Kamti Devi v Poshi Ram, AIR 2001 SC 2226 .
303. Karapaya Servai v Mayandi, AIR 1934 PC 49 . Asiya v Hameed, AIR 2009 Ker 163 , rebuttal of

presumption of legitimacy can be solely on the ground of non-access and not in any other
manner. Access connotes opportunity for coitus. It can be established by direct evidence of
positive nature or by circumstantial evidence of cogent and conclusive nature.
304. Chilukuri Venkataswarlu v Chilukuri Venkatanarayana, AIR 1954 SC 176 . 1954 SCR 424 .

Usman v Badarunisa, AIR 2007 NOC 371 (Ker), no evidence produced by the man to shown nonaccess, refusing to submit to DNA test, presumption of paternity prevailed.
305. Bharatha Matha v R Vijaya Renganathan, (2010) 11 SCC 483 .
306. Maina v Deorao, (1942) Nag 383.
307. Jit Ram v Cheli, 1989 Cr LJ 1852 (HP), The Court referred to Padmanabhan Kesavan v

Bhargavi Krishnamma, 1981 Cr LJ 156 and Raghavan Pillai v Gourikutty Amma, AIR 1960 Ker 119
: 1960 Cr LJ 476 , on rebuttal of the presumption under the section.
308. Bessi Devi v Chatru Devi, AIR 2010 HP 26 .
309. Kanti Devi v Poshi Ram, AIR 2001 SC 2226 .
310. Gautam Kundu v State of West Bengal, AIR 1993 SC 2295 : 1993 Cr LJ 3233 : (1993) 3 SCC

418 .
311. Dukhtar Jahan v Mohammed Farooq, AIR 1987 SC 1049 : 1987 Cr LJ 849 . Banarsi Dass v

Teeku Dutta, (2005) 4 SCC 449 : (2005) 2 KLT 729 : (2005) 4 SCC 449 , the presumption can be
overthrown not by a mere balance of probability, but strong preponderance of evidence.
312. Ramroop Rathore v Rajkumari, AIR 2009 MP 82 .
313. Laila v Muhammedali, AIR 2009 Ker 173 .
314. Mazhar Ali v Budh Singh, (1884) 7 All 297 (FB); Musammat Kaniza v Hasan Ahmad Khan,

(1925) 1 Luck 71 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
315. Sibt Muhammad v Muhammad Hameed, (1926) 48 All 625 ; Muhammad Allahabad Khan v

Muhammad Ismail Khan, (1888) 10 All 289 .
316. Nur-ul-Hasan v Muhammad Hasan, (1910) PR No. 78 of 1910 (Civil); P v R, (1911) PR No. 77

of 1911 (Civil). Where a child was born after 7 months of marriage, this presumption applied
and no weight was given to the mother's opinion that the child was mature. Dukhtar Jahan v
Mohd Farooq, AIR 1987 SC 1049 : 1987 Cr LJ 849 : (1987) 1 Hindu LR 362 : (1987) 1 SCC 624 .
317. Shamsudeen M Illias v Mohammed Salim M Idris, AIR 2008 Ker 59 .
318. Luis Caetano Viegas v Estreline Mariana RMA Da' Costa, AIR 2003 SC 630 .
319. Dibakar Behera v Padmabati Behera, AIR 2008 Ori 92 .
320. Master Leonard Mark v Seby Hillario, AIR 2007 NOC 2348 (Bom).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 113] Proof of cession of territory.—
A notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette that any portion of British territory has 321.[before
the commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, ch.
2)], been ceded to any Native State, Prince or Ruler, shall be conclusive proof that a
valid cession of such territory took place at the date mentioned in such notiﬁcation.

COMMENT
[s 113.1] Object.—
This section was enacted to exclude inquiry by Court of Justice into the validity of the
acts of the Government so far as cession of territory to any Indian State was
concerned. But the section is a dead-letter because it is declared to be ultra vires by the
Privy Council in a case in which it is decided that the Governor-General-in-Council being
precluded by 24 & 25 Vic. clause 67, section 22, from legislating directly as to
sovereignty or dominion of the Crown over any part of its territories in India, or as to the
allegiance of British subject, could not, by any legislative Act, purporting to make a
notiﬁcation in the Government Gazette conclusive evidence of a cession of territory,
exclude inquiry as to the nature and lawfulness of that cession.322. The section now is
obsolete.323.

321. Ins. by the A.O. 1937, (Pt. III of the Government of India Act, 1935 came into force on the

1st April, 1937).
322. Damodhar Gordhan v Deoram Kanji, (1875-1876) 31 A 102 : 1 Bom 367.
323. Maganbhai v UOI, AIR 1969 SC 783 , 794 : (1970) 3 SCC 400 . One of the effects of cession

is that the inhabitants of the territory can enforce only such rights as the new sovereign
recognised. Govindrao v State of UP, AIR 1982 SC 1201 : (1982) 2 SCC 414 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
324.[[s 113-A] Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.—

When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been
abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had
committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and
that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the
Court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that
such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, 'cruelty' shall have the same meaning as
in Sec. 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]

COMMENT
The words "having regard to all the other circumstances of the case" in this section
give wide powers to the court to appraise evidence and come to conclusion whether
there was some extraneous cause for a woman to commit suicide.325.
The words "all other circumstances of the case" require that a cause and effect
relationship between the cruelty and suicide has to be established before drawing the
presumption. Therefore, the presumption is not of mandatory nature.326. The mere fact
that if a married woman commits suicide within a period of seven years of her
marriage, the presumption under this section would not automatically apply. The term
"the Court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that
such suicide has been abetted by her husband" would indicate that the presumption is
discretionary.327.
In a dowry death case, the presumption that suicide was abetted by the accusedhusband of the deceased could be drawn only when prosecution has discharged the
initial onus of proving cruelty.328. In State of WB v Orilal Jaiswal,329. it was held that the
requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt in dowry death cases does not stand
altered even after the introduction of section 498A of the IPC and section 113A of the
Evidence Act. "Although, the Court's conscience must be satisﬁed that the accused is
not held guilty when there are reasonable doubts about the complicity of the accused
in respect of the offences alleged, it should be borne in mind that there is no absolute
standard for proof in a criminal trial and the question whether the charges made
against the accused have been proved beyond all reasonable doubts must depend
upon the facts and circumstances of the case and the quality of the evidences
adduced in the case and the materials placed on record. The doubt must be of a
reasonable man and the standard adopted must be a standard adopted by a
reasonable and just man for coming to a conclusion considering the particular subjectmatter."330. The scope of the pronouncement of the Apex Court that the offence of
attempt to commit suicide is ultra vires the Constitution does not make the offence of
abetment to commit suicide ultra vires the Constitution because the former is volitional
and well-planned act of the person concerned whereas the latter is on the different

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
footing as a third person forces the other person to take his life by committing
suicide.331.

[s 113A.1] Retrospective application.—
The section embodies a rule of evidence. It would, therefore, also apply to incidents
prior to its enforcement date, i.e., 25 December 1983.332. The section is procedural in
nature. It would, therefore, have retrospective operation.333.
The provisions of the section are applicable to the pre-amendment cases also. In the
words of the Supreme Court:334. "These provisions do not create any new offence, (or
any substantive right), but merely a matter of procedure and as such are retrospective
and applicable to the present case. The presumption against retrospection does not
apply to legislation concerned merely with matters of procedure or of evidence; on the
contrary, the provisions of that nature are to be construed as retrospective unless there
is a clear indication that such was not the intention of Parliament."335.

[s 113A.1.1] Legislative intent.—
The legislative intent is clear, i.e., to curb the menace of dowry deaths, etc., with a ﬁrm
hand. One must keep in mind this legislative intent. It must be remembered that since
such crimes, e.g., dowry death, cruelty, etc., are generally committed in the privacy of
residential homes and in secrecy, independent and direct evidence is not easy to get.
That is why the legislature has by introducing sections 113-A and 113-B in the Evidence
Act tried to strengthen the hands of the prosecution by permitting a presumption to be
raised if certain foundational facts are established and the unfortunate event has taken
place within seven years of marriage. This period of seven years is considered to be the
turbulent one after which the legislature assumes that the couple had time enough to
settle down in life.336.

[s 113A.2] No presumption where charge under section 302, IPC.—
Where the accused was charged under section 302, IPC, the presumption under section
113-A, Evidence Act, is not available. In such a case conviction and sentence has to be
based on cogent and reliable evidence.337.

324. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, section 7 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983).
325. Krishan Lal v UOI (FB), 1994 Cr LJ 3472 (P&H).
326. Ramesh Kumar v State of Chhatisgarh, 2001 Cr LJ 4724 (SC), the cause of cruelty and

beating as indicated in the deceased woman's letters and the statements of witnesses was
forgetful nature and not dowry, presumption not applicable.
327. Mangat Ram v State of Haryana, (2014) 12 SCC 595 (para 30).
328. Basappa Dattu Hegade v State of Karnataka, 1994 Cr LJ 1602 (Kant); Pawan Kumar v State

of Haryana, AIR 2001 SC 1524 : 2000 Cr LJ 1679 , the requirement of cruelty was proved by
preponderance of evidence of unmet dowry demands, death had taken place by burning, theory

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of accident because of mis-handling of kerosene stove was found to be false. Nandlal v State of
MP, 2000 Cr LJ 794 (MP), cruelty not proved, the allegation was that the husband has recalled
his ﬁrst wife and beat up the second (deceased), but this was not proved. Hence, the
presumption did not arise. Sarwan Kumar v State of HP, 2000 Cr LJ 4002 (HP), onus is on the
prosecution to prove that the accused had abetted suicide, the deceased-wife had not
complained to her mother of harassment or cruelty. The explanation put forth by the accusedhusband was that she was short tempered and was unhappy because of poor ﬁnancial
condition. The Court described the explanation as plausible and, though not proved it could be
accepted. State of Rajasthan v Kesa, 2002 Cr LJ 432 (Raj) the initial burden of proving cruelty not
discharged, presumption could not be raised. Chandra Devi v State of Rajasthan, 2002 Cr LJ
1075 (Raj), unnatural death of wife by burning within 7 years, she was unconscious and not in
mental or physical condition to give statement as for medical opinion, statement recorded by
police did not inspire conﬁdence, not a genuine document, no evidence of cruelty or harassment
for dowry, no presumption. Dwarika Prasad Soni v State of MP, 2002 Cr LJ 1080 (MP) no proof of
cruelty during the preceding three years after the settlement, earlier cruelty not relevant, no
presumption.
329. State of WB v Orilal Jaiswal, AIR 1994 SC 1418 : 1994 Cr LJ 2104 : (1994) 1 SCC 73 : 1994

SCC (Cri) 107 .
330. See also Dhobilal v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4108 (MP), the wife committed suicide within 5 years

from the date of marriage. She lived with her parents for 2-3 years. She returned to her
matrimonial home and within a month thereafter she jumped into a well. Harassment by the
husband and in-laws during this month was not proved. Hence, no presumption under the
section.
331. Krishan Lal v UOI (FB), 1994 Cr LJ 3472 (P&H).
332. State of Punjab v Iqbal Singh, 1991 Cr LJ 1897 : AIR 1991 SC 1532 .
333. Arvind Kumar v State of MP, 2001 Cr LJ 2317 (MP).
334. Gurbachan Singh v Satpal Singh, AIR 1990 SC 209 at p 218 : 1990 Cr LJ 562 . Followed in

Bhoora Singh v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 2294 ; Vranta Tulshiram v State of Maharashtra, 1987 Cr LJ
901 , see also Shanti v State of Haryana, AIR 1991 SC 1226 : 1991 Cr LJ 1713 : (1991) 1 SCC 371
; State of Punjab v Kirpal Singh, 1992 Cr LJ 2472 (P&H).
335. The court cited Halsbury's Laws of England,Vol 44 para 570.
336. State of Punjab v Iqbal Singh, (1991) 3 SCC 1 , 9 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 513 : AIR 1991 SC 1532 :

1991 Cr LJ 1897 .
337. P Mani v State of TN, AIR 2006 SC 1319 : (2006) 3 SCC 161 : 2006 Cr LJ 1629 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
338.[[s 113-B] Presumption as to dowry death.—

When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman
and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such
person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the
Court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in s. 304B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]

COMMENT
When the question at issue is whether a person is guilty of dowry death of a woman
and the evidence discloses that immediately before her death she was subjected by
such person to cruelty and/or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for
dowry, section 113-B, provides that the court shall presume that such person had
caused dowry death. Of course if there is proof of the person having intentionally
caused her death that would attract section 302, IPC.339.
Presumption of dowry death under this section has a purpose. It is a beneﬁcial
provision aimed at giving relief to a woman subjected to cruelty routinely in an Indian
household. The meaning to be applied to each word of this provision has to be in
accord with the legislative intent. Even while construing this provision strictly, care will
have to be taken to see that its object is not frustrated.340.
The presumption under this section is attracted only in case of suicidal or homicidal
death and not in case of an accidental death.341.
Presumption under this section is a presumption of law. On proof of the essentials
mentioned therein, it becomes obligatory on the court to raise a presumption that the
accused caused the dowry death.342. While the words "shall presume" in section 113-B
mandate that the court is duty bound to proceed on the basis that the person has
caused the dowry death, the presumption is rebuttable and it is open to prove that the
ingredients of section 304-B IPC are not satisﬁed.343.
Section 113B of the Evidence Act being procedural, it has been held that it is
retrospective in operation.344.

[s 113B.1] Presumption—When may be raised.—
The presumption under section 113B shall be raised only on the proof of the following
essentials:—
(1) The question before the court must be whether the accused has committed the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
dowry death of a woman. This means that the presumption can be raised only if
the accused is being tried for the offence under section 304B, IPC.
(2) The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his

relatives.
(3) Such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any demand for

dowry.
(4) Such cruelty or harassment was taking place soon before her death.345.

The requirements of this presumption in offence under section 304-B of IPC for the
purposes of its applicability, have been thus re-phrased by Supreme Court –
(i) death should be of burns or bodily injury or has occurred otherwise than under

normal circumstances;
(ii) within seven years of the marriage; and
(iii) that soon before her death she had been subjected to cruelty or harassment by

her husband or his relatives.
Even if one of the ingredients is not made out, the presumption under section 113-B of
the Evidence Act would not be available to the prosecution and the onus would not
shift to the defence.346.
The provisions of this section, although mandatory in nature, simply enjoin upon the
court to draw such presumption of dowry death on proof of circumstances mentioned
therein which amount to shifting the onus on the accused to show that the married
woman was not treated with cruelty by her husband soon before her death.347. In a
dowry death case, it is a condition precedent to the raising of the presumption that the
deceased married woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment for and in
connection with the demand for dowry soon before her death.348.

[s 113B.1.1] No presumption against wife where husband commits suicide.—
A husband committed suicide. The alleged cause was cruelty by wife. The court said
that a presumption under the section could not be raised against the wife.349.

[s 113B.1.2] Soon before her death.—
The term "soon before her death" has been employed by Parliament to refer to cruelty
or harassment which was meted out in proximity to the death and has to be considered
as the cause of death. The provision does not employ the term "at any time before" nor
"immediately before" and must be construed in its true import.350.
The term "soon before" is a relative term. In matters of emotions, there cannot be a
ﬁxed formula. The time lag may differ from case-to-case. There must be a nexus
between the demand of dowry, cruelty and harassment, based upon such demand and
the date of death. The test of proximity will have to be applied. But, it is not a rigid test.
It depends on the facts and circumstances of each case and calls for a pragmatic and
sensitive approach of the court, within the conﬁnes of law.351.
The expression "soon before" would normally imply that the interval should not be
much between the cruelty and harassment concerned and the death in question. There
must be existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty based on

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
dowry demand and the death concerned. If the alleged incident of cruelty is remote in
time and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental equilibrium of the woman
concerned, it would be of no consequence.352.

[s 113B.1.3] Cruelty or harassment.—
Cruelty or harassment differs from case-to-case. It relates to the mindset of the people,
which varies from person to person. Cruelty can be mental or it can be physical. Mental
cruelty is of different shades. It can be verbal or emotional like insulting or ridiculing or
humiliating a woman. It can be giving threats of injury to her or her near and dear ones.
It can be depriving her of economic resources or essential amenities of life. It can be
putting restraints on her movements. It can be, not allowing her to talk to the outside
world. The list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Physical cruelty could be actual
beating or causing pain and harm to the person of a woman. Every such instance of
cruelty and related harassment has a different impact on the mind of a woman. Some
instances may be so grave so as to have a lasting impact on a woman. Some instances
which degrade her dignity may remain etched in her memory for a long time.353.

[s 113B.2] Introduction of sections 113A and 113B.—
In a case where demand of dowry is alleged, such demands are conﬁned within four
walls of the house and known only to members of both sides of family. In such cases
independent and direct evidence with regard to the occurrences is ordinarily not
available. That is why the legislature has introduced sections 113A and 113B in the
Evidence Act by permitting presumption to be raised in certain circumstances.354.

338. Ins. by Act No. 43 of 1986, section 12 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986).
339. State of Punjab v Iqbal Singh, (1991) 3 SCC 1 : AIR 1991 SC 1532 : 1991 Cr LJ 1897 ; Lakhjit

Singh v State of Punjab, (1984) Supp. 1 SCC 173, the offence in this case was committed prior to
the enforcement date of section 113-B. Evidence showed that the death in question could be
suicidal. Section 113-B was held to be not applicable.
340. Surinder Singh v State of Haryana, (2014) 4 SCC 129 (para 26).
341. Sultan Singh v State of Haryana, (2014) 14 SCC 664 (para 8).
342. Rajinder Kumar v State of Haryana, (2015) 4 SCC 215 (para 15).
343. Jagjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2018 SC 5719 : 2018 (105) ACC 613 .
344. Bhoora Singh v State of UP, 1992 Cr LJ 2294 (All).
345. Keshab Chandra Panda v State of Orissa, 1995 Cr LJ 174 (Ori); Rajinder v State of Haryana,

2000 Cr LJ 2492 (P&H), the accused demanded money after 6 months of marriage which was
paid. After 2 years he raised another demand. Death took place 2 years after the second
demand. The Court refused to raise presumption under the section. The requirement of "soon
before" was not satisﬁed. Amar Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2010 SC 3391 : (2010) 9 SCC 64 ,
harassment one month before death, held to be covered by the words "soon before." Prem

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Kanwar v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2009 SC 1242 : 2009 Cr LJ 1123 : (2009) 3 SCC 726 , the
expression "soon before her death" requires that there must be a live-link between the effect of
cruelty based on dowry demand and concerned death. Tarsem Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2009
SC 1454 : (2008) 16 SCC 155 , presumption available only when the trial is for dowry death. M
Sirinvaslu v State of AP, AIR 2007 SC 3146 : (2007) 12 SCC 443 , the expression "soon before" is
very much relevant when section 304-B, IPC and section 113-B, Evidence Act are pressed into
service. It embodies the concept of proximity. There must be proximate and live link between
the effect of cruelty based on dowry demand and concerned death. Kailash v State of MP, AIR
2007 SC 107 : (2006) 12 SCC 667 , the words "soon before" cannot be limited to ﬁxed time-limit.
Thakkan Jha v State of Bihar, (2004) 13 SCC 348 , deceased tortured and harassed for nonsupply of articles, death not in normal circumstances, within 7 years of marriage, presumption
attracted, the court also explained in detail the scope of the expression soon before, one
circumstance was that there was settlement after the demand and before death.
346. Gurdeep Singh v State of Punjab, (2011) 12 SCC 408 .
347. Krishan Lal v UOI (FB), 1994 Cr LJ 3472 (P&H).
348. Bhoora Singh v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 2636 (All). See also Keshab Chandra Panda v State

of Orissa, 1995 Cr LJ 174 (Ori); Chando Devi v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 2783 (Pat), death by
hanging, no proof of dowry demand or torture for it. There was demand for money for starting
business but there was no torture for it. Presumption not applicable.
349. Alka Grewal v State of MP, 2000 Cr LJ 672 (MP).
350. Tummala Venkateswar Rao v State of AP, (2014) 2 SCC 240 (para 10).
351. Surinder Singh v State of Haryana, (2014) 4 SCC 129 (paras 17 and 18).
352. Hira Lal v State (Govt of NCT of Delhi), (2003) 8 SCC 80 , para 9 : AIR 2003 SC 2865 . See

also Major Singh v State of Punjab, (2015) 5 SCC 201 , para 16; VK Mishra v State of Uttarakhand,
(2015) 9 SCC 588 , para 7.
353. Surinder Singh v State of Haryana, (2014) 4 SCC 129 (para 17).
354. VK Mishra v State of Uttarakhand, (2015) 9 SCC 588 , para 28.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
[s 114] Court may presume existence of certain facts.—
The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have
happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, [s 114.4] human
conduct, [s 114.5] and public and private business, [s 114.6] in their relation to the facts
of the particular case.
ILLUSTRATIONS
The Court may presume—
(a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either

the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can
account for his possession;355.
(b) that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material

particulars;356.
(c) that a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for

good consideration;
(d) that a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a

period shorter than that within which such things or states of things usually
cease to exist, is still in existence;
(e) that judicial and oﬃcial acts have been regularly performed;
(f) that the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) that evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be

unfavourable to the person who withholds it;357.
(h) that if a man refuses to answer a question: which he is not compelled to answer

by law, the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) that when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the

obligation has been discharged.
But the Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering
whether such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it:—
as to illustration (a)—a shop-keeper has in his till a marked rupee soon after it
was stolen, and cannot account for its possession speciﬁcally, but is continually

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
receiving rupees in the course of his business:
as to illustration (b)—A, a person of the highest character, is tried for causing a
man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person
of equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes
precisely what was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of
A and himself:
as to illustration (b)—a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C, three
of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each
gives an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each
other in such a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
as to illustration (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business.
B, the acceptor, was young and ignorant person, completely under A's inﬂuence;
as to illustration (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain course ﬁve years ago,
but it is known that there have been ﬂoods since that time which might change
its course;
as to illustration (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was
performed under exceptional circumstances;
as to illustration (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown to
have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by
disturbance;
as to illustration (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would bear on
a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure
the feelings and reputation of his family;
as to illustration (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not
compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in
matters unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked;
as to illustration (i)—a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances
of the case are such that he may have stolen it.

COMMENT
[s 114.1] Presumption and burden of proof.—
Sections 104–113 direct on whom burden of proof will lie. The court is bound in every
instance to presume against that party on whom the burden of proof is directed to lie.
No option is given to the court as to whether it will presume the fact or not. But there
are various presumptions where room is left for the court to exercise its powers of
inference; the court can throw the burden of proof on whichever side it chooses. This
section deals with cases of the description. It declares that the court may, in all cases
whatever, draw from the facts before it, whatever inferences it thinks just. The terms of
the section are such as to reduce to their proper position of mere maxims, which are to
be applied to facts by the courts in their discretion, a large number of presumptions to
which English law gives, to a greater or less extent, an artiﬁcial value. Nine of the most
important of them are given by way of illustrations.358.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The effect of this provision is to make it perfectly clear that Courts of Justice are to use
their own common sense and experience in judging of the effect of particular facts,
and that they are to be subject to no particular rules whatever on the subject. The
illustrations given are, for the most part, cases of what in English law are called
presumptions of law: artiﬁcial rules as to the effect of evidence by which the court is
bound to guide its decision, subject, however, to certain limitations which it is diﬃcult
either to understand or to apply, but which will be swept away by the section 114 in
question.359. A presumption is not evidence or proof. It only shows on whom the
burden of proof lies.360.
Venkatramiah J of the Supreme Court observed:
A presumption is not in itself evidence but only makes a prima facie case for party in whose
favour it exists. It indicates the person on whom the burden of proof lies. When presumption
is conclusive, it obviates the production of any other evidence. But when it is rebuttable it
only points out the party on whom lies the duty of going forward with evidence on the fact
presumed, and when that party has produced evidence fairly and reasonably tending to
show that the real fact is not as presumed the purpose of presumption is over.

Pelting of stones on passengers in a train whether by a mob or otherwise creates an
adverse presumption against railways. Responsibility for an untoward incident arises
unless it is explained otherwise.361.

[s 114.2] Scope.—
This section authorises the court to make certain presumptions of fact. They are all
presumptions which may naturally arise, but the Legislature, by the use of the word
"may" instead of "shall" both in the body of the section and in the illustrations, shows
that the court is not compelled to raise them but is to consider whether in all the
circumstances of the particular case they should be raised.362. The section does not
lay down any hard and fast rule with regard to the circumstances in which any fact or
facts may be presumed to exist nor does it contain an exhaustive list of such facts,
though it gives a few illustrations from various walks of life.363. In order to draw an
inference that a fact in dispute has been established, there must exist, on record, some
direct material facts or circumstances from which such an inference could be
drawn.364. Genuineness of a document cannot be presumed merely because of it
having been exhibited.365.
In a case under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, it was proved that a sum of
money was paid to the accused. The court said that it could be presumed that payment
was made for the performance of an oﬃcial act. This presumption could be based
upon a proved fact, but there could not be further presumption on the basis of this
presumption.366. The court relied upon its own decision in which it was observed: "A
presumption can be drawn only from facts—and not from other presumptions—by a
process of probable and logical reasoning."367.
"When a rule prescribed only a formula of presumptions based on facts, the
prescription is only of a directory nature and not of a mandatory nature." Thus spoke
the Supreme Court in Ammal Chandra Dutt v IInd ADJ,368. The following passage wad
cited by the court from Phipson on Evidence:369.
Presumptions are either of law or fact. Presumptions of law are arbitrary consequences
expressly annexed by law to particular facts; and may be either conclusive, as that a child
under a certain age is incapable of committing any crime; or rebuttable, as that a person not
heard of for seven years is dead, or that a bill of exchange has been given for value.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Presumptions of fact are inferences which the mind naturally and logically draws from given
facts, irrespective of their legal effect. Not only are they always rebuttable, but either the
trier of fact may refuse to make the usual or natural inference notwithstanding that there is
no rebutting evidence.

A presumption can be raised to ﬁll the gaps in evidence, but it cannot be used to
contradict evidence.370.
The power conferred by section 114 is in respect of inferences which may be drawn by
the court. The section does not authorise the courts to legislate as to the manner in
which human beings should conduct themselves.371.

[s 114.3] Presumptions.—
Presumptions may be either of law or fact, and when of law may be either conclusive
(proesumptiones juris et de jure), or rebuttable (proesumptiones juris), but when of fact
(proesumptiones hominis) are always rebuttable. Mixed presumptions are those which
are partly of law and partly of fact.372.
Presumptions of law differ from presumptions of fact in the following respects:
(1) Presumptions of law derive their force from law; while presumptions of fact

derive their force from logic. And though many of the former have intrinsic
logical weight, being indeed derived from the latter, yet there are others which
have none.
(2) A presumption of law applies to a class, the conditions of which are ﬁxed and

uniform; a presumption of fact applies to individual cases, the conditions of
which are inconstant and ﬂuctuating.
(3) Presumptions of law are drawn by the court, and in the absence of opposing

evidence are conclusive for the party in whose favour they operate;
presumptions of fact are drawn by the jury, who may disregard them however
cogent.373.
Venkatramaiha J of the Supreme Court said:
In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, there are three cases where conclusive presumption may
be drawn. They are sections 41, (judgments in rem) 112 and 113. These are cases where
law regards that any amount of other evidence will not alter the conclusion to be reached
when the basic facts are admitted or proved.374.

As to statutory presumptions, see sections 118, 119–122, 137 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881; sections 53 and 101 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act (I of 1894). There are various other statutory
presumptions.
The chief function of rebuttable presumptions of law is to determine on whom the
burden of proof rests.375.

[s 114.4] "Common course of natural events".—
A presumption of facts is an assumption resulting from one's experience of the course
of natural events of human conduct and human character. Such experience can be
made use of in the ordinary course of life as well as in the business of courts.376.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
It is settled law that presumption of fact is a rule in law of evidence that a fact
otherwise doubtful may be inferred from certain other proved facts. When inferring the
existence of a fact from other set of proved facts, the court exercises a process of
reasoning and reaches a logical conclusion as the most probable position. The above
position is strengthened in view of section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872. It empowers
the court to presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened.
In that process, the courts shall have regard to the common course of natural events,
human conduct, etc. in addition to the facts of the case. In these circumstances, the
principles embodied in section 106 of the Evidence Act can also be utilised. This
section is not intended to relieve the prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt of the
accused beyond reasonable doubt, but it would apply to cases where the prosecution
has succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable inference can be drawn
regarding the existence of certain other facts, unless the accused by virtue of his
special knowledge regarding such facts, failed to offer any explanation which might
drive the court to draw a different inference.377.
This expression is appropriate in regard to such matters as the period of gestation or
the continuance of life. The legitimacy of a child may have to be decided by reference
to the term during which in the ordinary course of nature gestation may continue.
A case of adultery must be judged having due regard to the social conditions and the
manner in which the parties are accustomed to live. If there is evidence enough to
show that they had reasonable opportunities of having sexual intercourse in the
conditions of life in which they live for days together then the court may be justiﬁed in
raising an inference of adultery.378.

[s 114.5] "Human conduct".—
As an example of an inference to be drawn from the conduct of a person the following
is apposite. It is settled law that where property is entrusted to a servant, it is the duty
of the servant to give a true account of what he does with the property so entrusted to
him. If such servant fails to return the property or to account or gives an account which
is shown to be false and incredible, it is ordinarily a reasonable inference that he has
criminally misappropriated the property so entrusted to him and dishonestly converted
it to his own use. In such cases the court is entitled to draw hostile inferences and
presumptions from the action and statements of the servant.379. Where one member
of the family claimed that the property in question was his self-acquired property and,
therefore, was not liable to partition, and the other members showed that he had no
source of income and in fact, payment was out of joint family fund, the court said that a
presumption arose that the property was for the beneﬁt of the whole family and was
liable to partition. No evidence to counteract this presumption was given.380. In the
matters of partnership, the managing partner having a ﬁduciary character is bound to
protect the interest of other partners and to make full and correct disclosure of
accounts to them and presumption of genuineness of books of account is not be
available to him.381. Where a Hindu male performed second marriage during the life
time of the ﬁrst wife before coming into force of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and a
child was born out of that wedlock, presumption of the second marriage being legal
could be drawn.382.
In a husband's suit against his wife for divorce on the ground of mental cruelty being
caused by repeated accusations of adultery with his brother's wife, his father and a
social friend testiﬁed to the accusations, the court, having regard to human conduct,
said that the father, an old and respectable person, would not testify to a fact which
would disgrace his family, unless it was true.383.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where one joint owner was permitted to be in possession for a long period of over 50
years and that too without any protest or objection, a presumption arose that he was
the exclusive owner.384. A statement in a judgment as to things happening before the
judge is not ordinarily permitted to be questioned.385. Where an examinee's answer
showed correct answer to a mathematical problem without showing the detailed
calculation work in solving the problem and he was charge sheeted on the ground that
he could not have done so without using unfair means, it was held that such a
presumption was not justiﬁed. The court said that having regard to human possibilities,
one can as well imagine that the examinee in question might have learned his lessons
by heart.386. Where the accident was not caused due to collusion and the plea of
failure of lights and foggy weather being the cause was not established, negligence on
the part of the driver could be presumed.387. Where in a suit for eviction on the ground
of sub-letting, the tenant's plea that the other person was running a joint business with
him was not substantiated, adverse inference could be drawn against the tenant and he
could be evicted.388. The conduct of the eyewitness, the daughter of the deceased in
apprising her maternal uncles about the murder of her father and brother ﬁrst and then
going along with the Sarpanch to inform the police was held to be normal and natural
and this was no ground for drawing adverse conclusions against her conduct.389.
The petitioner claimed that his mother was in the train which met with an accident and
died. The body was so badly charred that even DNA test was not possible. No concrete
evidence was produced against this contention. So the court presumed that the
woman must have been the mother of the petitioner. The court issued direction for
issue of death certiﬁcate.390.

[s 114.5.1] Void or illegal marriage.—
Where by reason of the provisions in the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 the second
marriage, during the subsistence of the ﬁrst, is void ab initio, there would be no
presumption of validity even if the couple is living together as husband and wife and
the society recognised them as such. Such marriage does not create any right of
succession.391.

[s 114.5.2] Presumption of divorce—Child Marriage.—
When the child was eight years old, there was marriage. The marriage was never
consummated. The wife left him immediately after and never came to live with him.
Divorce was permissible in the community. The husband himself cohabited
subsequently with another woman for a long period. The court said that in the light of
such facts the marriage could be presumed to have been terminated.392.

[s 114.5.3] Blank signature.—
A person who said that he put his signature on a blank paper was not taken to mean
that he had executed a document. There could be no presumption or inference of that
kind.393.

[s 114.5.4] Condonation of adultery presumed.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the husband had alleged adultery against his wife and sought divorce but he had
given his wife an opportunity to mend her ways and they both lived together thereafter,
condonation of the offence of adultery by the husband could be presumed.394.

[s 114.5.5] Presumption of mens rea.—
There is a presumption that mens rea or guilty intent is an essential ingredient of
offences created by the law maker. But the legislature may create an offence with
absolute liability requiring neither mens rea nor any other state of mind.395.
The number of injuries caused to the victim was not considered by the court to raise
the presumption of intention to kill. But the Supreme Court said that taking into
consideration the number of injuries and medical evidence corroborating ocular
evidence, there could no doubt that the accused entertained the intention to kill.396.

[s 114.6] "Public and private business".—
A catalogue which embodies a statement of the ﬁrm regarding the price at which it is
prepared to sell its articles is not hearsay and is admissible in evidence in proof of the
price.397. There is a presumption that every person in his private character does his
duty and unless the contrary is proved, it is presumed that all things are rightly and
regularly done.398. The plaintiff could not prove that he had kept jewellery in his bank
locker. The court said that hiring a locker is not entering into a contract of bailment, and
that, even if it were a contract of bailment, it could not be said that the bank had not
exercised proper care. The court was not to presume, in the absence of evidence that
the lockers installed were not built according to speciﬁcations.399.
An adoption deed which was also registered mentioned all the ceremonies which were
performed for carrying out the adoption. It was not allowed to be challenged simply
because the presiding pandit was not examined. Presumption as to the regularity of
social acts and ceremonies prevailed.400.
"There must be an assumption that whatever is published in the Government owned
paper correctly represents the actual state of affairs relating to governmental business
until the same is successfully challenged and the real state of affairs is shown to be
different from what is stated in the Government publication."401.

[s 114.7] Illustrations not exhaustive.—
The illustrations given under this section are not exhaustive. They are merely a few
examples of this class of "natural" presumptions, and they do not exclude the other
numerous cases in which such presumptions are constantly drawn. The court need not
draw the presumption in any particular case. The word used is "may"; and wherever the
informative facts proved over-balance the probability that the inference would be a
sound and just one, the court will exercise its sound discretion in electing not to rest
upon the presumption.402. The illustrations are merely examples of circumstances in
which certain presumptions may be good and other presumptions, of a similar kind in
similar circumstances, may be made under the provisions of the section itself. Every
one of the illustrations is followed by an exception.403. There are several presumptions
recognised in Hindu law, Mahammadan law, criminal law, etc., e.g., the original status

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of a Hindu family must be presumed to be joint and undivided; in a joint Hindu family
the whole property of the family is joint estate; in the absence of express contract a
Mahammadan dower is presumed to be prompt; every person is presumed to be
acquainted with the law of the land; the accused is presumed to be innocent.

[s 114.8] Stolen property—
[Illustration (a)].—This illustration raises two presumptions, viz., that the person in
possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either (1) the thief, or (2) has
received the goods knowing them to be stolen. The question as to which of the two
presumptions is to be drawn will depend upon the facts of each particular case. This is
a presumption which the court is not bound to draw but it is in the option of the court to
draw it. But it does not, in any way, shift the burden of proof to the accused. The words
"can account for its possession" do not mean that the accused must prove it positively
that he received the property in the manner indicated by him. If the explanation given is
not inherently improbable or palpably false and the court or the jury trying the case ﬁnd
it to be reasonably true, the adverse presumption shall be deemed to have been
rebutted. The meaning of the words "reasonably true" appears to be that the
explanation must be suﬃcient to cast a doubt on the guilt of the accused and in that
case unless the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
received the property knowing it to be stolen, the beneﬁt of the doubt shall go to
him.404.
The presumption under this illustration arises only when the prosecution has
established, (1) the ownership of the article in question, (2) theft of the article, and (3)
its recent possession by the accused. Before a presumption can arise it must
necessarily be proved that the goods found in possession of the accused had been
stolen.405. The words "receives" and "retains" are generally used together and though
Illustration (a) expressly refers to dishonest receipt of stolen property, a presumption
about dishonest retention of the stolen property may equally be made by virtue of that
illustration even though in the charge it is stated that the accused dishonestly received
(not retained) the stolen property.406.
The Supreme Court has held that the presumption permitted to be drawn under this
illustration has to be read along with the important time factor.407. If the gap of time is
too large, the presumption that the accused was concerned with the crime itself gets
weakened. The presumption is stronger when the discovery of the fruits of crime is
made immediately after the crime is committed.408. The question what period is
covered by the expression "soon after" depends upon the circumstances of each case.
Where the articles stolen in dacoity were found in the possession of the accused "soon
after" the commission of the offence, it was presumed under section 114 that the
accused were dacoits and offence of dacoity was thereby proved.409.
The various factors that have a bearing on this presumption have been restated by the
Supreme Court thus: the presumption depends on the nature of the article, the manner
of acquisition by the accused, the nature of evidence about its identiﬁcation, the
manner in which the accused dealt with it, the place and circumstances of recovery, the
length of intervening period, the ability or otherwise of the accused to explain his
possession.410. Recovery in pursuance of information is an important piece of
evidence.411.

[s 114.8.1] Application of this presumption to other matters.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The presumption in this illustration is not conﬁned to charges of theft, but extends to
all charges, however, penal, not excluding even murder. Therefore where a person
charged with dacoity is shown to have been in possession of part of the stolen property
soon after the dacoity, it may be presumed that he was one of the dacoits or that he
received the property knowing it to have been stolen at the dacoity. The principle of
Illustration (a) applies not only to cases of ordinary theft but also to cognate offences
such as dacoity and robbery. The presumption arising under this illustration extends to
all charges, however penal, including murder.412. Where a watch belonging to the
deceased was recovered from the possession of the accused, it was held that, that by
itself could not connect the accused with the offence of murder by invoking section
114.413. Merely because death of the person occurred in police custody, an immediate
inference of murder cannot be drawn against the police.414.
The Supreme Court held in Navalshankar Ishwarlal Dave v State of Gujarat, that mutation
of name in revenue record is not evidence of title.415. The statements of police
witnesses are entitled to the same weight and the same consideration which are
attached to the statements of a member of the public. However, the impugned
statement must inspire conﬁdence to be relied upon.416.
Where an oﬃcer was found in possession of money, the court applied the presumption
that he must have accepted bribe.417.

[s 114.8.2] Long stay in India and citizenship.—
In a case before the Supreme Court418. the facts were that the appellant had gone to
Pakistan and acquired a Pakistani passport voluntarily. He obtained a visa to visit India.
On the expiry of the visa, he neither went back nor sought extension of visa, but,
instead went underground. There was no evidence to show that the Pakistani passport
was obtained under compelling circumstances. It was held that a conclusive
presumption could be raised that Pakistani citizenship was taken voluntarily. The claim
for Indian citizenship was rejected. The court said that a long stay in a country and
enrolment in voters' list does not confer any right on an alien to continue to stay in the
country.

[s 114.8.3] Possession.—
Person driving a vehicle and others who were travelling in the vehicle from which two
bags of poppy husk were seized, it could not be said about them that they were in
possession of the contraband, though two of them were sitting on the two bags and
both of them ran away on the vehicle being stopped for checking.419.

[s 114.8.4] Purchaser of property already sold to another.—
Where there was an oral agreement of sale and the fact of the agreement and payment
of earnest money made under it were proved. The suit for speciﬁc performance was
resisted on the ground of subsequent sale. It was held that the burden of proving that
the subsequent buyer was a bona ﬁde buyer without notice was illegally put on the
plaintiff (the ﬁrst buyer). The court said that an adverse inference had to be drawn
against the subsequent buyer. The court accordingly granted the decree of speciﬁc
performance.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 114.9] Accomplice—
[Illustration (b)].—An accomplice is one who is a guilty associate in crime. Where the
witness sustains such a relation to the criminal act that he could be jointly indicted with
the accused, he is an accomplice.420. It is a rule of prudence and practice which
practically amounts to a rule of law that the evidence of an accomplice ought not to be
acted upon unless it is corroborated as against the particular accused in material
respects.421. Corroborative evidence is evidence which shows or tends to show that
the story of the accomplice that the accused committed the crime is true, not merely
that the crime has been committed, but that it was committed by the accused.422. The
confession of a co-accused cannot be used to corroborate the evidence of an
accomplice.423. The corroboration in the case of an accomplice must point to the
identiﬁcation of the person charged with the particular act with which the direct
evidence connects him.424. The corroboration in material particulars must be such as
to connect or identify each of the accused with the offence.425. The evidence of an
accomplice ought to be regarded with suspicion. The degree of suspicion which will
attach to it must vary according to the extent and nature of the complicity.426.
Where the accomplice is not really a criminal but a spy or informer his evidence does
not require any corroboration.427.
The rule in this illustration is to be read along with section 133, and neither rule is to be
ignored in the exercise of judicial discretion. In point of law an accomplice is a
competent witness against an accused person (vide section 133). But great caution in
weighing his testimony is dictated by prudence and reason. Unless the case is a very
exceptional one, an accomplice's evidence should not be accepted as being
suﬃcient.428.
In England it is regarded as the settled course of practice not to convict a prisoner,
excepting, under very special circumstances, upon the un-corroborated testimony of an
accomplice.429. The corroboration which the common law requires is corroboration in
some material particular tending to show that the accused committed the crime
charged. It is not enough that the corroboration shows the witness to have told the
truth in matters unconnected with the guilt of the accused.430. See comment on
section 133, infra.
One accomplice cannot corroborate another. However, if several accomplices
simultaneously and without previous concert give a consistent account of the crime
implicating the accused, the court may accept the several statements as corroborating
each other, but it must be established that the several statements of accomplices were
given independently and without any previous concert.431.
It is now well settled that the minimum amount of corroboration required to make it
safe to act on the testimony of an approver is that the evidence must be corroborated
not only as to the corpus delicti but also as to the identity of the accused persons. The
corroborative evidence must show or tend to show that the story of the approver that
the accused committed the crime is true; in other words, the corroborative evidence
must be such which conﬁrms not only the evidence that the crime has been committed
but also the evidence that the accused committed that crime.432.
In a case where there are a large number of accused it is essential that the evidence of
an accomplice be corroborated by evidence which implicates each of the accused
individually. Independent evidence which corroborates the evidence of an accomplice
so far as one of several co-accused is concerned is not necessarily evidence which
corroborates the statement of the accomplice so far as the other accused are
concerned.433.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The Bombay High Court has laid down the following four principles with regard to the
nature and extent of corroboration:
(1) that it is not necessary that there should be independent conﬁrmation of every

material particular,
(2) that independent evidence must not only make it safe to believe that the crime

was committed, but in some way reasonably connect or tend to connect the
accused with it by conﬁrming in some material particular the testimony of the
accomplice or complainant that the accused committed the crime,
(3) that the corroboration must come from independent sources, and
(4) that the corroboration need not be direct evidence that the accused committed

the crime—it is suﬃcient if it is merely circumstantial evidence of his connection
with crime.434.
In a case of corruption the accused offered the Minister of State an amount of Rs 3
lakhs for certain favours and the Minister gave them the impression that he was willing
to consider their offer but he informed the Anti-Corruption Bureau (ACB) and ﬁled a
complaint whereupon a trap was laid by ACB. It was held that unlike other normal
corruption cases, where the complainants are members of public and the complaints
are against the public servants, the complainant could not be equated with the position
of an accomplice and in such unusual cases the accused could be convicted even on
uncorroborated testimony of the complainant.435.

[s 114.9.1] Rape cases.—
The Supreme Court of India has held that though a woman who has been raped is not
an accomplice, her evidence has been treated by the courts on somewhat similar lines,
and the rule which requires corroboration of such evidence save in exceptional
circumstances has now hardened into law. The view that though corroboration should
ordinarily be required in the case of a grown-up woman, it is unnecessary in the case of
a child of tender years is not correct. The true position is that in every case of this type
the rule about the advisability of corroboration should be present to the mind of the
judge; whether corroboration is unnecessary is a question of fact in every case.436. As
a rule of prudence the court normally looks for some corroboration of her testimony so
as to satisfy its conscience that she is telling the truth and that the person accused of
rape on her has not been falsely implicated.437. Where in a prosecution for rape there
was variance on material points between FIR and statements made during trial and the
eyewitnesses denied any such occurrence so that the only evidence on record was the
uncorroborated testimony of the prosecutrix, the conviction was held to be not
proper.438.
The Supreme Court has spoken thus on the matter:439. A prosecutrix of a sex offence
cannot be put on par with an accomplice. She is in fact a victim of the crime. The
Evidence Act nowhere says that her evidence cannot be accepted unless it is
corroborated in material particulars. She is undoubtedly a competent witness under
section 118 and her evidence must receive the same weight as is attached to an
injured person in cases of physical violence. The same degree of care and caution
must be taken in the evaluation of her evidence as in the case of an injured
complainant or witness and no more. What is necessary is that the court must be alive
to and conscious of the fact that it is dealing with the evidence of a person who is
interested in the outcome of the charge levelled by her. If the court keeps this in mind
and feels satisﬁed that it can act on the evidence of the prosecutrix, there is no rule of
law or practice incorporated in the Evidence Act similar to Illustration (b) to section 114
which requires the court to look for corroboration. If for some reason the court is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
hesitant to place implicit reliance on the testimony of the prosecutrix, it may look for
evidence which may lend assurance to her testimony short of corroboration required in
the case of an accomplice. The nature of evidence required to lend assurance to the
testimony of the prosecutrix must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances
of each case.
The same approach was adopted in Sheikh Zakir v State of Bihar.440. The court said:
If a conviction is based on the evidence of a prosecutrix without any corroboration, it will not
be illegal on that sole ground. But in the case of a grown-up or married woman, it is always
safe to insist on corroboration, which can be sought from either direct or circumstantial
evidence or both.

[s 114.9.2] Rape in Custody.—
This line of development has been applied to rape in custody. A teenage girl was raped
by a police oﬃcer, Ahmadi J observed:441.
A prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be put on par with an accomplice. She is in fact a
victim of the crime. The same degree of care and caution must attach in the evaluation of
her evidence as in the case of an injured complainant. What is necessary is that the court
must be alive to and conscious of the fact that it is dealing with the evidence of a person
who is interested in the outcome of the charge levelled by her. If the court keeps this in mind
and feels satisﬁed that it can act on the evidence of the prosecutrix, there is no rule of law
or practice incorporated in the Evidence Act similar to the illustration (6) to s. 114 which
requires (the court) to look for corroboration. If for some reason the court is hesitant to
place implicit reliance on the testimony of the prosecutrix it may look for evidence which
may lend assurance to her testimony short of corroboration required in the case of an
accomplice.

[s 114.9.3] Bigamy.—
A mere presumption or admission by the accused is not suﬃcient to prove bigamy.
Requisite form and performance of necessary ceremonies should aﬃrmatively be
proved.442. A man married second wife while the ﬁrst was living. The second marriage
took place in 1950 when polygamy was permissible. She was driven out from the
house 35 years after their marriage. The witnesses to marriage and other documents
pertaining to marriage could not be produced and the husband denied marriage. It was
held that on the basis of long cohabitation and numerous other documents,
presumption regarding the second marriage could be drawn.443.

[s 114.10] Presumption as to consideration—
[Illustration (c)].—The presumption on which this illustration is founded is in accordance
with the maxim omnia praesumuntur rite, esse acta, i.e., all things are presumed to be
done in due form. The principle of the maxim "has, in many instances, been recognised
in support of the solemn acts of even private person...Thus, if an act can only be lawful
after the performance of some prior act, due performance of that prior act will be
presumed. Again, although in the case of contracts not under seal, a consideration
must in general be averred and proved, yet bills of exchange and promissory notes
enjoy the privilege of being presumed, prima facie, to be founded on a valuable
consideration. The law raises this presumption in favour of these instruments, partly
because it is important to preserve their negotiability intact, and partly because the
existence of a valid consideration may reasonably be inferred from the solemnity of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
instruments themselves, and the deliberate mode in which they are executed.444. An
effect of the presumption is that the plaintiff has not to produce account books to
substantiate consideration. The burden is upon the other party.445.
The explanation to this illustration speaks of "a man of business," which in its wellknown popular sense must mean a man habitually engaged in mercantile transactions
or trade.446.

[s 114.10.1] Presumption under this section and under Negotiable Instruments
Act.—
Sections 118 and 119 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 lay down certain other
presumptions. The Lahore High Court has held that section 118 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 replaces the explanation attached to this illustration and
therefore the rule laid down in this illustration is modiﬁed by section 118. What was
permissible in the Evidence Act was converted into a statutory obligation in the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. While illustration
(c) is conﬁned to the acceptance or endorsement of a bill of exchange, section 118 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 applies to the making or drawing of it also.447.
The Madras High Court has held that the difference between this section and section
118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, consists only in this, that under the ﬁrst,
the court has a discretion to make the presumption or not, whereas, under the second,
the court is bound to start with the presumption; but once the presumption is made
there is no difference between the two cases, in the manner of displacing the
presumption or disproving the "presumed" fact. Any presumption as to quantum of
consideration as distinguished from the mere existence of consideration, has
accordingly to be drawn, not by virtue of section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881 or even under this section, but only from the recitals, if any that the instrument
may contain. As to such recitals, it has long been established that being prima facie
evidence against the parties to the instruments, they may operate to shift on to the
party pleading the contrary the burden of rebutting the inference raised by them. But
the weight due to recitals may vary according to circumstances and, in particular
circumstances, the burden of rebutting them may become very light, especially when
the court is not satisﬁed that the transaction was honest and bona ﬁde.448. Section 118
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 enacts a special rule of evidence which
operates between parties to the instrument or persons claiming under them in a suit or
proceeding relating to the bill of exchange and does not affect the rule contained in this
section in cases not falling within section 118 of the Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881.449.
A bill of exchange given to a bank was dishonoured. The bank did not give to the
drawer (defendant) notice of dishonour within reasonable time. The bank was
withholding evidence as to the date of dishonour. The notice being not within
reasonable time, the bank was not entitled to compensation.450.

[s 114.10.1.1] Presumption under sections 138 and 139, NI Act.—
In the context of the dishonour of a cheque a presumption has to be drawn under
section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 that the cheque was issued for
discharge of debt or liability of the drawer to the payee. This is a legal presumption and,
therefore, it has to be drawn in every case. The presumption is rebuttable. The evidence
which has to be adduced in rebuttal must not be merely a plausible explanation. Some
evidence in proof of the explanation would be necessary.451.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Dealing with the use of phrases "until the contrary is proved" in section 118 and "unless
the contrary is proved" in section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 read with
deﬁnitions of "may presume" and "shall presume" as given in section 4 of Evidence Act,
it has been explained by Supreme Court that presumptions to be raised under both the
provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is rebuttable, it only points out that
when the party against whom the presumption is drawn produces evidence fairly and
reasonably tending to show that real fact is not as presumed, the purpose of the
presumption is over.452.

[s 114.10.1.2] Notice of demand.—
It is not necessary that the notice of dishonour and demand should be sent by
registered post only. It can also be sent under certiﬁcate of posting. It has been held
that once notice is sent by registered post by correctly addressing to the drawer of the
cheque, the service of notice is deemed to have been effected. But, the drawer is at
liberty to rebut this presumption.453. The notice sent by speed post is presumed to
have been served even if it was not sent by registered post.454.

[s 114.11] Continuity of things—
[Illustration (d)].—This illustration is founded on the presumption which exists in favour
of continuance or immutability.
If a thing or a state of things is shown to exist, an inference of its continuity within a
reasonably proximate time both forwards and backwards may sometimes be drawn.
The rule that the presumption of continuance may operate retrospectively also has
been recognised in India. How far the presumption may be drawn backwards and
forwards depends upon the nature of the thing and surrounding circumstances.455.
The ordinary legal presumption is that things remain in their original state.456. If a
person is shown at one time to be a member of a joint Hindu family, it will be held
under this illustration that he never separated at all unless the contrary is proved.
Property which was shown to be ancestral would continue to be so until the contrary is
shown.457. But where the property was shown to be in the name of a co-sharer, there
was no presumption that it was ancestral property.458. The name of the husband was
recorded as a tenant in revenue records and after his death his wife's name and
thereafter she was recorded as a mortgagee. Change of revenue entries will not raise a
presumption of cessation of the wife's tenancy and it will revert to her on redemption of
mortgage.459.
Sections 107–109 deal with particular applications of the principle of which this
illustration is the general expression.

[s 114.12] Judicial and oﬃcial acts—
[Illustration (e)].—The rule embodied in the illustration ﬂows from the maxim omnia
praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta, i.e., all acts are presumed to have been rightly
and regularly done. "The true principle intended to be conveyed by the rule, "omnia
praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta,"...seems to be, that there is a general
disposition in court of justice to uphold oﬃcial, judicial, and other acts, rather than to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
render them inoperative, and with this view, where there is general evidence of acts
having been legally and regularly done, to dispense with proof of circumstances, strictly
speaking essential to the validity of those acts, and by which they were probably
accompanied in most instances, although in other the assumption rests solely on
grounds of public policy".460. The presumption is in favour of the constitutional validity
of an Act passed by the parliament.461.
The court cited the following passage from Herbert Broom's A Selection of Legal
Maxims:462.
In these cases the ordinary rule is that everything is presumed to be duly and rightly
performed until the contrary is shown. The following may be mentioned as general
presumptions of law illustrating this maxim: that a man, in fact acting in a public capacity,
was properly appointed and is duly authorised so to act; that in the absence of proof to the
contrary, credit should be given to public oﬃcers who have acted prima facie within the
limits of their authority, for having done so with honesty and discretion.

Where a statement appears in the judgment of a court that a particular thing happened
or did not happen before it, it ought not ordinarily to be permitted to be challenged by a
party unless both the parties to the litigation agree that the statement is wrong, or the
court itself admits that the statement is erroneous.463. Whether a presumption should
or should not be made must depend upon the particular circumstances of each
case.464. This illustration only means that, if an oﬃcial act is proved to have been done,
it will be presumed to have been regularly done,465. but it does not raise any
presumption that an act was done for which there is no evidence and proof. When the
Government accords sanction, section 114 Illustration (e) of the Evidence Act raises a
presumption that the oﬃcial acts were regularly performed. The burden is heavier on
the accused to rebut that statutory presumption.466. Neither motives can be presumed
nor bad faith or abuse of power.467. The appointment of teachers being governed by
statutory regulations is an oﬃcial act and a presumption of regularity attaches to it.468.
An order was passed by a magistrate in the course of performing his oﬃcial duty by
which a prosecution was sanctioned under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
Presumption of validity attached to the order. Examination of the magistrate was not
necessary.469.
Where under an Act certain things are required to be done before any liability attaches
to any person in respect of any right or obligation, it is for the person who alleges that
that liability has been incurred to prove that the things prescribed in the Act have been
actually done. No presumption can be made in favour of the things prescribed by the
Act having been done. If, for example, publication of a notice was essential under an
Act in order to bind a person, such publication must be distinctly proved.470. But the
Privy Council held that in the absence of evidence to the contrary it has to be presumed
that the procedure laid down in a statute was duly followed and that proper statutory
notice was given.471. Where a warrant contains a preamble that the requirement of a
section of an Act has been fulﬁlled, a presumption arises under this illustration that the
oﬃcer issuing the warrant has performed his duty correctly.472. The Calcutta High
Court has held that the Privy Council has virtually overruled the decisions which laid
down that it is not suﬃcient for the purpose of proving service of notice to rely on the
presumption arising out of this section.473.
A registered sale deed carries the presumption of genuineness. The burden of proving
that it is not so, lies on the person who denies its genuineness.474.
The mere fact that the impugned order of suspension did not contain a recital that the
Governor was satisﬁed that it was either necessary or desirable to place the delinquent
under suspension did not render the said order invalid.475.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Entries in Record of Rights are presumed to be correct. Such record stands on a
different footing than village papers or mutation papers. The law does not attach so
much sanctity to such papers as it does to Record of Rights. It has to be presumed to
be correct. Where any party alleges that an entry in the Record of Rights was not
correct, the burden would lie on him to prove it.476.
A presumption arises under this section as to legality and correctness of a court's
proceedings.477. Factual recitals or observations made in a judgment or order are
taken to be correct unless rebutted.478. Where the special appeals were ﬁled under
section 18 of the Rajasthan High Court Ordinance and Rule 134 of the Rules for the
High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan by the Additional Advocate General, it may be
presumed that he was duly authorised to ﬁle the said special appeals.479.
"A presumption has to be drawn under section 114(e) that the competent authority
must have before it the necessary materials which prima facie establish the
commission of the offence charged and that the competent authority had applied its
mind before tendering the consent. All the reasons for the consent order need not be
set out."480.
Presumption of regularity of acts extends to testamentary documents.481. It also
extends to appointments and removals. They are also presumed to have been effected
in due observance of applicable Rules and Regulations.482. But the Government has, in
the ﬁrst instance, to justify its action either by proper pleadings or by producing
records. A termination was declared to be invalid because the Government's failure to
do so.483.
Entries in Collector's books are presumed to be correct having regard to Illustrations (e)
and (f).484. A report signed by a Public Analyst under the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954 is, without any other proof, admissible in evidence under this
clause.485. The conﬁdential reports submitted by the medical examiners of the Life
Insurance Corporation will have to be accepted as true.486. First Information Report is a
public document.487. The certiﬁcate by Board of Censor is relevant but does not create
a presumption that sections 292 and 293 of IPC are not violated.488. Where the entries
in the record of rights maintained under the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 did not
show that a particular chunk of Brick-earth vested in the State, it was held that it
created an irrebuttable presumption that it vested in the owner of the land.489. Showing
mutation as a sale in a land record does not create a presumption that the entry was
correct. No proof of sale being the entry was rejected as being of any value.490. Where
the Magistrate has not recorded in the order-sheet the ascertainment of intactness of
seal and mark and non-tampering of signature of the accused on the sample received
from the Local Health Authority before sending it to the Director of Central Food
Laboratory which was not challenged before the Magistrate, presumption of regular
performance of judicial act could be drawn.491. National Savings Certiﬁcates are the
property of the Post Oﬃce and when the Post Master pledged them, the presumption
would be that the same had been done properly.492.

[s 114.12.1] Legislature.—
Courts always presume that the legislature inserted every part of the statute for a
purpose and legislative intention is that every part of it should have effect. This
presumption is equally applicable to rule making authorities.493.
The general presumption available for a statute cannot be invoked for an executive
action.494.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 114.12.2] Notiﬁed order of Government.—
The natural presumption is that this oﬃcial act of the Government has been done after
due application of mind.495.

[s 114.12.2.1] Rules and Regulations made under Statute.—
Rules or regulations made under a statute become a part of the statute. They have the
same statutory force and effect as the statute itself. A presumption arises that the
rules or regulations have been made for a particular purpose and that purpose should
be given effect to.496.

[s 114.12.2.2] Constitutionality.—
There is a presumption of validity of statutes. The courts presume that the legislature
understands and correctly appreciates situations and, therefore, there is always a
presumption in favour of constitutionality. The person who alleges that there is a
transgression of constitutional provisions, has to prove that fact.497.

[s 114.12.3] Acceptance of illegal gratiﬁcation.—
There is a presumption under section 20(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988,
which is of mandatory nature, that gratiﬁcation was accepted for performance of some
oﬃcial act. The prosecution proved in this case that the accused received gratiﬁcation
from the complainant. The court could draw the legal presumption that the gratiﬁcation
was accepted as a reward for doing public duty.498.
See sections 79–86 as to the presumptions of this kind in respect of documents.

[s 114.12.4] Proceedings of meetings.—
It is not obligatory that the minutes of proceedings of a meeting (corporators, in this
case) should be conﬁrmed at the subsequent meeting. The only requirement is that the
presiding oﬃcer of the next ensuing meeting should sign the minutes. Presumptive
value can be given to minutes, but this presumption is rebuttable. The corporators are
not estopped from disputing the correctness of the minutes by adducing evidence.499.

[s 114.13] Common Course of business—Delivery of letters.—
[Illustration (f)].— This illustration leaves it to the discretion of the court to presume that
a common course of business has been followed: but the court is not bound to
presume it.500. In commercial transactions the presumption is that the usual course of
business was followed by the parties thereto.
"Many presumptions are drawn from the usual course of business in public oﬃces.
With regard to the course of the post...if a letter is put into a post oﬃce, that is prima
facie proof, until the contrary appears, that the party to whom it is addressed received it
in due course."501. "Postmarks on letters are prima facie evidence that the letters were

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
in the post at the time and place therein speciﬁed if a letter properly directed, is proved
to have been either put into the post-oﬃce or delivered to the postman, it is presumed,
from the known course of business in that department of public service, that it reached
its destination at the regular time, and was received by the person to whom it was
addressed".502.
The presumption is stronger when the letter is sent by registered post and the
acknowledgement is signed by someone at the other end.503. In the case of a public
analyst's report, the requirement of law is to send the report to concerned persons by
Regd. Post and not with acknowledgement due also. The report was sent with
acknowledgement due which fact was not proved. It was held that if any excess has
been done beyond the requirement of law that will not affect the legal position as
stands under the law. Hence, non-proving of acknowledgement due does not affect the
presumption of the service of the report.504. In VP Shivanna v Bhadramma505. it was
held that, in a case of recovery of maintenance, notice sent to the husband by
Registered AD and not as contemplated under section 125(3), CrPC was illegal and
question of any inference about its receipt to be drawn under section 114 does not
arise. Where a notice was sent by registered post AD and it was duly received and
acknowledgement signed, presumption of service arises and it was not necessary to
examine the postman simply because the receipt of notice was denied.506.
In view of the provisions of section 114 Illustration (f) of the Evidence Act and section
27 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, there is a presumption that the addressee has
received the letter sent by registered post. However, the presumption is rebuttable on a
consideration of evidence of impeccable character.507.
It will all depend on the facts of each case whether the presumption of service of a
notice sent under postal certiﬁcate should be drawn. It is true that the presumption
would apply with greater force to letters which are sent by registered post, yet, when
facts so justify, such a presumption is expected to be drawn even in the case of a letter
sent under postal certiﬁcate.508.

[s 114.13.1] Open post card.—
Where a post card was delivered through the post oﬃce, the court said that there was
no presumption that it was written by the sender. The only presumption was that it
reached the addressee in the ordinary course of post.509.
See sections 16 and 32(2). Entries in the regularly maintained register of a nationalised
company have been held to be perfectly reliable.510. A cheque of a customer was
honoured beyond his balance without any agreement as to overdraft. It was presumed
to be a loan.511. Where two sets of account were seized, the court refused to draw the
presumption that accounts showing less turnover were correct.512.
From the publication of statements in the shape of advertisements identical to those
issued by an elected candidate, no inference could be drawn that they too were issued
by the same candidate.513.

[s 114.14] Withholding of evidence—
[Illustration (g)].—The presumption under section 114, illustration (g) is only a
permissible inference and not a necessary inference. The court has the option, it may
or may not raise presumption on the proof of certain facts. It depends upon the nature
of the fact required to be proved and its importance in the controversy, the usual mode

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of proving it, the nature, quality and cogency of evidence, which has not been produced
and its accessibility to the party concerned, all of which have to be taken into account.
It is only when all these matters are duly considered that an adverse inference can be
drawn against the party.514. This illustration deals with the presumption arising from
withholding evidence. The aspect of adverse inference under section 114, illustration
(g) could arise in a case where there is no evidence insofar as the evidence that was
available was suppressed or not produced. But in a situation where the material
produced by the prosecution is itself suﬃcient, section 114, Illustration (g) cannot
come to the assistance of the accused.515. The conduct of the person withholding the
evidence may be attributed to a supposed consciousness that the evidence, if
produced, would operate against him. In a criminal case failure to give evidence of
relevant facts leads to the presumption, that evidence which could be produced and is
not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to the person who withholds it.516.
Though the prosecution is not bound to call all available witnesses irrespective of
considerations of number517. or reliability, witnesses essential to the unfolding of the
narrative on which the prosecution is based must be called by the prosecution, whether
in the result the effect of their testimony is for or against the case for the prosecution.
It, therefore, becomes necessary to prove that the witnesses in question had seen the
occurrence and, therefore, their evidence was material and the same has been
deliberately withheld.518. Explaining the role of the court in this connection the
Supreme Court observed:519.
It is a cardinal rule in the law of evidence that the best available evidence should be brought
before the court to prove a fact or the points in issue. But it is left either for the prosecution
or for the defence to establish its respective case by adducing the best available evidence
and the court is not empowered under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure to
compel either the prosecution or the defence to examine any particular witness or
witnesses on their sides. Nonetheless if either of the parties withholds any evidence which
could be produced and which, if produced, be unfavourable to the party withholding such
evidence, the court can draw a presumption under Illustration (g) to section 114 of the
Evidence Act. In such a situation a question that arises for consideration is whether the
presiding oﬃcer of a court should simply sit as a mere umpire at a contest between two
parties and declare at the end of the combat who has won and who has lost or is there not
any legal duty of his own, independent of the parties, to play an active role in the
proceedings in ﬁnding out the truth and administering justice? It is a well accepted and
settled principle that a court must discharge its statutory function, whether they be
discretionary or obligatory it is the duty of a court not only to do justice but also to ensure
that justice is being done.

Before drawing an adverse inference against a party for non-production of a document,
it must be ascertained whether the document actually existed and whether it was in the
possession of the party.520. A party cannot be called upon to produce evidence with
regard to an issue which is not part of its case. There can be no adverse presumption
in such a case.521.
Where in an accident claim, the insurer pleaded limited liability and produced only the
attested copy of the policy on a different form, adverse inference could be drawn
against the insurer for non-production of the original or oﬃce copy of the policy.522. An
adverse presumption was drawn against the driver of a truck which was involved in a
head on collision because he refused to appear in the witness box to avoid crossexamination. His helper was testifying about matters.523. The complainant alleged that
a cheque was given to him under a share transaction; but he did not produce his
statutory books of account relating to the transaction. An adverse inference was drawn
against him.524.
The presumption laid down in this illustration was held to apply to the case of counsel,
engaged in a suit, who should not have been, under the circumstances counsel but
should have been called as a witness.525. An adverse presumption arose where a
notiﬁcation declared certain premises as shops without giving any opportunity to the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
owner. The relevant material justifying the notiﬁcation was also not produced in the
court.526. Where the defendant Government failed to produce the original document for
a long time of ﬁve years, an adverse inference was drawn.527. A written report was
made by the deceased's father to the police and that was the ﬁrst contemporaneous
document putting on record the true facts pertaining to the incident. It was not
produced by the prosecution despite directions by the Sessions Judge. The court said
that this raised a doubt against the prosecution case.528. A worker claimed to have
become permanent on account of continuous service. The Reserve Bank failed to
produce any records. The worker's case was presumed to be true.529. Where the
plaintiff brought a suit for the recovery of loan amount on the basis of pro-note from
the defendant who pleaded repayment and the plaintiff, though he maintained an
account, did not produce it in the court, an adverse inference was drawn against
him.530. A supplier on instalments wanted to impose a penalty on the failure of the
buyer to pay an instalment. But he did not produce the agreement which enabled him to
do so. An adverse presumption was drawn against him.531.
Where a suit was ﬁled for speciﬁc enforcement of an agreement as to an immovable
property, the vendor did not step into the witness box to depose in support of her case,
the court drew the adverse inference that the case set up by her was not true.532. The
court said:533. The party has not stepped into the witness box to depose in support of
her case and to subject herself to cross-examination. It has been held by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Ishwar Bhai C. Patel v. Harihar Behara,534. that if a defendant does not
enter the witness box to make a statement on oath in support of the pleadings set out
in the written statement, an adverse inference would arise that what he had stated in
the written statement was not correct. In the present case as well on the failure of
defendant No. 3 to step into the witness box, an adverse inference will have to be
drawn against her that the case set up by her is not true.
Where a party refuses to submit to a medical examination in a case where the whole
case depends on the state of his or her mind or body, it will be open to the court to
draw an adverse inference or presumption against the recalcitrant party.535.
Where the plaintiff refused to give his specimen signature for the purpose of
comparison with disputed signature, the court refused to draw any adverse
presumption against him, because admitted signature of the plaintiff was already there
on record and no effort was made to use the same for comparison purposes.536.
However, where a witness ﬁled "evidence aﬃdavit" and refused to undergo a crossexamination or was withheld and not offered for cross-examination, an adverse
inference could be drawn against such witness or the party. "Evidence aﬃdavit" was to
be ignored.537.
In a trial for the offence of rape, it was alleged that the woman was raped when her
husband was sleeping in the same room. It was held that the failure to examine the
husband was fatal to the prosecution and an adverse inference could be drawn under
section 114, Illustration (g).538.
No presumption is created against the prosecution by reason of any conﬂict between
medical version of the incident and that of the eyewitnesses.539.
The object of O XII, rule 8 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 is to facilitate the plaintiff
or any other party to get a document on record, which is not in their possession or in
the possession of the other party. If a document has been produced then it is the duty
of the party who has asked for such production to get it placed on record. If, however,
the said document is not placed on record, then adverse inference against the party
who has produced the same cannot be drawn, more so, when the party who has

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
produced the said document before the court has been cross-examined vis-à-vis that
document.540.

[s 114.14.1] Government claim of privilege.—
The High Court directed the Central Government to produce a copy of the note put up
before the cabinet and its decision on the point. The Central Government refused to
comply with the direction claiming privilege in regard to the document. The court said
that in the facts of the case, such act of the Government indicated mala ﬁdes.541.

[s 114.14.2] Failure to produce leave register.—
A public servant who was facing the charge of bribery failed to produce the casual
leave register of his Department for the purpose of showing that he was on leave on
the alleged date of acceptance of bribe at oﬃce. An adverse inference on this ground in
the circumstances of the case was held to be not proper. He was able to show his
application for caused leave for that particular day and his absence from the oﬃce was
proved by the evidence of an oﬃcer. Such evidence could not have been discarded.542.
The presumption under the section being non-obligatory, the background facts play an
important role. No adverse inference can be drawn for non-production of evidence
which had not even been called for.543. Documents called for in the absence of any
pleadings are not relevant.544.

[s 114.14.3] Failure to produce document in proof of age.—
In a charge under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 the accused wanted
the beneﬁt of probation on the ground that he was below 18 years of age. But he did
not produce his school leaving certiﬁcate in proof of his age in spite of opportunity.
Municipal birth certiﬁcate was also not produced. The court said that a presumption
under section 114(g) of the Evidence Act could be raised against the accused that if
the evidence in question had been produced it would have gone against him.545.

[s 114.14.4] Public functionary's failure to produce document.—
A document was in possession of a public functionary and he was under a statutory
duty to produce the same before the court. The court said that on his failure to do so
an adverse presumption could be drawn against him.546.

[s 114.14.5] Statement to police before becoming approver.—
Copies of statements made by an approver witness before police must be supplied to
the defence on demand, otherwise an adverse inference could be drawn against his
testimony. The defence could not be deprived of or denied the right to avail of the
statements made before the police so as to enable them to test the evidence of the
concerned witness or confront him with his earlier version and to ﬁnd out whether the
evidence in court was inconsistent with the earlier statements made before the police.
In the present case, copies of those statements were not made available to the
defence. The evidence of the approver had to be assessed in the light of this inﬁrmity,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
which gave rise to an adverse inference to the effect that if the statements had been
made available in response to the demand made by the defence, the same would have
impaired the value of his testimony.547.

[s 114.14.6] Compromise agreement.—
A wife ﬁled maintenance case and also criminal proceedings against the husband for
cruelty. They entered into a compromise agreement. The proceedings were withdrawn
and the wife came back to live with her husband. After about one and a half years the
husband ﬁled a case for divorce on the ground of cruelty by ﬁling criminal proceedings.
It was held that there was no cruelty by the wife. Her complaint was genuine, that is
why the husband entered into the compromise. The failure on the part of the husband
to produce a copy of the compromise agreement was a withholding of evidence
creating a presumption against him.548.

[s 114.14.7] Refusal to submit to medical examination.—
The plaintiff brought an action for damages for personal injuries, but refused to submit
for medical examination by the defendant's neurosurgeon. The court postponed the
trial because with such report it was not possible to hold a fair trial. The court said: The
plaintiff had blocked a potential solution to the problem by refusing to be examined by
the neurosurgeon. It was not then open to her to insist the trial proceed without the
defendant being able to produce evidence, whether orthopaedic or neurological, to
counter that of the plaintiff's neurosurgeon. The judge had attempted to give the
defendant a proper opportunity to respond to all the medical evidence which his expert
had not had the chance to consider and the plaintiff should have attended the
appointment despite the defendant choosing to go to a neurosurgeon.549.

[s 114.14.8] Refusal to participate in DNA test.—
It was alleged that the accused had sexual intercourse with the victim girl as a result of
which she was blessed with the child and in case the accused chose to decline the
direction of the court to undergo the DNA test to decide the paternity of the child, an
adverse inference could be drawn against him.550.

[s 114.14.9] Refusal to attend occupational therapy report.—
The plaintiff suffered a crushing injury to his left dominant hand and traumatic
amputation of all four ﬁngers at the proximal interphalangeal joints in an industrial
accident. Both parties instructed surgeons to examine the plaintiff and prepare reports
on his injuries and future prognosis. The plaintiff's solicitors also obtained a report
from an occupational therapist which assessed his disability and made suggestions to
assist him in coping with his disability. He brought an action claiming damages for
personal injuries. The defendant's solicitors requested facilities for an occupational
therapist specialist to interview him with a view to preparing a report. His solicitors
refused interview facilities with him but allowed the defendant's expert limited access
to his ﬂat to consider possible adaptations. The defendant's sought a stay of
proceedings on the basis that the plaintiff unreasonably refused to be interviewed by
his specialist. A argued that a comparison should be drawn between occupational

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
therapists and employment consultants. It was held granting a stay of proceedings,
that this was a claim where occupational therapist evidence was of importance for the
just determination of the case. There was no similarity between occupational therapist
specialists and employment consultants. It was necessary for the defendant's
occupational therapist expert to interview the plaintiff as opposed to preparing a report
from the medical evidence alone.551.

[s 114.15] Refusal to answer questions—
[Illustration (h)].—Refusal to answer a question is a legitimate ground of unfavourable
inference against the person who has to answer the question. See section 148(4), infra.
But this illustration does not contemplate the case of witnesses who are not compelled
to answer on grounds of privilege (vide sections 121–129).

[s 114.15.1] No presumption in criminal matters.—
The Supreme Court has laid down that in criminal matters no presumption should be
raised which does not have any origin in any statute as it may cause great prejudice to
the accused.552.

[s 114.15.2] Failure to traverse allegations.—
An adverse inference can ordinarily be drawn in respect of allegations which are not
traversed. But there is no rule that an adverse inference must always be drawn
whatever the facts and circumstances may be.553. There is also the rule that everybody
has to prove his own case and no one can take advantage of the weakness in evidence
of the other side.

[s 114.15.3] Compliance with or disregard order of High Court—
In a case involving illegitimacy of a child, the High Court had ordered the wife to
undergo a DNA test. The Supreme Court gave liberty to her to comply with or disregard
the order passed by the High Court and if she declined to comply with the direction
issued by the High Court, an adverse inference could be drawn against her, in terms of
the provisions of this section.554.
See section 313, Code of Criminal Procedure (Act V of 1973).

[s 114.16] Document in the hands of the obligor—
[Illustration (i)].—This presumption is founded on the natural supposition that a man will
protect his own interests by securing his bond before or at the time of discharging it.
Where the instrument of a debt and the security for that debt are found in the hands of
the debtor, the prima facie presumption is that the debt has been discharged.555. If a
pro-note is in the hands of the maker, there is a presumption that it has been paid off. If
the drawee alleges that the maker came into possession of the note unlawfully, the
onus is on him to prove it. This illustration only refers to presumption that may be
raised. It does not follow that such presumption would shift the onus of proof.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In a suit on a bond for money, plaintiff alleged that his non-production of the document
was due to the fact that the defendant had stolen it. The defendant admitted the
execution of the bond, but alleged that he had paid it; it was held that the burden of
proof was on the defendant to prove payment, either by the production of the bond, or
other evidence or by both.556.
Where plaintiff sued for money due upon hundis (bills of exchange), but alleged their
loss, whilst defendant admitted execution, but pleaded payment and subsequent
destruction of the documents, it was held that failing production of the hundis by the
defendant there was no presumption that the hundis had been discharged and the onus
was upon the defendant to prove payments.557.
In a suit for money due on a mortgage bond, the plaintiff produced only a copy of the
document, alleging in his plaint that it had been lost. The defendant admitted its
execution, but alleged that the debt had been discharged, and in support of his
allegation he produced the original document containing the endorsement of the
mortgagee through her agent of payment of the debt. It was held that the production by
the defendant of the bond with the endorsement of payment cast on the plaintiff the
burden of proving that the debt was still outstanding.558.

355. Deivendran A v State of TN, 1998 Cr LJ 814 : AIR 1998 SC 2821 , an explanation of the

circumstances in which presumption of this kind can be drawn.
356. Francis Stanly v Intelligence Oﬃcer, Narcotic Control Bureau, AIR 2007 SC 794 : 2007 Cr LJ

1157 , evidence of an accomplice should ordinarily be corroborated. K Hashim v State of TN, AIR
2005 SC 128 : (2005) 1 SCC 237 : 2005 Cr LJ 143 , corroboration means that there should be
some additional independent evidence rendering it probable that the story told by the
accomplice is true and it is reasonably safe to act upon it. The statement should identify the
accused as the one or one of those who committed the offence. It may not be direct evidence, it
would be enough to show circumstantial connection. Testimony of one accomplice cannot be
used as corroboration. In this case there was suﬃcient corroborative evidence.
357. Prabha Shanker Shukla v Shrikant Tiwari, AIR 2006 NOC 1115 (All), the driver put forth by

the claimant had no valid driving licence, hence no liability of insurer for the accident, Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, section 149.
358. Stephen's Introduction to Evidence Act.
359. Gazette of India, March 30, 1872 Supplement pp 234-235.
360. Sodhi Transport Co v UP, AIR 1986 SC 1099 : (1986) 2 SCC 486 : (1986) 2 SCC 486 : 1986

SCC (Tax) 410.
361. Lakhi Barua v UOI, AIR 2008 Cal 59 .
362. Muthukumaraswami Pillai v King-Emperor, (1912) 35 Mad 397 (FB); Sadashib Das v State,

(1957) Cut 680.
363. Mahabir Singh v Anant Ram, AIR 1966 All 214 .
364. R Puthunainar Alhithan v PH Pandian, AIR 1996 SC 1599 : (1996) 3 SCC 624 .
365. Hari Kumar v Sat Narain Mehra, 1996 AIHC 2700 (Del), explaining and distinguishing Ali

Hasan v Matiullah, AIR 1988 All 57 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
366. M Narsinga Rao v State of AP, AIR 2001 SC 318 at p 322; Suresh Bhudarmal Kalani v State of

Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 4592 : AIR 1998 SC 3258 , presumption can be drawn only from facts
and not from other presumptions by a process of probable and logical reasoning.
367. Suresh Budharmal kalani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1998 SC 3258 : 1998 AIR SCW 3182 :

(1998) 7 SCC 337 .
368. Ammal Chandra Dutt v IInd ADJ, AIR 1989 SC 255 : (1989) 1 SCC 1 .
369. Phipson on Evidence, 13th Edn, p 4.
370. Vattacherukuru Village Panchayat v Nori Venkatarama Deckshuthulu, 1991 Supp. 2 SCC 228.
371. State v Bhera, 1997 Cr LJ 1237 (Raj) see generally, State of AP v Gangula Satya Murthy, AIR

1997 SC 1588 : 1997 Cr LJ 774 .
372. Phipson, 10th Edn, p 2012.
373. Ibid, p 2016.
374. Sodhi Transport Co v State of UP, AIR 1986 SC 1099 : (1986) 2 SCC 486 .
375. Syad Akbar v Kant, AIR 1979 SC 1848 : 1979 Cr LJ 1374 explaining the difference between

the operation of a presumption of fact and that of law. Krishna Murari Prasad v Mitar Singh, AIR
1994 SC 489 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 439 , a fallacious statutory presumption.
376. State of Karnataka v David Rozario, 2002 Cr LJ 4127 (SC).
377. Tulshiram Sahadu Suryawanshi v State of Maharashtra, (2012) 10 SCC 373 .
378. Devyani v Kantilal Gamanlal, (1962) 65 Bom LR 24 .
379. Sona Meah v King Emperor, (1924) 2 Ran 476, 477. See Emperor v Abdul Gani, (1925) 27

Bom LR 1373 . See further Bank of India v Y Maredi, 1987 Cr LJ 722 : AIR 1987 SC 821 ,
withdrawing money from another's account, presumption of intention.
380. Packsyam Ammal v Pattu Ammal, AIR 1999 Mad 383 .
381. Y Venkanna Chowdry v G Lakshmidevamma, AIR 1994 Mad 140 .
382. Nera Bai v Pusia Bai, 1996 AIHC 122 (MP).
383. Kiran Mandal v Mohini Mandal, AIR 1989 P&H 310. See also State of UP v Chetram, AIR

1989 SC 1543 : (1989) 2 SCC 425 : 1989 Cr LJ 1785 , a lantern recovered from the room of
murder was deposed by the witnesses to be carrying a wick and chimney, presumption that
those things must have disappeared while in the property room. Virendra Kumar Tripathy v
Nirmala Devi, AIR 2006 SC 1724 : (2006) 3 SCC 615 , presumption as to reality of relationship
drawn from expression employed in the ordinary course of social life.
384. Khan Ali Md. Khan v Abdul Rahim, AIR 1981 J&K 57.
385. State v Orissa Oil Industries, AIR 1982 Ori 245 .
386. Naresh Pal v High School and Intermediate Education Board, AIR 1995 All 81 .
387. Krishna Kapoor v Himachal Road Transport Corp, AIR 1994 NOC 308 (HP).
388. Bansilal v Mohan Lal, AIR 1995 Raj 167 .
389. State of Punjab v Surja Ram, AIR 1995 SC 2413 : 1995 Cr LJ 4161 . Crystal Developers v

Asha Lata Ghose, AIR 2004 SC 4980 : (2005) 9 SCC 375 , inferences must be drawn from a given
set of facts and circumstances as they operate upon realistic diversity. T Shankar Prasad v State
of AP, AIR 2004 SC 1242 : 2004 Cr LJ 884 : (2004) 3 SCC 753 , factual or discretionary
presumptions should not be used to draw yet another discretionary presumption unless there is
a statutory compulsion. State of MP v Sanjay Rai, (2004) 10 SCC 570 : AIR 2004 SC 2174 ,
opinion in standard test books may be used for help and guidance, though the court has to form
its own opinion. The court's conclusion that the accused strangulated the victim arrived at only
on the basis of text books on medical jurisprudence without getting the passages examined by
experts was held to be not sustainable.
390. N Suryanarayana Raju v South Central Railways, AIR 2010 NOC 625 (AP).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
391. Swaminathan v Palaniammal, AIR 2009 NOC 221 (Mad). To the same effect is the decision

in Parmanand v Jagrani, AIR 2007 MP 242 , no presumption of marriage when the wife started
living with another during the life time of her husband. No custom to that effect in the
community was shown. She could not be regarded on the wedded wife of the other person.
392. Sobha Hymavathi Devi v Setti Gangadhara Swamy, (2005) 2 SCC 244 : AIR 2005 SC 800 .
393. Kiutadan Velyaudhan Re, AIR 2001 Ker 123 .
394. Arun Kumar Bhardwaj v Anila Bhardwaj, AIR 1993 P&H 33.
395. State v Jagdish Chandra Jena, 1998 Cr LJ 4771 (Ori).
396. Benjamin v State, AIR 2008 SC 1383 : 2008 Cr LJ 1806 : (2008) 3 SCC 745 .
397. Hansanali v Darashah, (1948) Nag 922.
398. Zeenat v Prince of Wales Medical College, AIR 1971 Pat 43 ; Taneja Skins Co Pvt Ltd v

Bharath Skins Corp, AIR 2002 Delhi 179 , goods delivered and taken delivery of at Delhi, the
person selecting and taking delivery was an employee of the buyer. Since he was so acting
openly, the presumption prevailed that he was an employee of the buyer at Delhi. The High Court
of Delhi accordingly had jurisdiction.
399. Atul Mehra v Bank of Maharashtra, AIR 2003 P&H 11, the bank was the victim of robbery.
400. Baru v Tejpal, AIR 1998 All 230 , PS. Manoharan v State of TN, AIR 1999 Mad 208 , merely

because a ﬁle in a Government oﬃce is destroyed, the genuineness and correctness of a
certiﬁcate (certiﬁcate of permanent residence in the state) was not to be doubted unless there
are other circumstances to rebut the presumption as to oﬃcial acts.
401. RS Nayak v AR Antulay, (1986) 2 SCC 716 : AIR 1986 SC 2045 : 1986 Cr LJ 1922 per

Ranganath Misra J. There is a presumption in favour of the contents of a Government
publication Pushpa Devi M Jatia v ML Wadhawan, (1987) 3 SCC 367 : AIR 1987 SC 1748 : 1987
Cr LJ 1888 , oﬃcial acts of the holder of an existing oﬃce are recognised as valid.
402.

Norton, 299; Sabitri Sharma v State of Orissa, 1987 Cr LJ 950 (Ori), proof of mere

possession, no presumption. Jogendra Singh v State of Orissa, 1991 Cr LJ 2331 (Ori), driver of a
truck not to be convicted on mere proof that he was carrying the goods. Abdul Rashid v State of
UP, 1991 Cr LJ 3065 (All), property found on land adjoining that of the accused, no presumption.
403. Emperor v Chhidda, (1944) All 694 .
404. Emperor v Jagannath, (1945) All 11 ; Amar Singh v MP, AIR 1982 SC 129 : 1982 Cr LJ 610 :

(1982) 3 SCC 214 recovery of property shortly after dacoity; Virumal v Gujarat, AIR 1974 SC 334 :
1974 Cr LJ 277 : (1974) 3 SCC 565 , stolen goods found possession within 2 days; Thulia Kali v
TN, AIR 1973 SC 501 : 1972 Cr LJ 1296 , a person from whose custody things are recovered
must be examined. See generally, Rameshkumar Soni v State, 1997 Cr LJ 3418 (MP).
405. Sohan Singh v State, (1955) Patiala 601. See, Shankar v State, 1989 Cr LJ 1066 (Del), where

this presumption was resorted to though only some of the robbed articles were recovered.
Guman v State of MP, 1989 Cr LJ 1425 (MP), where the property recovered from the accused
was that of a deceased person and there was no proof whether the same was removed before
or after death, hence no proof of theft and no presumption. Limbaji v State of Maharashtra, AIR
2002 SC 491 : 2002 Cr LJ 590 , test of recent possession, the accused came into possession of
ornaments soon after the commission of robbery and murder, one article sold very next day to a
shop keeper, other articles were discovered from places of concealment within a short time as
disclosed by the accused. This created the presumption that the accused were themselves
involved in the commission of robbery and murder. Deivendran A v State of TN, 1998 Cr LJ 814 :
AIR 1998 SC 2821 in a case of murder and robbery, the main accused was convicted of murder,
the other accused persons from whom only articles were recovered were not convicted for
murder. In contrast to this is the decision in Ronny v State of Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 1638 : AIR
1998 SC 1251 , articles belonging to the family of the deceased were recovered from the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
possession of the accused soon after the incident of robbery and murder. The accused person
could not explain his possession. Murder and robbery were found to be a part of the same
transaction. The Supreme Court concluded that the accused and none else committed murder
and robbery. Ezhil v State of TN, 2002 Cr LJ 2799 : AIR 2002 SC 2017 , dead body was recovered
from near a bridge in the village, articles belonging to him were recovered from the two accused
persons who were moving in a car, very proximately to the time of death, blood stained articles
recovered from the dicky of the car, no plausible explanation by them, presumption of robbery
and murder against them. State of Orissa v Dayanidhi Bisoi, 2003 Cr LJ 123 (Ori), recovery of
incriminating materials, presumption that the accused persons were responsible for murder and
robbery.
406. Bama v State, (1958) Cut 131. Praveen Kumar v State of Karnataka, (2003) 12 SCC 199 :

2003 (4) Crimes 358 (SC), accused was in constructive possession of ornaments belonging to
the deceased immediately after the murder, he offered no explanation, inference that the
accused robbed the victim and committed murder in that process. Gilbert Pereira v State of
Karnataka, (2004) 12 SCC 281 : AIR 2004 SC 4454 , robbery and murder, gold chain worn by the
deceased missing, presumption.
407. Tulsiram v State, AIR 1954 SC 1 : 1954 Cr LJ 236 .
408. Shivappa v State of Mysore, AIR 1971 SC 196 : 1971 Cr LJ 260 . Thavaraj Pandian v State,

2003 Cr LJ 2642 (Mad), recovery of stolen jewels from the accused one month after the
incident. Presumption against the accused drawn. Mere length of time did not matter. The
accused was not able to explain how the articles came into his possession.
409. State of Karnataka v Rajan, 1994 Cr LJ 1042 (Kant).
410. Baiju v MP, AIR 1978 SC 522 : 1978 Cr LJ 646 : 1978 Mad LJ (Cr) 300.
411. Mohan Lal v Ajit Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1183 : 1978 Cr LJ 1107 .
412. Ramasarup Singh v King-Emperor, (1929) 9 Pat 606; Queen-Empress v Sami, (1890) 13 Mad

426; Bandhan Sao, (1960) Pat 361; Dhyanigope v King-Emperor, (1946) 25 Pat 262; Pritam Singh v
The State, (1954) Pun 907.
413. Surjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 110 : 1993 Cr LJ 3901 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 208 .
414. State v Balakrishnan, 1992 Cr LJ 1872 (Mad).
415. AIR 1994 SC 1496 : 1994 Cr LJ 2170 .
416. Gurucharan Singh v State, 1993 Cr LJ 1622 (Del).
417. State of AP v Vasudeva Rao, AIR 2004 SC 960 : (2004) 9 SCC 319 : 2004 Cr LJ 620 .
418. Bhanwaroo Khan v UOI, AIR 2002 SC 1614 .
419. Avtar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2002 SC 3343 : 2002 Cr LJ 4330 .
420. Ramaswami Gounden v Emperor, (1903) 27 Mad 271, 277.
421. Emperor v Mataprasad Shivharak, (1942) 45 Bom LR 64 ; State v Ram Singh, (1954) Cut 309.
422. Noor Ahmad v Emperor, (1933) 62 Cal 527 .
423. Provincial Government, Central Provinces and Berar v Raghuram, (1942) Nag 749.
424. Emperor v Kalwa, (1926) 48 All 409 .
425. Rebati Mohan Chakravarty v Emperor, (1928) 56 Cal 150 . See also Rampal Pithwa Rahidass

v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 2320 : 1994 Supp (2) SCC 73 (SC) and S.C. Bahri v State of
Bihar, AIR 1994 SC 2020 : 1994 Cr LJ 3271 .
426. Srinivas Mall Bairoliya v Emperor, (1947) 49 Bom LR 688 (PC).
427. Queen-Empress v Bastin, (1897) PJLB 365, contra, Mi The U v Queen-Empress, (1881) SJLB

146.
428. Rajagopal, (1944) Mad 308 (FB).
429. Reg v Gallagher, (1875) 13 Cox 61.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
430. Rex v Baskerville, (1916) 2 KB 658 .
431. Hussain Umar v Dalipsinghji, AIR 1970 SC 45 : 1970 Cr LJ 9 .
432. Ram Singh v The Crown, (1950) Pun 209; Bhima Swa v State, (1956) Cut 195.
433. Kedar v Rex, (1949) All 152 .
434. Raju v State of Mysore, (1953) 55 Bom LR 191 .
435. CR Mehta v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 2863 (Bom).
436. Rameshwar v State of Rajasthan, (1952) SCR 377 : AIR 1952 SC 54 ; Bhownri v The State,

(1952) Raj 817 .
437. Gurcharan Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1972 SC 2661 : 1973 Cr LJ 179 . But corroboration

can be waived in the light of apparent circumstances, Krishan Lal v Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 1252 :
1980 Cr LJ 926 ; State of Maharashtra v CK Jain, 1990 Cr LJ 889 : AIR 1990 SC 658 , rape by
police oﬃcer, no corroboration was considered necessary.
438. Ashok Kumar v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 2859 (All).
439. State of Maharashtra v Chandraprakash Kewalchand Jain, (1990) 1 SCC 550 : AIR 1990 SC

658 : 1990 Cr LJ 889 .
440. Sheikh Zakir v State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 911 : 1983 Cr LJ 1285 .
441. State of Maharashtra v CK Jain, AIR 1990 SC 658 at 664-665 : 1990 Cr LJ 889 .
442. Subir Kumar Kundu v State of West Bengal, 1992 Cr LJ 1502 (Cal).
443. A Bal Reddy v Saraswathi, 1994 Cr LJ 1124 (AP), the case was for maintenance.
444. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 148, p 139.
445. Gulab Chand v Satya Vrat, AIR 1983 SC 54 . State of Haryana v Manoj Kumar, AIR 2010 SC

1779 : (2010) 4 SCC 350 , the fact that the sale deed was executed under the decree of a court
was held to be not a ground to presume the genuineness of the sale price mentioned in the
deed.
446. Ningawa v Bharmappa, (1897) 23 Bom 63, 66.
447. Bannu Mal v Munshi Ram, (1935) 17 Lah 107, 113.
448. Narasamma v Veeraju, (1934) 58 Mad 841, 850.
449. Oﬃcial Receiver v Abdul Shakoor, AIR 1965 SC 920 : (1965) 1 SCR 254 .
450. Indian Bank v Booruga Nagaiah Rajanna, AIR 2000 AP 289 .
451.

Hiten P Dalal v Bratindranath Banerjee, 2001 Cr LJ 4647 (SC) at p 4653; Malanbai

Ratnaparkhi v Govind R Motade, 2002 Cr LJ 1188 (Bom) presumption of service of notice, sent by
post at correct address. Suresh Kanhaiyalal Prajapat v Manoj Balkrishna Bansal, 2003 Cr LJ
(NOC) 94 (MP), no such presumption was raised where the address was not correct. The court
also said that an inference of delivery was not to be made from the remark that the "addressee
was not found".
452. Kumar Exports v Sharma Carpets, (2009) 2 SCC 513 .
453. N Parameswaran Unni v G Kannan, AIR 2017 SC 1681 : (2017) 5 SCC 737 .
454. Jaswant Kaur v Additional District Judge Court, Faizabad, 2017 (5) ADJ 72 : 2017 (123) ALR

104 .
455. Ambika Prasad v Ram Ekbal Rai, AIR 1966 SC 605 : (1966) 1 SCR 758 .
456. Mussammat Jariutool-Butool v Mussumat Hoseinee Begum, (1867) 11 Moo Ind App 194 ,

209.
457. Chito Mahto v Lila Mahto, AIR 1991 Pat 186 .
458. Raghunath Tiwari v Ramakant Tiwari, AIR 1991 Pat 145 .
459. Ram Rakhi v Atti, AIR 1993 HP 137 . T Siddoshi v Deputy Commissioner, AIR 2001 Kant 297 ,

change in mutation of records in favour of a partnership ﬁrm by a sale deed does not affect the
legality of the possession of the person who was already in possession. S. Venkatappa v

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Narayanappa, AIR 2001 SC 2148 , occupancy rights of the person proved to be in possession not
allowed to be affected by the declaration in the sale deed that vacant possession was being
given to the buyer.
460. BEST, 12th Edn, section 353, p 312; Narendra Lal Khan v Jogi Hari, (1905) 32 Cal 1107 ,

1121; Emperor v Leslie Gwill, (1944) 47 Bom LR 431 : (1945) Bom 681. Narayan v Maharashtra,
AIR 1977 SC 183 : (1977) 1 SCC 133 , presumption as to public purpose in acquisition. Kashmiri
Lal v Punjab, AIR 1984 P&H, 87, notiﬁcation is different from order. The latter does not amount to
public knowledge. Achchey Lal v VC Gpr. University, AIR 1985 All 1 , admissions beyond
prescribed limit can be questioned. Twarku v Surti, AIR 1997 HP 76 , entries in a family Register
maintained in accordance with Rules created the presumption of correctness as they were
made and maintained by public oﬃcers in due discharge of their duties.
461. Harpal Singh v Union Territory, Chandigarh, AIR 1978 P & H 68 at 71.
462. Page 642 (1939 Edn).
463. Bank of Bihar v Mahabir Lal, AIR 1964 SC 377 : (1964) 2 SCJ 611 ; State v Orissa Oil

Industries, AIR 1982 Ori 245 .
464. Harkishan Das v The Crown, (1943) 25 Lah 245 (FB). Things forming part of judicial

records, such as a person's signature upon a plaint ﬁled in a court, are presumed to be true,
Shahnaz v Dr Vijay, AIR 1995 Bom 30 , after a divorce decree, the allegation by wife that her
signature on petition was obtained by force was not entertained.
465. Pratap Singh v Manmohan Dey, AIR 1966 SC 1931 : (1966) 3 SCR 663 ; MB State v Beharamji

D & Co, AIR 1958 MP 71 ; Krishna Murthy v Abdul Shubhan, AIR 1965 (Mys) 128 ; State of
Rajasthan v Shamsher Singh, AIR 1985 SC 1082 : 1985 Cr LJ 1348 , opinion expressed by a
Board under MISA; Sone Lal v UP, AIR 1978 SC 1142 : 1978 Cr LJ 1122 , regular entries in public
documents, allegation of fabrication and delay in lodging FIR; Shankaranlingappa v Nanji Gowda,
AIR 1981 Kant 78 , entry in record of rights. Laxmibai v Thoreppa, AIR 1982 Kant 248 , entries in
death register. Ashim Kumar Dutta v State of WB, 1989 Cr LJ 1797 , presumption that a sanction
under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 for prosecution must have been granted
after due consideration. Mathukutty v State of Kerala, 1988 Cr LJ 898 : AIR 1988 Ker 60 ,
presumption that sampling was properly done. Nirmal Kumar v State, 1987 Cr LJ 46 (MP), in
spite of the presumption of proper sample, the court has to form opinion whether it was really
so. Revta v State, 1987 Cr LJ 1967 (MP), proceedings proper, presumption. Madhu Khanna v
Administrator, Delhi, 1987 Cr LJ 318 : AIR 1987 SC 48 , presumption that the conﬁrming authority
considered all relevant material. Food Inspector v V Velayudhan, 1987 Cr LJ 1137 (Ker),
Municipal Commissioner authorised by notiﬁcation under the Act to act as a Local Authority,
presumption of authority. Kartar Singh v DDA, AIR 2000 Delhi 184 , demarcation of plot of land,
Revenue Oﬃcials are supposed to be conversant with relevant rules, demarcation was done in
the performance of oﬃcial acts, presumed correct, objections would have to be substantiated
with evidence. Kamal Singh v State of UP, AIR 1998 All 220 , cancellation of mining lease on the
ground that the area fell within the forest area. There was expert report to that effect.
Presumption prevailed. No evidence to the contrary produced.
466. MS Reddy v State Inspector of Police, AC.B, Nellore, 1993 Cr LJ 558 (AP). Ranganathan v

State, 1996 Cr LJ 2041 (Mad). Devender Pal Singh v State NCT of Delhi, 2002 Cr LJ 2034 (SC),
TADA, 1987, confessional statement, the mere statement that the requisite procedures and
safeguards were not observed or that the statement was taken under duress or coercion, was
held to be of no consequence. There is the presumption that a person acts honestly which
applies as much in favour of police oﬃcers as to others. The contrary must be proved.
Kshudiram Pal v West Bengal Financial Corpn., AIR 1998 Cal 52 , notice issued by an oﬃcer valid
delegation of power, presumption as to oﬃcial acts applied.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
467. SR Bommai v UOI, AIR 1994 SC 1918 : (1994) 3 SCC 1 .
468. Naseem Bano v State of UP, AIR 1993 SC 2592 : 1993 Supp (4) SCC 46 : (1993) 4 Serv LR

803, the appointees were not qualiﬁed for promotion and therefore, the presumption was that
the appointment was not on promotion.
469. State of MP v Jiyalal, AIR 2010 SC 1451 : (2009) 15 SCC 72 .
470. Ashanullah Khan Bahadur v Trilochan Bagchi, (1886) 13 Cal 197 ; Walvekar v Emperor,

(1926) 53 Cal 718 .
471. Jitendra Nath Ghose v Monmohan Ghose, (1930) 57 IA 214 : 58 Cal 301. See Balakrishna

Pillai v State of Kerala, AIR 1992 Ker 136 , an endorsement by village oﬃcer that the substance
of the notiﬁcation of acquisition of land was announced in the locality was presumed to be true
until rebutted.
472. Emperor v Savlaram Kashinath, (1947) 49 Bom LR 798 .
473. Sasi Sekhar Sen Biswas v Maharaja Bir Bikram Kishore Manikya, (1931) 35 Cal WN 1239.

Lumbini Baruah v Cotton College, AIR 1997 Gau 87 , the application of the candidate was duly
processed and scrutinised through sub-committee, which recommended her name for
admission on being fully satisﬁed about eligibility, presumption applicable to performance of
oﬃcial acts arose. The candidate pursued her course for a whole year. Withholding of her result
for veriﬁcation of eligibility was held to be not proper. The candidate had done nothing wrong
and was not trying for any undue advantage.
474. Govind Anant Goltekar v Dasharath Deoba Goltekar, AIR 2006 Bom 174 .
475. State of Haryana v Hari Ram Yadaw, AIR 1994 SC 1262 : (1994) 2 SCC 277 .
476. Janadan Rai v Mandeo Rai, AIR 1997 Pat 124 .
477. Munshi Raghubir Singh v Rani Rajeshwari Devi, (1933) 9 Luck 90 ; Sheikh Ala Baksh v Thakur

Durga Baksh Singh, (1933) 9 Luck 162 ; Laikunnissah v Hari Pd, AIR 1980 All 63 , Court auction
sale, presumption of validity. Rama Krishna v Lakshminaryayana, AIR 1984 Kant 45 , presumption
that all oﬃcial acts are in accordance with proper order. Rudnap Export-Import v Estern
Associates Ltd, AIR 1984 Del 20 , presumption of validity of documents authenticated by a
foreign judge. Vijaya College Trust v Kumta Co-op Arecanut Sales Society Ltd, AIR 1995 Kant 35 ,
an order of attachment before judgment does not create a presumption that the attachment
must in fact have been carried out.
478. State of Maharashtra v Admane Anita Moti, AIR 1995 SC 350 : (1994) 6 SCC 109 ; Krishna

Rani Kwatra v DDA, AIR 1999 Del 194 , auction of shops, plaintiff's bid accepted for a shop,
cancellation afterwards on the ground that the vice-chairman had not accepted the bid.
Cancellation not allowed. Presumption that oﬃcial acts must have been performed properly.
479. Regional Transport Authority, Jodhpur v Sita Ram, AIR 1993 Raj 76 . Proof of notiﬁcation

and its publication in the locality under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, evidence of peon that he
aﬃxed the copy at a conspicuous place in the locality, enough, Ajai Krishan v UOI, AIR 1996 SC
2677 : (1996) 10 SCC 721 .
480. State of Bihar v PP Sharma, AIR 1961 SC 1260 : 1991 Cr LJ 1438 . Zorawar Singh v Sarwan

Singh, AIR 2002 SC 1711 : (2002) 4 SCC 460 , a document was ﬁled with an authority, it returned
the document without making any entry in any oﬃcial record. The plea as to ﬁling was belatedly
raised. Authority not examined. Presumption as to correctness of oﬃcial acts could not be
applied to such a document.
481. Satipada Chatterjee v Annakali Debya, (1955) 1 Cal 94 .
482. Naseem Bano v State of UP, AIR 1993 SC 2592 : 1993 Supp (4) SCC 46 .
483. Vijay Narain Singh v Supdt. of Police, 1994 SCC (L & S) 796 : (1994) 27 ATC 405 .
484. Mahomed Solaiman v Birendra Chandra Singh, (1922) 50 Cal 243 : 50 IA 247; Emperor v Shib

Charan, (1938) All 386 ; Karewwa v Hessensab Khansaheb, AIR 2002 SC 504 , presumption as to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
correctness of entries in revenue record, this presumption can be rebutted by leading evidence.
Such entries do not stand rebutted by a mere denial statement made in the written statement.
485. State v Chhotekhan, AIR 1970 MP 29 (FB); Lacho Devi v State, 1991 Cr LJ 2793 (Del); the

fact that the secret information was not recorded before the raid is not material, but the
authorities have to show observance of proper procedure for sampling and no tampering till
laboratory test. On the report of Public Analyst and Food Inspector, Competent Authority issued
order for prosecution, Court could draw presumption that the said authority applied its mind
before tendering "consent", Senior Food Inspector, Ananthapur v Ravuru Subbaiah, 1992 Cr LJ
2289 (AP), following Bihar v PP Sharma, AIR 1991 SC 1260 : 1991 Cr LJ 1438 .
486. LI Corp v B Chandravathamma, AIR 1971 AP 41 .
487. Krishan Ram v Chuni Lal, AIR 1981 P&H 120.
488. Raj Kapoor v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1980 SC 258 : 1980 Cr LJ 202 .
489. State of Punjab v Subash Chander, AIR 1991 P&H 134.
490. Ram Sarup v State of Punjab, 1987 Cr LJ 928 (P&H). Sukumar Roy v Rabindra Chandra Roy,

AIR 1994 Gau 67 , certiﬁed copy issued by the sub-Registrar, the scribe of the original document
was also examined correctness presumed.
491. Kailash Chand Gaggar v State of Assam, 1993 Cr LJ 2632 (Gau). The preparation of crop

record by Tehsildar is an oﬃcial act, presumption of regular performance arises, Pabbathi Reddy
v PRS, AIR 1996 AP 300 .
492. Gorakhnath Upadhyaya v State of UP, AIR 1994 All 283 ; DSE Brokers Forum, Bombay v SEBI,

AIR 2001 SC 1010 , fee levied by SEBI on stock brokers and sub-brokers is both registration and
regulatory fee. The Board had competence to levy it.
493. Balkishan v Shrilal, AIR 1994 MP 14 .
494. Baby P v Hindustan Petroleum Corp Ltd, Mumbai, AIR 2016 Ker 184 , para 7.vii.
495. Marie Emmanuelle Verhoeven v UOI, (2016) 6 SCC 456 , para 123.
496. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co Ltd v RBI, (1992) 2 SCC 343 : AIR 1992 SC

1033 : (1992) 75 Comp Cas 12 .
497. Rakesh Bansal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2003 NOC 68 (Raj) : (2002) 2 Raj LR, 153, the

provision in a taxing statute that for every evasion, 4 times more would have to be paid. This
was held to be valid.
498. M Narsinga Rao v State of AP, 2001 Cr LJ 515 (SC).
499. Tarvindersingh Mahendra Singh Dhillon v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2000 Bom 223 .
500. Ram Das Chakarbati v The Oﬃcial Liquidator, Cotton Ginning Co Ltd, Caunpore, (1887) 9 All

366 , 376.
501. Best, 12th Edn, section 403, p 344.
502. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 179, p 163; Harihar Banerjee v Ramshashi Roy, AIR 1918 PC 102 .

Where the invitation cards bore postal stamps of the place of posting and also the place of
destination, inference could be drawn that in the normal course of things they were posted and
received by the addressee. Vandavasi Karthikeya v S Kamalamma, AIR 1994 AP 102 . Refusal by
tenant to receive notice, presumption of service, R.A Qureshi v Xth Addl DJ, Meerut, AIR 1995 All
345 . P Purushotham Reddy v Pratap Steels Ltd, AIR 2003 AP 141 , despatch of registered letter
proved, presumption of delivery was not rebutted by the addressee by showing that the address
put on the cover was incorrect, or that the postal authorities never tendered that letter or that
there was endorsement by the postal authority that the letter could not be delivered. Mere denial
of receipt was not suﬃcient.
503. Hazaribagh Municipality v Fulchand, AIR 1966 Pat 434 .
504. State of MP v Ramdeo Agrawal, 1995 Cr LJ 1512 (MP). A letter sent by registered post, if

not returned to the sender within 30 days, creates a presumption of delivery, Piara Singh v A S.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Lyalpuri, AIR 1994 NOC 335 (Del). Notice sent in accordance with law, presumption of due
services arises, Vinod Khanna v Bakshi Sachdev, AIR 1996 Delhi 32 . GS. Shrikanth v Sri Lakshmi
Financers, 1999 Cr LJ 329 (AP), demand notice under section 138, Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881, sent by Regd. AD Post, neither the letter came back, nor AD slip, delivery presumed.
Aparna Agencies v P Sudhakar Rao, 2000 Cr LJ 1005 (MP), notice for dishonour of cheque, Regd.
post came back with the endorsement that the addressee was out of station. The notice was
deemed to have been duly served. Jameel v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 3049 (All), report of Public
Analyst, copy sent by Regd. Post, remark of the post man did not make it clear whether the
addressee was avoiding delivery. The court said that presumption of delivery could not be made
from the fact that the addressee was absent from home. No alternative or second attempt was
made for service. The addressee was deprived of his rights under the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, 1954. His conviction was held to have been vitiated.
505. VP Shivanna v Bhadramma, 1993 Cr LJ 418 (Kant).
506. Shashikant Sadashiv Bagwe v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1995 Bom 172 .
507. Parimal v Veena, (2011) 3 SCC 545 . Also see, RS Sujatha v State of Karnataka, (2011) 5

SCC 689 .
508. Samittri Devi v Sampuran Singh, (2011) 3 SCC 556 .
509. Ashok Kumar Uttamchand Shah v.Patel Mohmad Asmal Chanchd, AIR 1999 Guj 108 .
510. SKARSM Ramanathan v NTC Ltd, AIR 1985 Ker 262 .
511. Bank of Maharashtra v United Construction Co, AIR 1985 Bom 432 . False explanation does

not create any presumption. Abdul Karim v Mys., 1979 Cr LJ 1123 : AIR 1979 SC 1506 .
512. State of Ker. v MM Mathew, AIR 1978 SC 1571 : 1978 Cr LJ 1690 ; KM Patel v Mohd.

Rahimbux, AIR 1981 SC 977 : 1980 Supp SCC 1 , accounts not produced.
513. Gajanan Krishnaji Bapat v Dattaji Raghobaji Meghe, AIR 1995 SC 2284 : (1995) 5 SCC 347 .

Emess Advertising Service v Hindustan Times Ltd, AIR 1998 Del 14 , service of summons through
newspaper publication was not rebutted.
514. Tomaso Bruno v State of UP, (2015) 7 SCC 178 , para 27.
515.

State of Maharashtra v Jethmal Himatmal Jain, 1994 Cr LJ 2613 (Bom). Where no

neighbours witnessed the incident, non-production of neighbours, no adverse inference, Sat Pal
v State of Punjab, AIR 1996 SC 201 : 1996 Cr LJ 406 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 1039 . Non-production of
FIR, adverse presumption, Ranganathan v State, 1996 Cr LJ 2041 (Mad).
516. Mahendrapal v State, (1955) 2 All 325 . See Harbhajan v State of MP, 1989 Cr LJ 2205 (MP),

prosecution not explaining serious injury on the person of the accused which was not selfcaused, adverse presumption; State of Rajasthan v Madho, 1991 Cr LJ 1343 : AIR 1991 SC 1065 .
But no such presumption where unexplained injuries were of minor nature. Man Singh v State of
UP, 1987 Cr LJ 693 (MP).
517. Khazan Singh v State of Punjab, 1989 Cr LJ 1555 (P&H) : AIR 1989 SC 374 , where a third

witness, not produced, would have only added to multiplicity, no presumption. To the same
effect, Radhakishan Prashar v State, 1988 Cr LJ 17 (Bom); Waisuddin v State (Delhi Admn.), 1991
Cr LJ 134 (Del).
518. Pattad Amarappa v State of Karnataka, AIR 1989 SC 2004 at 2012. Dropping of some

witnesses may attract this presumption, but will be of no consequence where the case proved.
Gurmej Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 214 : 1992 Cr LJ 293 . Prosecution was not allowed
to be thrown out only on the ground that independent witnesses were not produced. Appabhai v
State of Gujarat, 1988 Cr LJ 848 : AIR 1988 SC 696 . A complaint cannot be thrown out by reason

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the fact that the State has not ﬁled written statement particularly when the stage is still not
mature for the same. State of Haryana v Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 604 : 1992 Cr LJ 527 .
519. Mohanlal Shamji Soni v UOI, AIR 1991 SC 1346 : (1991) 2 Guj LH 11 : 1991 Cr LJ 1521.
520. Bhoolchand v Kay Pee Cee Investments, AIR 1991 SC 2053 : (1991) 1 SCC 343 .
521. Standard Chartered Bank v Andhra Bank Financial Services, (2006) 6 SCC 94 : AIR 2006 SC

3626 .
522. Krishan Lal v Mohd. Din, AIR 1994 Del 10 .
523. Krishna Dey v National Insurance Co Ltd, AIR 2008 NOC 2190 (Cal—DB). See also Abdul

Mannan v Pawdhari Chouhan, 2016 AIR CC 2749, para 10 (Gau).
524. MS. Narayana Menon v State of Kerala, (2006) 6 SCC 39 : AIR 2006 SC 3366 .
525. Weston v Peary Mohan Dass, (1912) 40 Cal 898 .
526. Lipton India Ltd v West Bengal, AIR 1984 Cal 109 .
527. State v Rikhab Das Jain, AIR 1994 Raj 114 .
528. SK Meheboob v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2005 SC 1805 : (2005) 10 SCC 387 : 2005 Cr LJ

2136 .
529. HD Singh v RBI, AIR 1986 SC 132 : (1985) 4 SCC 201 .
530.

HN Nanjundappa v CV Shashidhara Murthy, 1996 AIHC 1916 (Kant). Collector, Land

Acquisition, UEED v Zamindarani Nambal, AIR 1999 J&K 93, the Revenue Minister slashed down
the temporary assessment of compensation made by the collector. No speaking order was
passed, the record of the case not produced by the collector before the court despite suﬃcient
opportunities. The court said that an adverse inference could be drawn that the record was
intentionally withheld.
531. Ganga Maruthi v Nagaraj, AIR 1998 Kant. 407 .
532. Ranjana Nagpal v Devi Ram, AIR 2002 HP 166 .
533. Ibid, p 175.
534. Ishwar Bhai C. Patel v Harihar Behara, AIR 1999 SC 1341 : (1999) 3 SCC 457 .
535. Sulabai v Jagannath, (1971) 74 Bom LR 295 ; Swati Lodha v State of Rajasthan, 1991 Cr LJ

939 (Raj), refusal to give blood sample to determine paternity, presumption. Where divorce was
sought on the ground of impotency and the husband refused to undergo medical examination,
adverse inference could be drawn against him, George Philip v Saly Elias T, AIR 1995 Ker 289 .
536. Kalyan Singh v Ranjot Singh, AIR 2002 HP 180 .
537. Banganga Co-op Housing Society Ltd, Mumbai v Vasanti Gajanan Nerurkar, AIR 2015 NOC

1132 (Bom).
538. Vijayan v State, 1993 Cr LJ 2364 (Mad).
539. Raja Ram v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 3227 (All).
540. Rohini Traders v JK Lakshmi Cement Ltd, (2015) 12 SCC 46 , para 14.
541. UOI v Raja Mohd. Amir Mohd. Khan, (2005) 8 SCC 696 : AIR 2005 SC 4383 .
542. Ganga Kumar Srivastva v State of Bihar, AIR 2005 SC 3123 : (2005) 6 SCC 211 : 2005 Cr LJ

3454 .
543. Manager, RBI v S Mani, AIR 2005 SC 2179 : (2005) 5 SCC 100 : (2005) 3 Serv LR 333.
544. Mahendra L Jain v Indore Development Authority, AIR 2005 SC 1252 : (2005) 1 SCC 639 :

(2005) 1 Serv LR 39.
545. Rakesh Kumar v State, 2001 Cr LJ 2978 (Del).
546. State Inspector of Police v Surya Sankaran Karri, (2006) 7 SCC 172 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 225 :

2006 Cr LJ 4598 .
547. Lal Chand v State of Haryana, (1984) 1 SCC 686 , 690 : 1984 SCC (Cri) 355 : AIR 1984 SC

226 : 1984 Cr LJ 164 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
548. Tapan Kumar Chakraborti v Joytsna, AIR 1997 Cal 134 .
549. Wilson v Fylde Borough Transport, June 22, 1998 (CA) : 1998 CLY 101 (351).
550. Bappaditya Ghosh v State of WB, 2016 Cr LJ 5011 , para 22 (Cal).
551. Barresi v Acton & Borman Ltd, May 15, 1998 : 1998 CLY 102 (353).
552. Kailash Gour v State of Assam, AIR 2008 SC 2467 : (2008) 9 SCC 204 .
553. Jagjit Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2007 SC 590 : (2006) 11 SCC 1 .
554. Dipanwita Roy v Ronobroto Roy, AIR 2015 SC 418 (para 12), followed in Govindula Sathaiah

v Govindula Manjula, AIR 2016 AP 160 , paras 7 and 8.
555. Bhoy Hong Kong v Ramanathan Chetty, (1902) 29 IA 43 : 29 Cal 334: 4 Bom LR 378. Citi

Bank NA v Standard Chartered Bank, (2004) 1 SCC 12 : AIR 2003 SC 4630 , bank receipts in
possession of the bank, presumption, payment had been made.
556. Chuni Kuar v Udai Ram, (1883) 6 All 73 ; Aung Myat v Hla May, (1918) 10 LBR 26.
557. Dhian Singh v Gurdit Singh, (1925) 6 Lah 297.
558. Mohamad Mehdi Hasan Khan v Mandir Das, (1912) 39 IA 184 : 34 All 511: 14 Bom LR 1073.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
559.[[s 114A] Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for

rape.—
In a prosecution for rape under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (e),
clause (f), clause (g), clause (h), clause (i), clause (j), clause (k), clause (l), clause (m)
or clause (n) of sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),
where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was
without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and she states in her
evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall presume that she
did not consent.
Explanation .—In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]

COMMENT
[s 114A.1] Principle.—
Evidence of bad character of an accused person (of whose good character evidence
has not been given) is not relevant under this section for the purpose of raising a
general inference that the accused is likely to have committed the offence charged.
Such evidence is irrelevant and cannot be legally admitted in evidence whether elicited
by the prosecution or by the defence.560. This description of the accused as a lawbreaker amounted to evidence of character. The Supreme Court excluded it.561. A
man's guilt is to be established by proof of the facts alleged and not by proof of his
character; such evidence might create prejudice but not lead a step towards
substantiation of guilt.562. The prohibition does not in any way affect evidence which is
required to prove a motive for the crime or which is otherwise relevant.563. But in
assessing punishment the court may take into consideration the accused's character
and antecedents or the state of crime in the country or locality.564.
Section 114-A no doubt addresses the consent part of the woman only, when the
offence of rape is proved but it also impliedly would be applicable in a matter where the
victim girl had gone to the extent of committing suicide due to the trauma of rape, and
yet was sought to be disbelieved at the instance of the defence that she had woven a
concocted story, even though she suffered the risk of death after consuming poison. If
this were to be accepted, then what was the need of incorporating an amendment by
incorporating section 114-A, which clearly has been added to add weight and credence
to the statement of the victim woman, who suffers the offence of rape and a
claustrophobic interpretation of this amended provision cannot be made to infer that
the version of the victim should be believed relating merely to consent in a case where
the offence of rape is proved by other evidence on record. If this view of the matter is
taken into account relying upon the amended section 114-A as was done by the Apex
Court, then even if there had been a doubt about the medical evidence regarding non-

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
rupture of hymen, the same would of no consequence as it is well settled that the
offence of rape would be held to have been proved even if there is an "attempt of rape
on the woman and not the actual commission of rape". Thus, if the version of the victim
girl is ﬁt to be believed due to the attending circumstances that she was subjected to
sexual assault of rape and the trauma of this offence on her mind was so acute that led
her to the extent of committing suicide, which she miraculously escaped, it would be a
travesty of justice if the court disbelieves her version which would render the
amendment and incorporation of section 114-A as a futile exercise on the part of the
legislature which in its wisdom has incorporated the amendment clearly implying and
expecting the court to give utmost weightage to the version of the victim of the offence
of rape which deﬁnition includes also the attempt to rape.565.

[s 114A.2] 2013 Amendment.—
This section was amended vide the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013566. on the
basis of recommendations given by the Justice JS Verma Committee, constituted in
the aftermath of December 2012 Nirbhaya rape incident, whereby changes were made
in section 376(2) of Indian Penal Code. By making necessary amendment in this
section, the newly classiﬁed offence under up to clause (n) of section 376(2) has also
been brought within the bracket of statutory presumption of non-consensual
intercourse prescribed in this section.
The convicts who commit the offence of rape, and fall within any of the clauses (a) to
(n) of sub-section (2), because of their special position by virtue of which they can
exert inﬂuence upon the victim, have been classiﬁed differently. The statutory
presumption of non-consensual intercourse is based on the proposition that because
of their special position, the convict was in a position to exert inﬂuence upon the
victim.
Further, an Explanation has been also inserted in this section so as to clarify that the
meaning of "Sexual Intercourse" shall be the same that has been attributed to any of
the acts mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.

559. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, section 26, for section 114A (w.r.e.f. 3-2-2013). Earlier section

114A was inserted by Act 43 of 1963, section 6 (w.e.f. 25-12-1989). Section 114A, before
substitition by Act 13 of 2013, stood as under:
"114A. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape.—In a prosecution
for rape under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (g) of
sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where sexual intercourse
by the accused is proved and the question is whether it was without the consent of the woman
alleged to have been raped and she states in her evidence before the Court that she did not
consent, the Court shall presume that she did not consent.".
560. Mi Myin v King-Emperor, (1908) 5 LBR 4; Emperor v Gangaram, (1920) 22 Bom LR 1274 .
561. Ram Lakhan v State of UP, AIR 1977 SC 1936 : 1977 Cr LJ 1566 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
562. Amrita Lal Hazra v Emperor, (1915) 42 Cal 957 .
563. Jagwa Dhanuk v King-Emperor, (1925) 5 Pat 63.
564. King-Emperor v Nga Ba Shein, (1928) 6 Ran 391 FB
565. Puran Chand v State of HP, (2014) 5 SCC 689 (para 16).
566. Act 13 of 2013, vide section 26, (w.e.f. 03.02.2013).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VIII ESTOPPEL
[s 115] Estoppel.—
When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, [s 115.17] intentionally
caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such
belief, [s 115.18] neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or
proceeding between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth
of that thing.
ILLUSTRATION
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and thereby
induces B to buy and pay for it.
The land afterwards becomes the property of A, and A seeks to set aside the sale on
the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no title. He must not be allowed to prove
his want of title.

COMMENT
[s 115.1] Principle.—
Estoppel is based on the principle that it would be most inequitable and unjust that if
one person, by a representation made, or by conduct amounting to a representation,
had induced another to act as he would not otherwise have done, the person who made
the representation should not be allowed to deny or repudiate the effect of his former
statement, to the loss and injury of the person who acted on it.1.
The section says that when one person has by his,
(a) declaration, (b) act or (c) omission, intentionally caused or permitted another
person,
(i) to believe a thing to be true and (ii) to act upon such belief, then neither he nor his
representative shall be allowed to deny the truth of that thing in any suit or proceeding
between himself and such person or his representative. To invoke the doctrine of
estoppel three conditions must be satisﬁed; (1) representation by a person to another,
(2) the other shall have acted upon the said representation and (3) such action shall
have been detrimental to the interests of the person to whom the representation has
been made. Even where the ﬁrst two conditions are satisﬁed but the third is not, there
is no scope to invoke the doctrine of estoppel.2. As a doctrine based on equity, the
principle of estoppel is only applicable in cases where the other party has changed his
position relying upon the representation thereby made.3. The doctrine is premised on
the conduct of party making a representation to the other so as to enable him to
arrange its affairs in such a manner as if the said representation would be acted
upon.4.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The doctrine of Estoppel is steeped in the principles of equity and good conscience.
Equity will not allow a person to say one thing at one time and the opposite of it at
another time. It would "estop" him from denying his previous assertion, act, conduct or
representation, to say something contrary to what was implied in the transaction under
which he obtained the beneﬁt of being let in possession of the property to be enjoyed
by him as a tenant.5.
Estoppel is a principle of equity which deals with the effect of contract and not with its
cause.6. The burden of proving the ingredients of this section lies on the party claiming
estoppel. The representation which is the basis for the rule must be clear and
unambiguous and not indeﬁnite, upon which the party relying on it is said to have, in
good faith and in belief of it, acted.7.
This section is founded upon the doctrine laid down in Pickard v Sears,8. namely, that
where a person "by his words or conduct wilfully causes another to believe the
existence of a certain state of things, and induces him to act on that belief, so as to
alter his own previous position, the former is concluded from averring against the latter
a different state of things as existing at the same time." The doctrine embodied in this
section is not a rule of equity, but is a rule of evidence formulated and applied in courts
of law.9. It precludes a person from denying the truth of some statement previously
made by himself. No cause of action arises upon estoppel itself.10.
Estoppel is based on the maxim, allegans contraria non est audiendus (a person alleging
contradictory facts should not be heard), and is that species of presumptio juris et de
jure, where the fact presumed is taken to be true, not as against all the world, but as
against a particular party, and that only by reason of some act done; it is in truth a kind
of argumentum and hominem. Hence it appears that "estoppel" must not be understood
as synonymous with "conclusive evidence"—the former being conclusions drawn by law
against parties from particular facts, while by the latter is meant some piece or mass
of evidence, suﬃciently strong to generate conviction in the mind of a tribunal, or
rendered conclusive on a party, by either common or statute law.11.
Estoppel is a complex legal notion, involving a combination of several essential
elements, namely, statement to be acted upon, acting on the faith of it, resulting
detriment to the actor. Estoppel is often described as a rule of evidence, as indeed it
may be so described. But the whole concept is more correctly viewed as a substantive
rule of law. Estoppel is different from contract in its both nature and consequences. But
the relationship between the parties must also be such that the imputed truth of the
statement is a necessary step in the constitution of the cause of action. But the whole
case of estoppel fails if the statement is not suﬃciently clear and unqualiﬁed.12.
Estoppel depends on the existence of some duty; and that is peculiarly so in the case
of an omission. In order to succeed on a plea of estoppel it must be shown that there
was a neglect of some duty owing to the person led into a particular belief, or to the
general public of whom that person is one, and not merely neglect of what would be
prudent in respect to the party prejudiced, or even of some duty owing to third persons,
with whom those seeking to set up estoppel are not privy. There is a breach of the duty
if the party estopped has not used due precautions to avert the risk.13.
It is only an unambiguous and deﬁnite promise, which is otherwise enforceable in law
upon which, the other party has acted, that comes within the ambit and scope of
enforcement, based on the principle of legitimate expectation, and binding on the
parties for their promise and representation.14.
Estoppel applies not only in favour of the person induced to change his position but of
a transferee from such person, and it binds not only the persons whose representations

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
or actions have created it, but all persons claiming under or through him by gratuitous
title.15. A person transferred his import licence. The transferee imported the goods.
The original licencee had committed irregularities in obtaining the licence; it was held
that the transferee could not be made to suffer on that basis.16. The Supreme Court
observed that the doctrine of estoppel could be described as a rule capable of creating
or defeating rights.17.
Estoppel is essentially a rule of civil action. It has limited application to criminal
proceedings, though in such proceedings it would be prejudicial to set up a different
story.18. In a criminal trial, where an issue of fact has been tried by a competent Court
on an earlier occasion and a ﬁnding has been recorded in favour of the accused, such a
ﬁnding would constitute an estoppel or res judicata against the prosecution, not as a
bar to the trial and conviction of the accused for a different or distinct offence, but as
precluding the acceptance/reception of evidence to disturb the ﬁnding of fact when the
accused is tried subsequently for a different offence. This rule is distinct from the
doctrine of double jeopardy as it does not prevent the trial of any offence but only
precludes the evidence being led to prove a fact in issue as regards which evidence has
already been led and a speciﬁc ﬁnding has been recorded at an earlier criminal trial.
Thus, the rule relates only to the admissibility of evidence which is designed to upset a
ﬁnding of fact recorded by a competent Court in a previous trial on a factual issue.19.
However, since the principles of estoppel, waiver and res judicata are procedural in
nature, the same will have no application in a case where judgment has been rendered
wholly without jurisdiction or issues involve only pure questions of law.20.
Although the principle of estoppel or res judicata does not strictly apply to the Income
Tax Authorities, it is not open to a Tribunal to come to a different conclusion to the one
arrived at by that very Tribunal earlier without any limitation whatsoever. An earlier
decision on the same question cannot be reopened if that decision is not arbitrary or
perverse, if it has been arrived at after due inquiry, if no fresh facts are placed before
the Tribunal giving the later decision, and if the Tribunal giving the earlier decision has
taken into consideration all material evidence.21.
It needs to be understood that the rule of estoppel is a doctrine based on fairness. It
postulates the exclusion of the truth of the matter. All, for the sake of fairness.22.

[s 115.2] Estoppel and presumption.—
Estoppel differs from presumption. An estoppel is a personal disqualiﬁcation laid upon
a person peculiarly circumstanced from proving peculiar facts; whereas a presumption
is a rule that particular inferences shall be drawn from particular facts, whoever proves
them.23.

[s 115.3] Estoppel and res judicata.—
Estoppel differs from res judicata: (1) Estoppel is part of the law of evidence and
proceeds upon the equitable principle of altered situation; the doctrine of res judicata
belongs to procedure and is based on the principle that there must be end to litigation.
(2) Estoppel prohibits a party from proving anything which contradicts his previous
declarations or acts, to the prejudice of party, who, relying upon them, altered his
position; res judicata prohibits the Court from enquiring into a matter already adjudicated.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(3) Estoppel shuts the mouth of a party; res judicata ousts the jurisdiction of the
court.24.
Put in the most simple and colloquial way, res judicata precludes a man averring the
same thing twice over in successive litigations, while estoppel prevents him saying one
thing at one time and the opposite at another.25.
An erroneous determination of a pure question of law in a previous judgment will not
operate as res judicata, in a subsequent proceeding for a different property, though
between the same parties.26.

[s 115.4] Estoppel and waiver.—
Estoppel and waiver are different. Estoppel is not a cause of action. It may, if
established, assist a plaintiff in enforcing a cause of action by preventing a defendant
from denying the existence of some fact essential to establish the cause of action; or,
in other words, by preventing a defendant from asserting the existence of some fact
the existence of which would destroy the cause of action. Waiver, on the other hand, is
contractual, and may constitute a cause of action; it is an agreement to release or not
to assert a right.27. If an agent, with authority to make such an agreement on behalf of
his principal, agrees to waive his principal's rights, then, subject to any other question
such as consideration, the principal will be bound, but he will be bound by contract, not
by estoppel. There is no such thing as estoppel by waiver.28.
The generally accepted connotation of waiver is that to constitute waiver there must be
an intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known existing legal right, or
conduct such as warrants an inference of the relinquishment of a known right or
privilege.29. The plaintiff wrote to her bank manager that she had joined nunnery and,
therefore, had no claim or interest in paternal property. This did not estop the plaintiff
from claiming her share. The letter did not amount to surrender or waiver.30. There is
no question of waiver where the party is not even aware of his right.31. Waiver of a right
cannot be lightly inferred and something more than inaction of the right holder in
exercising the right is necessary.32. Therefore, where a party to a litigation not only fails
to invoke the doctrine of estoppel before the judge but joins issue with the opposite
party upon the question and accordingly an issue is raised and evidence adduced on
this question, such a party is precluded from relying on the doctrine of estoppel to
prevent the other party from proving that question.33.
For attracting the principle of waiver, there are two essential elements to be satisﬁed.
Firstly, waiver should be voluntary and intentional and secondly, there should be two
parties—one waiving and the other getting beneﬁt from such waiver.34.
These requirements were not satisﬁed in a case before the Delhi High Court.35. The
plaintiff's predecessor inducted the defendant as a tenant in respect of the suit
property. The lease required renewal after the initial 11 months, but it was never
renewed. The tenant stopped paying rent after death of the plaintiff's predecessor.
There was no evidence to show that the predecessor consented to the tenant
continuing in the premises in perpetuity. The court refused to accept the contention
that the plaintiff was bound by waiver in favour of the tenant.
After the accession of the state of J&K to India, articles of great value were left in the
treasury of J&K. The former Maharaja or his sons did not claim the articles as their
private property for over 30 years. The court held that it could be said that either there
was relinquishment of the right or waiver of it voluntarily.36.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A mandatory provision of a statute can be waived if it deals with individual rights. The
requirement of notice under section 28 of the Customs Act could be waived by the
individual who is entitled to such notice.37. In the matter of execution of an order of a
tribunal, no objection was raised on the ground that the tribunal had no jurisdiction
where the order was being executed. It was held that the failure to object at the initial
stage did not operate as waiver. No jurisdiction was conferred at the tribunal at that
place by such failure.38.
A person who is entitled to the beneﬁt of a stipulation in a contract or of a statutory
provision may waive it and allow the contract or transaction to proceed as though the
stipulation or provision did not exist. Waiver of this kind depends upon consent and the
fact that the other party has acted upon it is suﬃcient consideration.39.
A suit was ﬁled by an advocate for recovery of his professional fee. In the letter of
appointment it was mentioned that the fee would be payable at the maximum rate. He
accepted the appointment at the minimum rate provided payments were made without
delay. Even so payments were delayed for months together. The advocate withdrew his
offer of working at minimum rates. The court said that the plaintiff's claim was not lost
by reason of waiver.40.

[s 115.4.1] Pre-emption and Waiver.—
The co-sharer (plaintiff) kept his right of pre-emption hanging in balance. When the
transaction with the purchaser (defendant) was ﬁnalised, the plaintiff acquiesced in the
matter and actively participated in the sale transaction. He was also present at the time
of registration. The court said that waiver of his right could be inferred.41.

[s 115.5] Kinds of estoppel.—
There are different kinds of estoppels: (1) estoppels by matter of record; (2) estoppels
by deed; and (3) estoppels in pais.
(1) Estoppel by matter of record.—A matter of record is something part of the records
of a Court. It is at once the narrative and the proof of its proceedings. Estoppel by
records results from the judgment of a competent Court. The law allows a party ample
opportunity, by way of appeal and otherwise, of upsetting a wrong decision. And if he
takes the opportunity and fails, or does not choose to avail himself of it, he cannot
subsequently re-open or dispute that decision.
And not only the parties themselves, but also the heir, executor, administrator and
assign of each of them are bound by the decision, for they are "privy to the estoppel".
Estoppel by matter of record is chieﬂy concerned with the effect of judgments and their
admissibility in evidence, and this kind of estoppel is dealt with by sections 11–14,
Code of Civil Procedure, and sections 40–44 of the Evidence Act. It is the ﬁnal decision
and not any and every expression of opinion in a judgment which gives rise to an
estoppel by record, and the actual decision cannot be carried further than the
circumstances warrant.42. The general principle which runs through the doctrine of
estoppel by record is that a decree is an order of the court and the judgment debtor
must, when it has once been completed, obey it unless and until he can get it set aside
in proceedings duly constituted for the purpose.43.
The force and effect of a judgment depend ﬁrst upon the nature of the proceedings in
which it was rendered, i.e. upon the question whether it was an action in rem or in
personam; and second upon the forum in which it was pronounced, i.e., upon the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
question whether it was a judgment of a domestic or foreign Court. The record of a
judgment in rem is generally conclusive upon all persons. In other cases, so far as the
record purports to declare rights and duties, its material recitals import absolute verity
between the parties to it and those who claim under them. The estoppel arising from or
ﬁxed by the fact enrolled constitutes the estoppel of a judgment. And to the question
whether the judgment necessarily creates an estoppel, the general answer is, yes, if it
results in res judicata: no, if it does not.44. A party accepting payment under an
arbitrator's award cannot afterwards challenge it.45. Similarly, a party accepting costs
under a judgment, even if under protest, was held to have amounted to accepting the
order of the court as the correct order.46. The principle is applicable to execution
proceedings as well. 47.
In a suit for partition, the court found that there were earlier two suits which recorded a
ﬁnding of oral partition. The plaintiff was a minor at that time but he was a party to
those suits and was represented by his guardian. There was no plea that the two earlier
proceedings were null and void, nor any prayer for setting aside decrees passed in
those suits. There was also no evidence to show that the minor was adversely
affected. He obtained fruits of those two decrees. He was not allowed to turn around
and say that those decrees should be ignored as they had affected his interest.48.
Where there were cross suits between the same parties relating to the same property
involving the same issues and they were disposed of by a common judgment involving
the passing of two decrees, it was held that an appeal against only one decree was not
maintainable.49.
The licencee of a corporation ﬁled a compromise in an earlier proceeding, but the
corporation did not accept the compromise. The licencee abandoned the compromise
and withdrew his petition. It was held that he was not bound in his subsequent petition
by the statements made by him in his earlier petition.50.
(2) Estoppel by deed.—Where a party has entered into a solemn engagement by deed
as to certain facts, neither he nor any claiming through or under him is permitted to
deny such facts. This rule, however, is subject to certain, qualiﬁcations:
(1) The rule applies only between parties and privies, and only in actions on the deed.
(2) No estoppel arises upon recitals or descriptions which are either immaterial or not
intended to bind. (3) No estoppel arises where the deed is tainted by fraud or illegality.
(4) A deed which can take effect by interest shall not be construed to take effect by
estoppel. Thus if a party leases premises to another for a longer term than he himself
possesses, it only enures to the extent of his own interest and no further.51.
Where the petitioner claimed his possession on the land of a tribal by virtue of a
registered sale deed obtained with due permission, the plea raised by the petitioner
must be considered before drawing the conclusion that the possession was without
lawful authority.52.
The doctrine of English law as to estoppel by deed does not apply to written
instruments in India. Deeds and contracts in this country are to be liberally construed.
The form of expression, the literal sense, is not to be so much regarded as the real
meaning of the parties which the transaction discloses.53. The art of conveyancing in
this country is of so simple and informal a character, that estoppel by deed has been
expressly discountenanced by courts. "Justice and equity" require no more than that a
party to an instrument should be precluded from contradicting it to the prejudice of
another person, when that other person or person through whom the other person
claims has been induced to alter his position by virtue of the instrument; but when the
question arises between the parties or the representatives of parties who at the time of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the execution of the instrument were aware of its intention and object and who have
not been induced to alter their position by its execution, justice in India will be more
surely obtained by allowing any party, whether he be plaintiff or defendant, to show the
truth.54.
(3) Estoppel in pais by conduct.—Estoppel in pais (i.e. "in the country", or "before the
public"), or more fully "estoppel in pais dehors the instrument" (i.e. with regard to
matters outside a record or deed) as known to the common law was of an entirely
different character to the estoppel in pais of the present days. "Indeed the estoppel in
pais of the present day has grown up entirely since the time of Coke, and embraces
cases never contemplated in that character by him or by the lawyers of even much later
times though the old lines are often visible in the newer pathways."
Estoppel in pais arises (1) from agreement or contract and (2) from act or conduct of
misrepresentation which has induced a change of position in accordance with the
intention of the party against whom the estoppel is alleged. To raise an estoppel by
conduct, a person must by word or conduct induce another to believe that a certain
state of things exists, and to cause that other to act on that belief in a way he would not
have done had he known the facts, so that, if in an action between them the person
making a representation were allowed to prove the true facts—to tell the truth—the
other person would be prejudiced. If these two conditions are fulﬁlled, then the person
making the representation will not be allowed to deny its truth in any action between
him and the person to whom he made it or the persons who claim in the same right.
But in any other action he can deny its truth. The ways in which a person may make
such a representation are inﬁnite. He may speak or write, act or omit to act, or act
negligently.
The following are the recognised propositions of an estoppel in pais: (1) If a man by his
words or conduct wilfully endeavours to cause another to believe in a certain state of
things which the ﬁrst knows to be false, and if the second believes in such state of
things, and acts upon his belief, he who knowingly made the false statement is
estopped from averring afterwards that such a state of things did not in fact exist.
(2) If a man, either in express terms or by conduct, makes a representation to another
of the existence of a certain state of facts which he intends to be acted upon in a
certain way, and it be acted upon in that way, in the belief of the existence of such a
state of facts, to the damage of him who so believes and acts, the ﬁrst is estopped
from denying the existence of such a state of facts.
(3) If a man, whatever his real meaning may be, so conducts himself that a reasonable
man would take his conduct to mean a certain representation of facts, and that it was a
true representation, and that the latter was intended to act upon it in a particular way,
and he with such belief does act in that way to his damage, the ﬁrst is estopped from
denying that the facts were as represented.
(4) If, in the transaction itself which is in dispute, one has led another into the belief of a
certain state of facts by conduct of culpable negligence calculated to have that result,
and such culpable negligence has been the proximate cause of leading and has led the
other to act by mistake upon such belief, to his prejudice, the second cannot be heard
afterwards, as against the ﬁrst, to show that the state of facts referred to did not
exist.55.
The conduct of appearing before a selection committee without any objection as to the
constitution of the committee would create an estoppel preventing the candidate from
challenging the constitution of the committee even if the decision was against him.56.
Where in the selection of District judges, minimum qualifying marks to be obtained in
interview were prescribed without any authority under the selection rules, no estoppel
was created against a candidate appearing at the interview. He was allowed to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
challenge the validity of the procedure.57. Allocation of 50% marks was held to be not
arbitrary when promotion was to be to higher managerial posts. The appellant
participated in the selection. He could not turn around subsequently to say that the
process of interview was unfair.58. Arbitrators failed to make an award within time. The
court passed a consent order entitling the umpire to proceed. The party who submitted
to his jurisdiction and participated in the proceeding was held precluded from
challenging it.59. A candidate appeared at a competitive examination on the basis of a
prospectus. He failed. He was not allowed to challenge the validity of the prospectus
as to the selection already made.60. A candidate having participated in the selection
process along with others without any demur or protest cannot be allowed to turn
round and question the very same process after having failed to qualify for the
promotion.61. A candidate who applies for revaluation is bound by the new result even
if his score is reduced.62. Where in an accident claim petition the owner of the vehicle
did not ﬁle the original policy and made no objection to the genuineness of the printed
copy ﬁled by the insurance company, the owner cannot later on make objection to its
genuineness.63.
Similarly, bidders who participated in the tender process offering petrol vehicles, where
the authorities had to decide what kind of vehicle they would hire for use as
ambulance, were held to be estopped from questioning or objecting to the conditions
of tender that it were meant to favouring only the owners of diesel vehicles, after they
participated in the process.64.
Estoppel in pais is dealt with in sections 115–117. sections 116 and 117 are instances
of estoppel by contract, viz., that of the tenant, the licensee, the bailee and the acceptor
of a bill of exchange. But the distinction between estoppel by contract and estoppel by
conduct is not preserved in the Evidence Act. The sections relating to estoppel in the
Evidence Act are not exhaustive. Cases of estoppel may arise which are not within the
purview of these sections.65. As to other instances of estoppel, see section 234 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872; section 18 of the Speciﬁc Relief Act, 1877; sections 41 and
43 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882; sections 27 and 53 of the Indian Sale of
Goods Act, 1930; and section 28 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932.66.
The members of a joint family arrived at an informal family arrangement under which
possession and enjoyment of the share in property of each member was handed over
to him. All the members had signed the agreement. They considered the partition so
made as ﬁnal as between all of them and nobody made any objection for a number of
years. The court said that in such circumstances even if it were to be assumed that the
document required registration, the conduct of members operated as an estoppel
which prevented them from resiling from the arrangement. No member could seek an
injunction or a restraint order in respect of property partitioned and mutated in favour
of another member.67. The court said68. that this principle has become established
through several decisions of the court as also of the Privy Council. "In Kanhailal v
Brijlal69. the privy council applied the principle of estoppel to the facts of the case and
observed: "Kanhailal was a party to that compromise. He was one of those whose
claims to the family property or to share in it, induced Ram Dei against her daughter,
Kripa, and greatly to her own detriment to alter her position by agreeing to the
compromise, and under that compromise he obtained a substantial beneﬁt which he
has hitherto enjoyed. In their Lordship's opinion he is bound by it and cannot now claim
as a reversioner". For the issue of a stage carriage permit one of the conditions was
that there would be levy of stand fee on per trip basis. This was held to be not violative
of Article 19(1)(g). The permit holder had accepted the condition and, therefore, he was
estopped from challenging the validity of the levy.70. Where the grantee of stage coach
permit challenged the proceedings on the ground that the State Transport Authority
had imposed improper conditions but no such grounds were raised before the Tribunal,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
it was held that the applicant was debarred from her conduct from raising the point in a
writ petition.
Where the consignee accepted the delivery of bulk goods from the ship after inspecting
them and ﬁnding damage, he was not allowed afterwards to raise any claim for short
delivery.71. Where the licencee accepted the licence under the UP Cinemas (Regulation)
Act, 1956 with a clause in the agreement that he would not claim grants-in-aid, it was
held that he having enjoyed the other beneﬁts under the agreement was not entitled to
wriggle out of the agreement and claim the beneﬁt of grant-in-aid.72. Where all along
the LIC had been accepting premiums and granting receipts without demur and there
was not a single document on record or any pleading on its behalf that at any time it
had informed the insured that, in fact, what it was depositing was the premium of the
previous month, the LIC by so accepting the premium as valid payments for long years
was estopped from taking the plea that the premium paid was not valid.73.

[s 115.6] Equitable estoppel.—
A man may be estopped, not only from giving particular evidence, but from doing acts,
or relying upon any particular argument or contention which the rules of equity and
good conscience prevent his using as against his opponent.74. The law of estoppel by
representation is conﬁned to the provisions of this section and apart from the
provisions of this section there is nothing like what is called "equitable estoppel"
evolved by the English judges. The provisions of this section are in a sense a rule of
evidence.75. Where the Government caused delay in communicating adverse remarks
to an employee, the Government was not permitted to reject the representation of the
employee as belated. The Government was held to be bound by an equitable estoppel
to consider the representation on merits.76. Estoppel being a product of equity the
court has to go by equities on both sides so as to hold them in a balance. A scheme for
allotment of plots to non-resident Indian generated a poor response. Time was
extended. It resulted in a long gap of time from the original date. In between the cost of
development increased substantially. The Central Government was held to be justiﬁed
in dropping the scheme.77.

[s 115.7] Proprietary Estoppel.—
The claimant lived for more than 30 years on an agricultural land of which the landlord
lady was the half owner. She had given a promise to the claimant that she would leave
her share in the land to him on her death if he cared for the land until her death and
cultivated it. The claimant paid no rent, but he continued to fulﬁl the conditions in the
owner's promise. He sold the surplus agricultural produce and retained the proceeds
for himself. But the owner sold the land to a purchaser for value, who notiﬁed the
claimant to quit the land. The claimant brought an action against the purchaser on the
basis of promissory estoppel. The court ruled that he was entitled to half the share of
the land. The court said that the question depended on what assurances were given to
him and what was the degree of his reliance on those assurances and the detriment
which was likely to be caused to him.

[s 115.8] Promissory estoppel.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
When one party has, by his words or conduct, made to the other a promise or
assurance which was intended to affect the legal relations between them and to be
acted on accordingly, then, once the other party has taken him at his word and acted on
it, the one who gave the promise or assurance cannot afterwards be allowed to revert
to their previous legal relations as if no such promise or assurance had been made by
him, but he must accept their legal relations subject to the qualiﬁcation which he
himself has so introduced. This doctrine, which is derived from a principle of equity
enunciated in 1877, has been the subject of considerable recent development. This is a
doctrine evolved by equity in order to prevent injustice.78. It differs from estoppel
properly so called because the representation relied upon need not be one of present
fact.79.
The doctrine of promissory estoppel is premised on conduct of party making a
representation to the other so as to enable him to arrange its affairs in such a manner
as if the said representation would be acted upon. It provides for a cause of action. It
need not necessarily be a defence.80.
In granting relief on the basis of the doctrine of promissory estoppel, it is the duty of
courts to analyse the facts to ensure that the principles of estoppel could appropriately
be invoked to help the respondents. Where the respondents were not put to
disadvantage acting upon any unequivocal promise made by the appellants, it was held
that no relief can be granted by resorting to the doctrine of promissory estoppel.81.
The Supreme Court observed in a case that in order to invoke the doctrine of
promissory estoppel, a clear, sound and positive foundation must be laid by the party in
the petition itself.82. A plea of estoppel cannot be availed of if there is duty owed by the
person sought to be estopped, nor any representation made by such person. Before
anyone can be estopped by a representation inferred from negligent conduct there
must be a duty to use due care towards the person misled, or towards the general
public of which that person is one.83.
No promissory estoppel arose where the Government granted a cement permit and
afterwards cancelled it on account of a change in policy.84. The doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot be invoked when the representation or promise made by Government
oﬃcials or public authority is beyond its power or is prohibited by law.85. The mere fact
that the tenderer had agreed to the proposal to pay the entire bid amount, was held to
be not an automatic acceptance of the tender on the principle of promissory
estoppel.86. Promissory estoppel is neither available against the abolition of a
Government post87. nor against the levy of a tax on sale of country liquor which was
exempted by an earlier Government.88. A long course of dealing (oil distribution agency
in this case) does not create an estoppel that the agency will not be terminated or its
terms will not be reviewed.89. Deemed promotion from a past date cannot be granted
but the Government can be held bound to adhere to the time bound promotion scheme
promised to employees.90. Where employees were shifted from one Department into
another on assurance that no change would be made in their service conditions, they
were allowed to claim estoppel against proposed changes.91. Where certain
mortgaged lands had reverted to the State and orders were passed to transfer the
lands to the persons to whom they were allotted after receiving from them the
mortgage money, the Government was not allowed to resile from its orders after
accepting payments.92. Sale of pledged goods by a bank under an assurance to the
borrower by the bank manager that he would be discharged from liability created an
estoppel preventing the bank from proceeding against the borrower for any
deﬁciency.93.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A person to whom the right to collect Zila Prishad fee on vehicles entering its territories
was allotted was not permitted afterwards to refuse to hand over the collection by
saying that the contract was not lawful.94.
Where the petitioner accepted the proposal to produce a serial for Doordarshan in 13
episodes but subsequently he sought permission to produce the said serial in 26
episodes, he was barred by estoppel.95. Where the railway authorities promised the
petitioner that freight for goods would be charged by the shortest route, they were
estopped from rationalising the longest route subsequently.96. Where the petitioner
failed to construct the cinema hall within the speciﬁed period, he could not claim
exemption from entertainment tax as promised by the Government by invoking the
doctrine of promissory estoppel.97. Where a certain small scale industrial unit, sick due
to its own mismanagement, was unwilling to fulﬁl the suggested conditions, the bank
could not be directed to fulﬁl the promise of its rehabilitation.98. The Government held
out a promise to a company to supply speciﬁed quantity of wood at a speciﬁed rate
and the company on that assurance set up a factory by investing a huge amount,
subsequent unilateral decision of the Government to enhance the rate of royalty would
be hit by the principle of promissory estoppel.99.
Where two people with the same source of information assert the same truth or agree
to assert the same falsehood at the same time, neither can be estoppel against the
other.100.

[s 115.8.1] Promissory estoppel against Government and its Agencies.—
Government and its agencies are no longer immune from the operation of the doctrine
of promissory estoppel. Government agencies have to work within the framework of
the legal system.101. A contractor was promised renewal of a forest lease. He paid the
requisites and incurred expenditure on improvement of the site. There was some delay
in granting formal renewal. Ultimately the contractor was refused because of a shift in
policy. The Madras High Court did not permit the Government to go back upon its
promise.102. Where the right of collection of terminal tax was allotted at an auction to a
bidder who had also deposited the bid amount and, before the ﬁnal contract was
executed, the Government adopted the policy of not granting such rights, the
Government was held to be precluded from cancelling the auction.103. The Government
announced a scheme of exemptions under the Industries Act. The applicant submitted
his documents within the time delimited and commenced working. The Government
took four years to dispose of his application telling him that the scheme was
withdrawn. The High Court of Delhi ordered the Government to grant the intended
beneﬁts to the applicant.104. The moral of these cases is that there can be no
whimsical withdrawal from a declared programme which has already generated
action.105. Where an industrialist went to the extent of erecting a factory in response to
declarations of vital exemptions, Supreme Court held the Government bound by the
scheme in reference to the petitioner. It was immaterial that his factory was running at
a proﬁt. The doctrine of estoppel is not based upon loss or detriment or fraud but upon
alteration of position in response to a representation.106.
It reviewed all the English cases on the subject, particularly relating to the position that
promissory estoppel cannot be used as a cause of action and it only affords a defence.
The learned judge said:107. "It is, however, necessary to make it clear that though the
doctrine has been called in various judgments and text-books as promissory estoppel,
and it has been variously described as "equitable estoppel", "quasi estoppel" and "new
estoppel", it is not really based upon the principle of estoppel, but it is a doctrine
evolved by equity in order to prevent injustice where a promise made by a person
knowing that it would be acted on by the person to whom it is made and in fact it is so

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
acted on and it is inequitable to allow the party making the promise to go back upon
it."108. The doctrine of promissory estoppel need not, therefore, be conﬁned to the
limitations of estoppel in the strict sense of the word. Even Lord Denning recognised in
Crabb v Arun District Council,109. that, "there are estoppels and estoppels. Some do give
rise to a cause of action. Some do not." He added that promissory estoppel often gives
rise to a cause of action. Stating the effect of estoppel on the position of the true
owner, his Lordship observed that the owner's title to the property, be it land or goods,
has been held to be limited or extinguished, and new rights and interests have been
created therein. And this operates by reason of his conduct—what he has led the other
to believe—even though he never intended it. "New rights and interests, so created by
estoppel, in or over land, will be protected by the courts and in this way give rise to a
cause of action." A declaration of the right of way against the District Council was
granted in this case. It referred to the treatise by Spencer Bower and Turner on the Law
Relating to Estoppel by Representation who have explained this decision on the basis
that it is an instance of the application of the doctrine of estoppel by encouragement or
acquiescence or what has now come to be known as proprietary estoppel which forms
an exception to the rule that estoppel cannot found a cause of action.
The Supreme Court cited110. the 13th Report of the Law Commission of India where it
is recommended that, by way of an exception to section 25 of the Contract Act, 1872, a
promise, express or implied, which the promisor knows or reasonably should know, will
be relied upon by the promisee, should be enforceable, if the promisee has altered his
position to his detriment in reliance on the promise. The learned judge added:
We do not see any valid reason why promissory estoppel should not be allowed to found a
cause of action where, in order to satisfy the equity, it is necessary to do so.111.
The doctrine of promissory estoppel can be invoked even where a case does not satisfy the
requirements of estoppel as enshrined in s. 115. It would be open to a party who has acted
on a representation made by the Government to claim that the Government should be bound
to carry out the promise made by it even though the promise was not recorded in the form
of a formal contract.112.

Where the mining lease granted was stopped on the ground that the detailed study on
the environment will be undertaken before taking further action in the matter, the rule of
promissory estoppel can be invoked only if on the basis of the representation made by
the Government, the party has substantially altered its position. However, it was held
that within a short time of ten days the party could not have altered its position so as to
invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel.113. Where the sale deed of area comprising
in "reserve forest", initially the registering authority refusing to register the same, was
got registered under the directions issued by the High Court, that does not mean that
the High Court had pronounced about the validity or otherwise of the document, the
State was not estopped from raising its objection under section 22 of the Kerala Forest
Act, 1962 for its violation.114.
The court will not pass any order binding the government by its promises unless it is so
necessary to prevent manifest injustice or fraud, particularly, when the Government
acts in its governmental, public or sovereign capacity. Estoppel does not operate
against the Government or its assignee while acting in such capacity.115.
Before laying down any policy which would give beneﬁt to its subjects, the State must
think about the pros and cons of such policy and its capacity to give the beneﬁts.
Without proper appreciation of all the relevant factors, the State should not give any
assurance, not only because that would be in violation of the principles of promissory
estoppel but it would be unfair and immoral on the part of the State not to act as per its
promise.116.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.8.2] Relief against Government under Promissory Estoppel.—
The extent of relief available against the Government on the plea of promissory
estoppel was summarised by the Patna High Court,117. citing Kailasam J.118.
The scope of the plea of doctrine of promissory estoppel against the Government may
be summed up as follows:
1. The plea of promissory estoppel is not available against the exercise of the

legislative functions of the State. Thus where the Government changed its export
policy by an order which had the force of legislation, exporters who had
contracted on the basis of earlier policy were not permitted to claim any estoppel
against the State.119.
2. The doctrine cannot be invoked for preventing the Government from discharging

its functions under the law or to act contrary to law.
3. When an oﬃcer of the Government acts outside the scope of his authority, the

plea of promissory estoppel is not available. The doctrine of ultra vires will come
into operation and the Government cannot be held bound by the unauthorised
acts of its oﬃcers.
4. When the oﬃcer acts within the scope of his authority under a scheme and

enters into an agreement and makes a representation and a person acting on
that representation puts himself in a disadvantageous position, the court is
entitled to require the oﬃcer to act according to the scheme and the agreement
or representation. The oﬃcer cannot arbitrarily act on his mere whim and ignore
his promise on some undeﬁned and undisclosed grounds of necessity or change
the conditions to the prejudice of the person who had acted upon such
representation and put himself in a disadvantageous position.
5. The oﬃcer would be justiﬁed in changing the terms of the agreement to the

prejudice of the other party on special circumstances, such as diﬃcult foreign
exchange position or other matters which have a bearing on general interests of
the State.
The decision in Motilal Padmapat case should be contrasted with the decision of the
Madras High Court in Shanmugraja v Superintending Engineer.120. In this case,
concession was given in the tariff of power supply to new industries for a period of ﬁve
years. The same was withdrawn in respect of an industry which started earning proﬁt
within the concession period of ﬁve years. The court said that such withdrawal was
reasonable and also necessary in public interest. The doctrine of promissory estoppel
would not apply.
Where the Government makes a promise knowing or intending that it would be acted
on by the promisee and, in fact, the promisee, acting in reliance on it, alters his position,
the Government would be held bound by the promise and the promise would be
enforceable against the Government at the instance of the promisee notwithstanding
that there is no consideration for the promise and the promise is not recorded in the
form of a formal contract as required by Article 229 of the Constitution. The rule of
promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine has to be moulded to suit the
particular situation. It is not a hard-and-fast rule but an elastic one, the objective of
which is to do justice between the parties and to extend an equitable treatment to
them. This doctrine is a principle evolved by equity, to avoid injustice and though
commonly named promissory estoppel, it is neither in the realm of contract nor in the
realm of estoppel. For application of the doctrine of promissory estoppel the promisee
must establish that he suffered in detriment or altered his position by reliance on the
promise.121.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Normally, the doctrine of promissory estoppel being applied against the Government
and defence based on executive necessity would not be accepted by the court.
However, if it can be shown by the Government that having regard to the facts as they
have subsequently transpired, it would be inequitable to hold the Government to the
promise made by it, the court would not raise an equity in favour of the promisee and
enforce the promise against the Government. Where public interest warrants, the
principles of promissory estoppel cannot be invoked. The Government can change the
policy in public interest. However, it is well settled that taking cue from this doctrine,
the authority cannot be compelled to do something which is not allowed by law or
prohibited by law. There is no promissory estoppel against the settled proposition of
law. Doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be invoked for enforcement of a promise
made contrary to law, because none can be compelled to act against the statute. Thus,
the Government or public authority cannot be compelled to make a provision which is
contrary to law.122.
Estoppel can be invoked to hold the Government bound to its promises and
agreements whether they are of executive or administrative character.123. The courts
have to strike a balance between individual rights and larger public interest.124. A Town
Development Authority was not permitted to raise prices arbitrarily.125. Cigarette
manufacturers did not collect excise on corrugated ﬁbre board containers in which
cigarettes were delivered at the factory gates on the basis of a Departmental letter. It
was held that promissory estoppel was attracted.126. A land which had been already
subjected to one-time tax was not allowed to be subjected to another dose of one-time
tax assessment on its sale by the original assesse.127. An invitation by the State
Government to companies to set up industries by assuring them of the supply of raw
material was not allowed to be changed in reference to companies which had already
established factories and were in a position to use the promised raw material.128. A
letter of intent on the basis of which the grantee had been going round fulﬁlling
formalities was not allowed to be cancelled without show cause notice to him.129. An
announced scheme of export promotion by providing cash assistance to persons
qualifying under the scheme not allowed to be withdrawn retrospectively.130. Where
additional import licence was granted to the petitioner against admissible exports as
an incentive, the Government was estopped from withdrawing such incentive in view of
new policy unless it was done in public interest.131. There was grant of quarry lease for
quarrying granite on priority basis. Approval was granted by the Forest Department.
Lessees incurred expenditure for preparatory work. The lease was subsequently
cancelled without giving notice to the lessees and without any opportunity of hearing.
This was held to be violative of the rules of natural justice. It was also hit by the
principle of promissory estoppel, and the doctrine of legitimate expectations.132.
Where relying on the cash compensatory scheme of the Government to exporters of
readymade garments, the petitioner priced its goods for export, the Government
subsequently could not discontinue the scheme with retrospective effect.133. Where
under the export policy an exporter had incurred heavy loans and started production,
the Government could subsequently not ban the export of goods ready for export.134.
An agreement as to the amount of property tax in lieu of the exemption to which the
Government company in question was entitled was held to be binding on the taxing
authority.135.
In a case under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, an understanding was arrived at between
the Government and the accused that, if the accused surrendered his licence, the
Government would not proceed further with the case. The licence was surrendered by
the accused but, later on, the Government reversed its decision. It was held that the
doctrine of promissory estoppel does not apply to criminal cases.136. The principle of
promissory estoppel has no application in a case of concluded commercial contract
between the private party and the State.137. Where assurance of rebate in electricity

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
tariff was held out but the same was not incorporated in the written agreement, no
rebate could be claimed.138. The Government can be bound by the principle of
promissory estoppel when it tries to wriggle out of the promises made by it through the
announcement of schemes for providing incentives to the entrepreneurs to open
industries in backward areas.139. Where the recognised travel agents invested
considerable amounts for the purpose of fulﬁlling conditions imposed for obtaining
recognition under the new circular, subsequent withdrawal of recognition by the
Government was covered by the principle of promissory estoppel.140.
The other parties are also bound to use Government aids only for sanctioned objects.
Money sanctioned for payment of rent of school building was not allowed to be
diverted to other heads.141.
Estoppel cannot be stretched to the extent of restraining the State from exercising its
sovereign and legislative powers.142. The Government can, for example, change export
policy and thereby upset many a contractual commitments.143. Speech made in
Parliament by a Minister cannot be treated as a promise or representation made to a
person attracting the principles of promissory estoppel.144. The Government is also not
bound by the acts of its Departments or oﬃcers which are beyond their powers, ultra
vires.145. Estoppel cannot be claimed on the basis of a contract which does not satisfy
the requirements of Article 299 of the Constitution.146. No estoppel can arise from
simple or casual statements as to future programmes.147. No estoppel was created by
a Minister's statement in the House and reported in newspapers that no import tax
would be levied on rice brought into the State.148. Statements on behalf of Government
in aﬃdavits in previous proceedings and in Parliament about the promotion of a
candidate did not constitute estoppel.149. A housing society which accepted land from
the Government on agreed rent was held to be free to apply to the Government for rent
reduction and the Government was also free to consider the application. The Supreme
Court said that no principle of promissory estoppel could be applied to the
circumstances of the case.150.
The Land Acquisition Oﬃcer (Collector) assured the landowner that a reference would
be made to the civil court over the matter of valuation. It was held that the collector
was a statutory authority. He became bound to fulﬁl the promise under the doctrine of
promissory estoppel. The reference was made under a writ petition. The parties
participated. The proceedings attained ﬁnality. The participating parties could not
question the validity of the reference.151.
No estoppel arose against land acquisition authorities where the amount of
compensation was agreed through amicable settlement. No further compensation
could be allowed because of the agreement.152.
An exemption from levy on rice granted to rice millers on the stock held by them was
subsequently withdrawn. It was held that withdrawal of any such exemption in public
interest was a matter of Government policy. It could not be assailed under the doctrine
of promissory estoppel.153. The withdrawal of a tax exemption contrary to industrial
policy announced for a particular period was not estopped since the Government could,
in public interest revise its policies. The exemption in this case was not a part of any
industrial policy. It was granted by a Notiﬁcation under the Sales Tax Act and the same
could be amended at any time.154. Where a notiﬁcation superseded exemption granted
earlier for a speciﬁed period, it was held that the principle of promissory estoppel was
not attracted.155. An incentive granted under a scheme could be withdrawn or the
scheme amended even during the currency of the scheme if public interest so
demanded.156.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be built upon promises which are contrary
to law. An assurance was given by the State Government to the demonstrators in the
Pharmacy Department that they would be promoted to the post of lecturers. There was
no room for such promotion under applicable Rules and Regulations. The promotion
would have been contrary to the law because under the legal provisions, the posts of
lecturers had to be ﬁlled by selection.157.

[s 115.8.2.1] Delay in invoking promissory estoppel.—
The delay in invoking the promissory estoppel has to be explained by cogent,
convincing and persuasive explanation to justify condonation thereof. In the instant
case the deliberate delay of more than two years was not so explained.158.

[s 115.8.2.2] Continuation of temporary appointment against Rules.—
A doctor was appointed temporarily. His appointment was to come to an end
automatically on the selection of a candidate by the service commission. Even
otherwise the appointment was not to be continued beyond one year without the
concurrence of the Commission. Such concurrence was not obtained even when the
appointment was continued for a long period. It was held that concurrence could not
be presumed from the fact of continuation. There could be no waiver of the
requirement of compliance of the applicable Rules. The petitioner could not claim
regularisation. The challenge to his order of dismissal was not tenable.159.
Instead of the candidate recommended through the Employment Exchange, another
candidate was taken because of better merit. The Supreme Court said that he could
not be denied appointment. There was no estoppel because of the Employment
Exchange recommendation.160.

[s 115.9] Housing.—
Where the Development Authority invited applications from the retired and retiring
Government servants for out of turn allotment of ﬂats on hire purchase basis, the
doctrine of promissory estoppel would be attracted if it subsequently demanded cash
down payment from the applicants.161. Where the Housing Board had earmarked a
certain area for providing community facilities, it could not subsequently convert the
area for residential and commercial complex.162. Where the petitioner sent some
amount along with an application for allotment of a plot by the Government and the
authorities requested him to pay the balance price so that letter of allotment could be
issued which he did, allotment could not be refused on the plea of subsequent change
of policy.163. The Delhi Development Authority allotted ﬂats on the basis of brochures
inviting applications indicating estimated provisional costs. The allottee was fully
aware of the fact that the cost was subject to change as per prevailing rates at the
relevant time. The plea that the costs indicated in the brochures was ﬁnal and binding
was held to be untenable. There was no estoppel against escalation based revision of
costs to the consumers.164.
The Housing Board had promised the petitioner (allottee) to provide the ﬂat to him on
hire purchase basis. The petitioner had acted on the promise and changed his legal
position by depositing two instalments. The Board was not allowed to go back upon its
promise.165.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.9.1] Exemption from building tax.—
At the time when construction of the building for promotion of tourism commenced,
there was no provision in the relevant Act for exemption from building tax. A provision
came into being subsequently and before the petitioner could make any claim, the
provision was dropped. No claim under promissory estoppel was allowed.166.

[s 115.9.2] Auction of shops in Malls and Multiplexes.—
The advertisement for auction of shops in Malls and Multiplexes clearly stated the ﬂoor
area. The subsequent attempt to reduce the ﬂoor area without any genuine ground was
prevented under the doctrine of promissory estoppel.167.

[s 115.10] Financing.—
Where the State Financial Corporation by issuing a notice abruptly refused to give the
promised facilities to a company, the notice was quashed.168.
An entrepreneur under took the construction of a hotel complex on the basis of grant of
loans by certain ﬁnancial institutions. He received huge sums under sanctioned loans
and also from certain private sources. He invested all such sums in the project. The
superstructure was completely constructed and was then waiting for ﬁnishing touches
when some of the promisors and institutions failed to release the balance of
sanctioned loans. The court said that the entrepreneur had altered his position to his
disadvantage on the basis of the promised loans and therefore, the lending institutions
could not be allowed to go back upon their promises. Directions were issued to the
institutions to release the balance of the promised loans.169.

[s 115.10.1] Scheme of Cash Subsidy.—
A cash subsidy scheme was adopted for new industrial units to be set up in developing
areas. The petitioner's two units fulﬁlled the requirements of the scheme. He was given
positive opinion on his application to the competent authority. Cash subsidy was
granted to him for ﬁve years. Later the scheme was cancelled by a State Level
Committee. The court held the order of cancellation to be improper.170.

[s 115.10.2] Power Supply.—
A representation was made to the consumer of electrical energy in furtherance of
which he had altered his position. It was held that the doctrine of promissory estoppel
applied.171.
Promissory estoppel has the effect of preserving a right. Exemption was granted from
payment of electricity tax. It was held to be an accrued right and not a mere
concession. Grant was in favour of those setting up power generating plants. The right
remained safe even though the scheme of the new Act on the subject was different.172.
The principles of promissory estoppel cannot be pressed into service to prevent the
State Electricity Board from realising the expenses, which it is statutorily empowered to
realise.173.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.10.3] Investment.—
Kisan Vikas Patras were issued to a company at a time when issue to companies was
banned by change of Rules. On maturity the Authorities refused to pay interest. The
investing company was not aware of any such ban. The Authority was held bound by
promissory estoppel to repay on maturity the principal amount with interest.174.

[s 115.10.4] Scheme of Loan for Rural Housing.—
A credit-cum-subsidy scheme was adopted for rural housing. The loan was sanctioned
to the petitioner and on the faith of it he mortgaged his land for a loan. The beneﬁt of
the scheme was denied to him on the ground that he was already in possession of
excess land. He disproved all the allegations by producing suﬃcient evidence. The
court said that the principle of promissory estoppel applied. Refusal of the grant was
not proper.175.

[s 115.11] Estoppel against Universities and other educational Institutions.—
Estoppel was pushed to service in the favour of a person who was appointed the Vice
Chancellor of a University for one term on the assurance that his appointment would be
extended for one more term and he had on that basis given up his political career and
his seat in the Assembly.176.
Estoppel presupposes equity in the conduct of the claimant. A student who is a party to
the issue of a false marks sheet cannot rely on it.177. Where a marks sheet showed
failing marks but the remarks column showed "passed", the mistake being patent, the
Board was not estopped from cancelling the result.178. Where a candidate was
declared successful at BA I exam and had pursued her studies right up to BA ﬁnal when
the error in the result was detected and the court held that the error may be rectiﬁed
and the candidate may be asked to clear her BA I papers without cancelling her
subsequent papers.179. The admission of a candidate to the engineering course in a
private college was not allowed to be questioned on the ground that he had not
secured qualifying marks, the University prescribing no standard.180. A published merit
list for house jobs was not challenged by the candidate but when the same list was
published again for ﬁnalising admission course, the candidate challenged it. The
acceptance of the list for one purpose was held to be an acceptance for all other allied
purposes and thus the candidate was precluded from challenging it.181. A revision of
marks on the basis of revaluation done before the publication of the result was held to
be within the discretion of the examining authority, there being no estoppel against it
before the publication of the result.182. A marks sheet obtained by fraud can be
rectiﬁed.183.
The Andhra Pradesh High Court allowed an institution to cancel an admission obtained
on the basis of a false certiﬁcate even though the falsity was discovered after four
years of study.184. The Supreme Court allowed discontinuation of an admission which
was obtained on the basis of a false certiﬁcate of belonging to a tribe.185. Where a
candidate, though not eligible, secured admission to a teachers' training school on
payment of capitation fee and completed two years of the course, it was held that the
withholding of his result on the basis of ineligibility was not improper. The plea of
estoppel raised by the candidate was not tenable.186. But the Patna High Court did not
allow this to be done when the candidate was in the ﬁfth year.187. An admission on the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
basis of a false certiﬁcate of caste can be cancelled.188. The Rajasthan High Court did
not permit it to be cancelled after three to four years.189. Where the petitioners had
passed their examinations from Hindi Vishwavidyalaya, Allahabad and their
testimonials were duly checked at the time of their admission to Nursing and Midwifery
course and they were able to follow the instructions in English, the Government was
estopped from cancelling their admission on the ground of not possessing the
minimum qualiﬁcation when they had almost completed their courses of studies.190.
Where the parent University conferred degrees on students of the aﬃliated colleges, it
was not allowed to cancel their degrees by pleading that the colleges had not complied
with the statutes. Such action of the University defeated the legitimate expectation of
the students.191. The Allahabad University Statutes limited the admission of
autonomous college students to post-graduate courses of the University. This was held
to be discriminatory and also violative of UGC guidelines.192.
Where an institution makes an error in an admission it may cancel the same if the
mistake is on a point of law.193. An admission which slipped through in spite of
inadequate percentage of marks was not allowed to be cancelled right on the verge of
examinations.194. An admission to LLB class was made on provisional basis and the
candidate was treated all along as provisionally admitted until the University sought to
cancel the admission. It was held that the University had become bound to honour the
admission notwithstanding the fact that the admission committee had no power to
make a provisional admission of a candidate who had apparently less than qualifying
marks.195. Where the admission rules were abruptly changed, a candidate was not
debarred from challenging them by the mere fact that he participated in the changed
procedure.196.
Where reservation for admission was claimed on the basis of being wards of police
oﬃcers holding gallantry awards, but the University admission carried no such reserved
category, the candidates were not allowed to claim such reservation. They were only
able to cite an instruction by the Chief Minister for creating such reserved category.
The court said that such reservation could only be prospective.197.
Where a candidate securing lesser marks in MSc Part I, appeared in the improvement
test and was allowed to appear at MSc Part II examination in the same academic year,
her result could not be withheld on the basis of a resolution prohibiting students from
taking two examinations in a year when such resolution was never communicated to
her.198.
Undertaking by students at the time of admission not to approach any Court against
the school did not have the effect of debarring them from ﬁling a writ petition.199.
Where admission of a candidate to Medical College was done due to the mistake of the
selection committee, her admission was not allowed to be cancelled four months after
her joining the Medical College, more so when she had given up her studies in an
agricultural college.200. Where the petitioner was admitted to the course of Physical
Training Instructor and was allowed to undergo full training for about a year,
cancellation of his admission on the ground that sports certiﬁcate given by him was
not properly authenticated, was held to be not proper.201. An institution cannot change
examination rules after the tests have already been conducted.202. In a test for
admission to post graduate degree and diploma in medical course, there was a
provision in the prospectus for preference to in-service candidates and this was also
made known to the candidates at the interview. The court allowed the provision to be
challenged by open merit candidate. The participation in the test did not debar from
challenging some of the provisions of the prospectus.203.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
One of the rules for the conduct of entrance tests to professional courses was that
there would be no revaluation or rechecking of answer books. A candidate who took
the test subject to the rules was not afterwards allowed to claim revaluation or
rechecking. His request for disclosure of key answers was also not allowed. The court,
however, directed the authorities to disclose key answers immediately after the
declaration of result.204.
Conditions of aﬃliation and of granting recognition to colleges and their degrees and
diplomas can be altered for the future. The okay report of inspectors for aﬃliation does
not bind the University so as to create an estoppel against it.205.
One of the conditions in the brochure issued for admission to homeopathic diploma
course was that the Central Council approved that the diploma holders would be
treated eligible for registration to degree course. It was found that there was no such
authorisation in favour of the college. The students who passed the diploma course
could not get any relief in terms of this condition. But having regard to their reasonable
expectation, the authorities were directed that students should be given permission to
join second year degree course after completion of 1750 hours of study and on
passing examination thereafter.206.
The candidates who had applied for a post and appeared at the interview without
protesting against the change of eligibility criteria were not subsequently allowed to
plead that the eligibility criteria were wrongly framed.207. The appellant was working as
a lecturer in a college. The District Inspector of Colleges approved his appointment on
yearly basis. Such approval was not granted after 1973. Another person (respondent in
this case) was selected as lecturer and appointed by the Education Department.
Appellant ﬁled his suit only against the college. Declaration by the Civil Court that the
appellant was permanent on his post was held not to bind the Education Department or
the respondent because they were not parties to the suit. There was no estoppel
against the Education Department.208.
A party claimed title to the property in question under a will and also set up the plea of
adverse possession. The court said that such alternative pleas are possible. It was held
that the trial Court holding that the appellant was not entitled to set up the right of
adverse possession and rejected it at threshold without scrutiny of evidence. This was
held to be improper.209.
Where the candidate had failed both in the aggregate as well as in an individual paper, a
pass mark sheet, having been issued to him by mistake, was allowed to be
cancelled.210.

[s 115.11.1] CASES.—
An admission Regulation required candidates to secure minimum 50% marks in the
Joint Entrance Test. The University in question did not mention it in its information
brochure. The petitioner was offered admission without securing the requisite
percentage. The University was not allowed to cancel the admission when he had
already pursued the medical course for more than a year, being against the equitable
doctrine.211.

[s 115.12] Revision of admission rules.—
Where students were allowed admission to higher semester pending the result of
revaluation, the facility being offered only as a concession, it was held that the
withdrawal of the facility after some years due to chaotic conditions caused by the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
scheme could not be condemned as something arbitrary. The doctrines of legitimate
expectations and promissory estoppel were not applicable. Public interest can override
legitimate expectations. The decision lies with the Government. The court can only see
that the new policy is not irrational or perverse.212. An exemption from fee was granted
to such medical and engineering candidates who had undergone sterilisation
operation. The Notiﬁcation to that effect was subsequently modiﬁed by providing that
the scheme was not to apply to private educational institutions. The candidates of such
institutions were not allowed to claim estoppel against the Government.213.
A university was running non-formal distant education system and had followed it for a
decade. All such Universities had to modify the system as per UGC guidelines. It could
not be said that they had acted against the law. The writ of mandamus could not be
issued.214.

[s 115.13] Revaluation.—
A student sought revaluation of some of his answer books. The University, carried out
revaluation of papers applied for and also revalued another paper which was not
applied for. This was done because some other wrongs were also detected. The court
said that there was nothing illegal in that respect. The principle of promissory estoppel
was not applicable.215.

[s 115.13.1] Admission Fee.—
Where a University was charging different fee from different batches and the batch of
the petitioners was subjected to higher fee and the structure of the fee was clearly
disclosed in the prospectus, it was held that the fact that the petitioners accepted the
fees structure while taking admission could not be a ground for estopping them from
challenging the validity of the discriminatory fees structure. They could not be said to
have given up their right to a parity of treatment with others with whom they were
similarly situated.216.

[s 115.13.2] Cancellation of result.—Mass copying.—
Where the petitioner was declared to have passed BA Final examination and he applied
for job and received call letter, he could not be said to have "changed or altered" his
position and the university could not be precluded from cancelling his result on the
ground of mass copying by invoking doctrine of estoppel.217. Where the students using
unfair means were allowed to join the next year courses under an interim order of the
High Court, the University was not estopped from altering their results subsequently on
the basis of the syndicate ﬁnding them to be guilty of using unfair means.218.

[s 115.14] Permission for establishing college.—
A permission to establish and run a private college was granted in accordance with
applicable Rules and subject to the conditions mentioned in the Government Order.
Acting on the basis of the permission, the founders spent huge sums of money in
establishing the institution. Subsequently to all this, the government issued an
executive order declaring 50% seats as Government seats, and also assuming the right

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
to admit students to that extent. The court ordered otherwise. The doctrine of
promissory estoppel prevailed over the executive order.219.

[s 115.14.1] Minority status.—
The right to establish and administer educational institutions by minorities cannot be
whittled down by doctrines of estoppel and waiver. The educational agency in this case
took inconsistent stands in claiming minority status. The court said that the claim
could not be rejected on that ground. A detailed and deeper probe would be
required.220.

[s 115.14.2] Religious institutions or places.—
A temple was being administered by the plaintiff community. On representation of the
plaintiff along with the general public, the defendant was allowed to administer the
temple. It was taken over by the defendant administering it for more than 35 years. The
temple lost its character by eﬄux of time and also because of the conduct of the
plaintiff community as being a denomination temple. The defendant appointed persons
of other communities as trustees. The plaintiff community became estopped from
challenging the administration by the defendant saying that it was violation of Article
26 of the Constitution, being against interests of the plaintiff community.221.

[s 115.15] Issue estoppel.—
The basic principle underlying the rule of issue estoppel is that the same issue of fact
and law must have been determined in the previous litigation.222. The doctrine of issue
estoppel in a criminal proceeding would come into play only if the earlier and
subsequent proceedings were criminal prosecutions.223. Where the issue of facts in
petty cases in relation to the accused was already tried and ﬁndings were reached
thereon, it was held that the reception of evidence as to the same issue of facts in
respect of the same accused in a murder trial was barred. Findings in petty cases
would constitute an estoppel against the prosecution in a murder case.224. The Court
has inherent jurisdiction as a matter of discretion in the interests of ﬁnality not to allow
a particular issue which has already been litigated to be reopened,225. nor to permit a
party to change his pleadings.226. Commons Commissioner decided a dispute between
a County Council and Crown Estate Commissioners by declaring that the grass verges
(which were in dispute) were a part of the highway and not registrable as common
land. Subsequently the Crown Estate Commissioners brought an action against the
County Council for trespass on verges and the Council claimed estoppel against them
because the issue had already been decided. The court said:227.
There was no reason why the decision of an inferior tribunal with a limited jurisdiction and a
strictly limited function to perform should not be capable of creating an issue estoppel,
subject always to the constitutional principles that a tribunal of limited jurisdiction could not
be permitted conclusively to determine the limits of its own jurisdiction and that a public
oﬃcial could not be barred by issue estoppel from performing his statutory duty. Since the
Commissioner had a statutory jurisdiction to decide whether the road verges should be
registered as common land and for that purpose had to determine whether they formed part
of a highway, he had jurisdiction to determine that question also. Furthermore, that was not
a jurisdictional question, since the Commissioner's jurisdiction to decide it did not depend
on the correctness of the answer he gave. All the requirements of issue estoppel were
therefore satisﬁed.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the purchaser of the assets of a company submitted before the High Court that
as per terms of the settlement, he would abide by the terms as modiﬁed by the High
Court, it was held that the Supreme Court could again modify the terms and no
estoppel would be attracted.228.
The principle of cause of action or issue estoppel applies to an industrial tribunal
application which has been formally dismissed following its withdrawal by the
applicant. The fact that the tribunal heard no evidence or argument on the issues of
fact or law would not prevent the decision from operating as res judicata. It was a
judicial decision by a tribunal in the exercise of its statutory powers and not a mere
administrative act. In the absence of any exceptional circumstances, the employee was
disentitled from bringing a further claim for a redundancy payment.229.
Under the principle of issue estoppel a party was not allowed to raise the matter of
copyright where it was not raised in the course of the parties' without prejudice
correspondence.230.

[s 115.16] Scope.—
In order to hold that a case comes within the scope of this section a Court must ﬁnd.
(1) That party A believed a thing to be true,
(2) That, in consequence of that belief, he acted in a particular manner,
(3) That that belief, and A's so acting, were brought about by some representation by
party B, either by declaration, act or omission, which representation was made
intentionally to produce that result.
If these be established, then B is prohibited by law from denying, in a proceeding
against A or A's representative, the truth of his representation.
It is not necessary to prove an intention by B to deceive, or any fraudulent intention. He
will nonetheless be estopped if he himself was acting under a mistake or
misapprehension. It is also not necessary that the party claiming estoppel should have
suffered any loss or detriment.231. The court said: "Gradually the doctrine of
promissory estoppel has developed to an extent that it is no longer necessary that the
party seeking to enforce the principle must have suffered a detriment."
The Supreme Court has stated the requirements in terms of a larger number of
points:232.
"To bring the case within the scope of estoppel as deﬁned in section 115 of the
Evidence Act;
(1) there must be a representation by a person or his authorised agent to another in

any form—a declaration, act or omission;
(2) the representation must have been of the existence of a fact and not of

promises de futuro or intention which might not be enforceable in contract;
(3) the representation must have been meant to be relied upon;
(4) there must have been belief on the part of the other party in its truth;
(5) there must have been action on the faith of that declaration, act or omission,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
that is to say, the declaration, act or omission must have actually caused
another to act on the faith of it, and to alter his former position to his prejudice
or detriment;
(6) the misrepresentation or conduct or omission must have been the proximate

cause of leading the other party to act to his prejudice;
(7) the person claiming the beneﬁt of an estoppel must show that he was not aware

of the true state of things—if he was aware of the real state of affairs or had
means of knowledge, there can be no estoppel;
(8) only the person to whom representation was made or for whom it was designed

can avail himself of it. A person is entitled to plead estoppel in his own
individual character and not as a representative of his assignee."
The law of estoppel cares nothing for the motive or state of knowledge of the party
upon whose representation the action took place. What it does care about is the
position of the party who was induced to act. That party can only use as an estoppel a
statement by which he was actually misled.
The Government is not exempt from the equity arising out of the acts done by citizens
to their prejudice, relying upon the representations as to its future conduct made by the
Government.233. Public bodies are as much bound as private individuals to carry out
representations of facts and promises made by them, relying on which other persons
have altered their position to their prejudice.234.
If a document is void ab initio there would be no question of estoppel.235.
The general notion about doctrine of estoppel has all along been that it can be used as
a defence and not as a cause of action. But now under the impact of its application and
extension to promissory estoppels, it is capable of affording a cause of action also.
Noting this development, the High Court of Delhi observed:
The modern doctrine of promissory estoppel is of comparatively recent origin in the ﬁeld of
public law. The provisions regarding estoppel contained in ss. 115–117 are a mere shadow
of what the modern principles of promissory estoppel have come to be. The present
development in this area is that an independent action can now be founded on a promissory
estoppel and it is no longer a principle available only as a shield. It can be used as a weapon
of offence.236.

[s 115.17] "When one person has by his declaration, act or omission?"—
The term "person" applies only to a person of full age and competent to enter into
contracts. If an infant represents fraudulently or otherwise that he is of age and thereby
induces another to enter into a contract with him, the infant is not estopped from
setting up infancy in an action founded on the contract.237. But the court has discretion
in equity to direct the minor to return the beneﬁt he has received by false representation
to the person he has deceived.238. The Allahabad High Court has held that upon
equitable grounds he may be made liable for any loss which the plaintiff has
suffered.239. The Privy Council has not decided the point though the Calcutta High
Court in its decision had expressly decided it.240.
A declaration of age, other than in the case of a minor, creates an estoppel.241.
There is a clear distinction between a representation of an existing fact and a
representation that something will be done in future. The former may, if it amounts to a
representation as to some fact alleged at the time to be actually in existence, raise an

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
estoppel, if another person alters his position relying upon that representation. A
representation that something will be done in the future may result in a contract if
another person to whom it is addressed acts upon it.242.
Under the English law a minor is not estopped from pleading his minority. An infant by
fraudulently representing that he was of full age induced the plaintiffs to lend him a
sum of money. In an action by the plaintiffs to recover the money it was held that the
cause of action was in substance ex contractu, that the plea of infancy was a good
answer to the action, and that the defendant was under no equitable liability to the
plaintiffs.243. "When an infant obtained an advantage by falsely stating himself to be of
full age, equity required him to restore him ill-gotten gains, or to release the party
deceived from obligations or acts in law induced by the fraud, but scrupulously stopped
short of enforcing against him a contractual obligation, entered into while he was an
infant, even by means of fraud."244. This case has been approved of by the Privy
Council.245.
Where the construction of a building has been sanctioned by the Development
Authority of the Town under ministerial orders, the validity of the sanction cannot be
questioned by the Government after the commencement or completion of
construction.246. Similarly, a Town Planning Authority cannot change the scheme of the
area of a residential colony.247. A person tolerated an encroachment wall obstructing
passage for nine years. He commenced proceedings but claimed removal only after
four years of the proceedings. The court would not allow him to do so but ordered the
defendant not to obstruct the passage further still by dumping material.248. Where
requisite fee has been paid on the basis of valuation made by the Government, the
latter cannot afterwards challenge the valuation.249. Where all the members of a family
accepted an assessment to estate duty permitting one of them to act as the
accountable person, none of them was subsequently allowed to challenge the
assessment on the ground that the person so assumed to be accountable was not
really so.250. Full professional charges were paid to a claimant by the Government as a
special case by waiving normal procedures. The person who accepted the payment
was not allowed afterwards to claim interest on delayed payment.251.
Where the Advocate General made a statement that a Government order stood
superseded by subsequent rules, the Government could not contend that the said GO
was still alive.252. Where royalty imposed on timber mills was found to be illegal, the
petitioner mill owner could not be refused relief by applying principle of estoppel,
merely because of some discussion between the Government and mill owners before
order of realisation of royalty was passed.253.

[s 115.18] "Intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing
to be true and to act upon such belief".—
A person who, by his declaration, act or omission, had caused another to believe a
thing to be true and to act upon that belief, must be held to have done so "intentionally"
if a reasonable man would take the representation to be true, and believe it was meant
that he should act upon it.254. The words "caused person to believe a thing to be true"
refer to the belief in a fact and not in proposition of law.255. "Believe a thing to be true",
i.e., believe a fact to be true. The word "thing" means fact.256. It must be found that the
defendant by his act or omission intentionally caused or permitted another person to
believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief. It is not suﬃcient to say that it
may well be doubted whether the plaintiff would have acted in the way he did but for
the way in which the defendant had acted. It must be found that the plaintiff would not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
have acted as he did.257. If a man, either by words or by conduct has intimated that he
consents to an act which has been done, and that he will offer no opposition to it,
although it could not have been lawfully done without his consent and he thereby
induces others to do that from which they otherwise might have abstained, he cannot
question the legality of the act he had so sanctioned, to the prejudice of those who
have so given faith to his words, or to the fair inference to be drawn from his
conduct.258. A teacher of a recognised school who was facing inquiry for misconduct
demanded that the enquiry should be held by educationists other than the members of
the school committee. An inquiry committee was so constituted and the teacher
participated in its proceedings without any objection as to its jurisdiction etc. No such
objections were allowed to be raised afterwards.259. The petitioner represented that he
wanted to hold ice shows for a limited duration. The ﬁrst round of shows in the various
cities of India was over. The Reserve Bank was not estopped from refusing further
permission. There was no representation that they would be permitted till their foreign
exchange was exhausted.260.
A party relying upon this section has to establish not only that the opposite party had
made a certain declaration, but that the said declaration had been believed and had
been acted upon and that it was not reasonably possible for the said party to know the
true state of affairs by pursuing inquiries reasonably and with diligence. Where truth is
accessible to a party, the plea of estoppel upon representation fails.261. A person
cannot invoke the doctrine of estoppel unless he proves that he has been induced to
change his position to his detriment by relying upon any declaration, act or omission of
the person against whom the doctrine is invoked.262.
Where the Government declared a scheme of giving incentive to Rice Mill Industries
and a party made heavy investments for modernisation of the mill but prior to
introduction of the scheme and did not obtain approval as required under the scheme,
he was entitled to no beneﬁt by applying the doctrine of promissory estoppel on
Government subsequently withdrawing the scheme.263.

[s 115.19] Permission for employment abroad, with right of lien on existing
job.—
An employee was allowed to join an employment abroad with two years lien on the
existing job. The sanction order clearly stipulated that if the employee failed to resume
his duty within two years his lien would end. The employee did not return within the
stipulated period and, therefore, his employment was terminated. He was not allowed
to challenge the validity of two years restriction on the right of lien.264.

[s 115.20] Future promise does not create estoppel.—
To create an estoppel there must be a representation by means of a declaration, act or
omission that a thing is true, i.e., that the representation is as to some state of facts
alleged to be at the time actually in existence. If the representation relates to a promise
de futuro, it can be binding not as an estoppel but as a contract.265. A mere promise to
do something in future will not create an estoppel.266.

[s 115.20.1] Agreement in Praesenti.—
A question arose about the extension of time for the telecast of a TV Serial. There was
a letter from the Prasar Bharti stating that an extension of time would not be granted

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
after 52 episodes. Both parties kept on acting on this letter. The court said that the
letter served as an agreement between the parties. Both parties thus became bound.
The applicant could not compel the authorities to grant extension on the basis of the
revised policy. Neither the principle of promissory estoppel nor that of legitimate
expectation could be invoked.267.

[s 115.21] True facts known to both the parties.—
The section does not apply to a case where the statement relied upon is made to a
person who knows the real facts and is not misled by the untrue statement. There can
be no estoppel where the truth of the matter is known to the both parties.268.
The husband who contracted second marriage was fully conscious of the fact that the
second wife was earlier married and divorced. The fact was duly included in the
matrimonial advertisement. The Church Marriage Register Book was also signed by
both the parties. The husband was not allowed to plead that his marriage was invalid
because the divorce to the wife from the ﬁrst marriage was granted by a Court of
incompetent jurisdiction. The plea was barred by estoppel and also contrary to public
policy.269.
Where the defendant knew that the buildings in dispute did not belong to him, but had
been sold to the plaintiff, and, in spite of that fact, he chose of his own accord to incur
expenditure by repairing these buildings, it was held that he could not raise any plea of
estoppel.270. The fact that a workman continued in service for a number of years on
the basis of bogus and forged casual labourer service cards, cannot create an estoppel
against the employer Government to remove him after holding departmental
proceedings.271.

[s 115.22] Estoppel does not require fraudulent intention.—
It is not essential that the person making the representation which induces another to
act must be inﬂuenced by a fraudulent intention. A fraudulent intention is not
necessary to create an estoppel. The determining element is not the motive with which
the representation has been made, nor the state of knowledge of the party making it,
but the effect of the representation as having caused another to act on the faith of
it.272. The Allahabad High Court has held that the word intentionally does not mean
that the conduct of the person making the representation should have been fraudulent
or that it should not have been made under a mistake or misapprehension. The motive
or state of knowledge of the representor is immaterial. The law only considers the
position of the person to whom the representation was made.273. The section "does
not make it a condition of estoppel resulting that the person who by his declaration or
act had induced the belief on which another has acted was either committing or
seeking to commit a fraud, or that he was acting with a full knowledge of the
circumstances, and under no mistake or misapprehension...What the law and the
Indian statute mainly regard is the position of the person who was induced to act; and
the principle on which the law and the statute rest is, that it would be most inequitable
and unjust to him that if another, by a representation made, or by conduct amounting to
a representation, has induced him to act as he would not otherwise have done, the
person who made the representation should be allowed to deny or repudiate the effect
of his former statement, to the loss and injury of the person who acted on it." If the
person who made the statement did so without full knowledge, or under error, sibi
imputet, it may, in the result, be unfortunate for him, but it would be unjust, even though

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
he acted under error, to throw the consequences on the person who believed his
statement and acted on it as it was intended he should do.274.
"An estoppel does not in itself give a cause of action; it prevents a person from denying
a certain state of facts. One ground of estoppel is where a man makes a fraudulent
misrepresentation and another man acts upon it to his detriment. Another may be
where a man makes a false statement negligently, though without fraud, and another
person acts upon it. And there may be circumstances under which, where a
misrepresentation is made without fraud and without negligence, there may be an
estoppel."275. There may be statements made, which have induced another party to do
that from which otherwise he would have abstained, which cannot properly be
characterised as misrepresentation, but which amount to estoppel.276.

[s 115.23] Estoppel must be unambiguous.—
To create an estoppel against a party, his declaration, act or omission must be of an
unequivocal and unambiguous character.277. An estoppel to have any judicial value,
must be clear and non-ambiguous; it must also be free, voluntary and without any
artiﬁce.278.

[s 115.24] Estoppel on point of law.—
There is no estoppel on a point of law.279. In CIT v BN Bhattacharjee, CIT v BN
Bhattacharjee,280. the court said: "The soul of estoppel is equity, not facility for inequity
nor is estoppel against statute permissible because public policy animating a statutory
provision may then become the casualty." Halsbury has noted this sensible nicety.281.
"Where a statute, enacted for the beneﬁt of a section of the public, imposes a duty of a
positive kind, the person charged with the performance of the duty cannot by estoppel
be prevented from exercising his statutory powers."282.
Estoppel refers to a belief in a fact and not in a proposition of law. A person cannot be
estopped for a misrepresentation on a point of law. An admission on a point of law is
not an admission of a "thing" so as to make the admission matter of estoppel.283. An
agreement contrary to public policy does not create an estoppel. It would not prevent
the party from pleading the illegality.284. Where certain claims have been allowed in a
tax matter, there is no estoppel as against similar claims in future.285. Any act done
under misapprehension of legal right does not create estoppel, nor does a question of
estoppel arise when the parties know the correct position.286. Where persons merely
represent their conclusions of law as to the validity of an assumed or admitted
adoption, there is no representation of a fact to constitute an estoppel.287.
Where an appointment was made clearly against the regulations, it was liable to be set
aside. There arises no question of estoppel though the appointee was even
promoted.288.
A student in a Polytechnic failed to put in a minimum prescribed percentage of
attendance. But the principal permitted him to take his examination. The principal
spoke of superior orders but the persons making such orders had no jurisdiction in the
matter. The permission was against Rules and, therefore, it was cancellable leaving no
scope for invocation of the doctrine of promissory estoppel.289.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A party is not bound by his pleader's admission on a point of law.290.
The doctrine of estoppel is not applicable to a decision on a pure question of law such
as the question of jurisdiction of courts.291. Where a cooperative bank alleged before
the MRTP Commission that it was a full-ﬂedged banking company within the meaning
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the same being against the law, it was held that
the party making the averment was not estopped from averring that it was not a
banking company.292.
The right of pre-emption, though a legal right, is in its nature a very weak right, and,
therefore, can be defeated by estoppel.293. A suit for pre-emption on the basis of an
alleged sale of land did not prevent the party from subsequently challenging the validity
of the sale.294. In a contract under which timber was to be supplied and price could not
be ﬁxed, because the timber had still to be ascertained the court said that sections 18,
19 and 20 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 would govern the right and duties of the
parties, and not the principle of promissory estoppel.295.
A life convict accepted certain conditions for his release as to his surety. One of the
conditions was that surety should be for an indeterminate period commensurate with
the life of the released prisoner. After his release he questioned the condition on the
ground that it was neither reasonable nor fair. It was contended by the other side that
he should not be allowed to do so because he had accepted it as a part of his package
of release. The court did not accept this condition and allowed questioning. The court
said that the principles of estoppel did not apply in this area.296.

[s 115.24.1] Allotment of ﬂat.—
After allotment, the Housing Board demanded additional price. The allottee paid it and
took possession. He was not allowed afterwards to challenge the validity of the
additional price demand.297. The allotment letters stipulated norms for ﬁxing price,
payment schedule of installments and interest chargeable for default. An oﬃce order
was issued subsequently for levying 20% surcharge for restoration. In spite of this
oﬃce order, the Authority condoned the default of the allottee as per terms of the
allotment letter and restored the allotment. The Authority was not allowed to enforce
the oﬃce order of surcharge.298.

[s 115.25] Allotment of plot of land in legal violation.—
The allottee (petitioner) himself cancelled the allotment saying that it was illegal. He
also claimed refund of earnest money. His claim for refund was not granted and
probably for that reason he changed his stand saying that the allotment was valid and
deposited the bid money. The deposit was accepted by the Authority under protest. It
was held that such conduct could not estop the authorities from cancelling something
which was against law.299.

[s 115.25.1] Allotment of Land for Petrol Pump.—
A site was allotted and a no objection certiﬁcate for installing a petrol pump was
issued. Subsequent to this, the Indian Road Congress issued a Circular for maintaining
prescribed distance between two petrol pumps. For this reason the NOC was
cancelled. In the meantime, the petitioner had by acting on instructions and guidelines
then prevalent, altered his position by making a huge investment. It was held that the
authorities were estopped from withdrawing the NOC on the basis of a subsequent
Circular.300.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.26] No estoppel against statute.—
The principle of estoppel cannot be invoked to defeat the plain provisions of a
statute.301. There is no estoppel against an Act of Legislature.302. There can be no
estoppel against the law. The doctrine of estoppel cannot be invoked to render valid a
transaction which the legislature has, on the grounds of general public policy, enacted
to be invalid, or to give the court a jurisdiction which is denied to it by statute, or to oust
the court's statutory jurisdiction under an enactment which precludes the parties
contracting out of its provisions.303. Estoppel only applies to a contract inter partes and
it is not competent to parties to a contract to estop themselves or anybody else in the
face of an Act.304. Statutory protection granted to persons below age and to persons of
unsound mind cannot be defeated by resorting to the doctrine of estoppel.305. Where a
statute imposes a duty by a positive action, estoppel cannot prevent it. Estoppel is only
a rule of evidence which can be invoked under special circumstances but is not
available to release a party from the obligation to obey a statute.306. Nor it can be used
to prevent legislative and executive organs of the State from performing their
functions. Estoppel is not available for preventing a Municipal Committee from acting
according to law. A Municipality granted exemption from Octroi for developing a Mandi,
but subsequently revoked it. It again granted exemption in keeping with the terms of
the original sale of plots, but again levied the tax. Even so a claim of estoppel against
its legislative power was not allowed.307. A Municipality (Mahapalika) handed over the
contract of building a shopping complex in a public park to a private builder. It found
subsequently that its action was contrary to the statute under which it was constituted.
It was held that the Mahapalika could reverse its action and would not be bound in that
respect by the doctrine of promissory estoppel. Its promise was against the law.308.
Where plots could be allotted under the applicable rules only to persons who qualiﬁed
as locally displaced persons, but they happened to be allotted to persons who were
similarly situated. Because of this allotment, others also claimed equal treatment. It
was held that a wrongful allotment would not give anybody the right to seek a further
wrongful allotment. Wrongly allotted plots were liable to be cancelled. The acceptance
of consideration in respect of those plots would not protect the allotment. There could
not be estoppel against law.309. Where a person had acted on the terms and conditions
of a code for several years even he was not estopped from challenging its validity.310.
Where an exemption from tax is granted to save an industry, the doctrine of estoppel is
not attracted.311. If an item has been listed in a wrong category for excise purposes,
the Department cannot be prevented from revising the classiﬁcation.312.
A Government authority was allowed to withdraw the promise of exemption from
Mandi tax when it was found that there was no provision in the underlying Act enabling
or justifying such exemption. Even the opinion of the Advocate General could not justify
the exemption.313.
It has been held that coffee is a plantation crop and not a ﬁrst produce. The Forest
Department collected tax from dealers in coffee seeds and coffee powder. This was
held to be not permissible. The fact that the respondent voluntarily remitted the tax
amount pursuant to a clause in the terms and conditions of the auction, did not have
the effect of precluding him from claiming refund.314.
No person can be precluded from pleading that certain orders are illegal or invalid,
because the question as to whether orders are illegal or invalid is a pure question of
law and there can be no estoppel against law.315. An undertaking was given before the
High Court in a writ proceeding on behalf of the hut and pavement dwellers that they
would not claim any fundamental right to put up huts on pavements or public roads
and that they would not obstruct the demolition of the huts after a certain date. They
were not estopped from contending before the Supreme Court that their huts could not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
be demolished because of their right to livelihood comprehended in Article 21.316. No
estoppel arises where a promise given by an executive authority is beyond its powers,
ultra vires,317. or when a statement is made under a misapprehension of legal
rights.318.
The plaintiff and the defendant exchanged adjacent plots of land each worth more than
Rs 100 by means of an unregistered deed, both believing that they had effected a valid
transfer. Possession was taken by each party and defendant began to erect a very
costly building placing a wall thereof in the land he had acquired in exchange. While the
building was in progress, the plaintiff demanded and obtained Rs 525 from the
defendant on the ground that the plot he parted with was found to be more in extent
than the defendant's. After the completion of the building the plaintiff sued the
defendant for recovery of his plot after removal of the defendant's building on it. The
defendant pleaded that the plaintiff was estopped by his conduct from recovering the
plot. It was held that the plaintiff was not estopped and that he was entitled to recover
his plot owing to the absence of a registered deed of exchange as required by sections
54 and 118 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.319.
Where the percentage prescribed for admission to a particular course had the force of
statutory operation, it was held that the admission granted by a college of the
University to a candidate with 39.1% marks (prescribed percentage being 40) was liable
to be examined and the University's cancellation on the eve of the examination was
well within time because the University came to know of the irregular admission only
on receiving the examination form.320. The statutory rights of a landlord under a
tenancy are not defeasible by means of an estoppel.321. No one can be estopped from
asserting his statutory rights even if he had been declaring that he would not insist
upon them.322. Whether an estoppel will operate against a statute depends on the
nature of the statute and objects sought to be achieved by it.323. But abandonment of
rights may change the position between the parties. A party suffering a wrong remand
for ﬁve years was precluded from challenging its validity.324. Similarly in a case, the
landlord claimed rent at an excess rate, which was tendered by the tenant under
protest, whereafter two eviction petitions were withdrawn by the landlord without
protest by tenant to proceed further to determine the rate of rent. Even a petition for
refund of excess rent paid by him was also not ﬁled by the tenant. In the third petition, it
was held that the tenant was estopped from disputing his liability to pay rent at a
higher rate as claimed in the earlier eviction petition.325.
Where a person (full-time law teacher) not entitled to be enrolled as an Advocate, was
granted enrolment by a State Bar Council by misinterpreting the relevant rules, it was
held that the cancellation of the enrolment by the Bar Council of India was proper. The
teachers concerned could not raise the plea of estoppel because they suffered the bar
at the threshold and were given enrolment in violation of and contrary to Rules.326.
A right of appeal cannot be created by consent or agreement. Parties cannot confer
jurisdiction on Court and then claim estoppel.327.

[s 115.27] No estoppel against a Constitutional right.—
Principle of estoppel cannot be invoked against a Constitutional right guaranteed to the
citizens of India.328.

[s 115.27.1] Transfer of Right of Succession.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Both under the Transfer of Property Act and Mohammedan Law, a bare chance of
succession is not transferable. Hence, no estoppel would arise by reason of any such
transfer. But she (the legal heir) had accepted money to give up her right during father's
life time. Her father died intestate. She became under estoppel from claiming her
share. The court said that estoppel as a rule of evidence could be applied to estop her
on account of her conduct from succeeding to the estate.329.

[s 115.28] Criminal proceedings.—
The doctrine of estoppel would not apply where parties agreed to compound an
offence which is otherwise not compoundable. A petition was ﬁled for quashing
proceedings under sections 498A, 304, IPC and under the Dowry Prohibition Act
because of the agreement between the parties. The petition was dismissed. The party
to the agreement was not bound by the unlawful compromise and, therefore, there was
no question of estoppel either.330.

[s 115.28.1] Statement Before Court.—
A statement was made by the party's counsel before the court. The matter had come
before the court in connection with illegal construction of an approach road. The party
wanted to withdraw the statement saying that the counsel had misconception about
facts and failed to take instructions. The court did not permit. Withdrawal was sought
not immediately after the statement but after several adjournments. It was a high
proﬁle case and was being conducted by an experienced counsel.331.

[s 115.29] Estoppel by silence and acquiescence.—
Whenever there is a duty owing by one person towards another to speak or act which
he has failed to perform and the other party has been led by such silence to change his
position, such silence would operate as estoppel against the former. But where there is
no duty to speak, no estoppel can arise.332. When silence is of such a character and
under such circumstances that it would be fraud upon the other party, for the party
which has kept silence to deny what his silence has induced, it will operate as an
estoppel.333. A man is bound to speak out in certain cases, and his very silence
becomes as expressive as if he has openly consented to what is said or done and had
become a party to the transaction. The ostensible owner sold certain land and his son,
the real owner, remained silent. The acquiescence resulted in an estoppel.334. Where a
forest coupe was knocked down in favour of a person at an auction was put to reauction after cancelling the earlier and he participated in the second auction, he was
not allowed subsequently to question the validity of the cancellation. His silence
amounted to an acceptance of the cancellation.335. A landlord, who had let out the
house for residential purposes tolerated non-residential use for as many as seven
years, was estopped from seeking eviction on that ground.336. Where the plaintiffs
came to know about the sale of property to the defendants beforehand and made no
objection to the transaction, they lost their right of pre-emption by acquiescence.337.
Wherein a suit for declaration of rights in the management of a temple, the matter was
settled between the main parties before the High Court, the other signatory defendants,
by their silence, were estopped from contending that the order was not binding on
them.338. Where the owners of certain industries acquiesced in their treatment as a
separate class, subsequently while ﬁxing electricity tariff, they could not say that the
classiﬁcation was discriminatory.339. Where the applicant-manufacturer allowed a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
sister concern to use his registered trade mark for a long period, doctrine of
acquiescence and honest and concurrent user was attracted.340.
Where in an order of eviction the second revision did not lie before the High School but
this plea was not raised when the matter was remitted to trial Court in the second
revision, acquiescence extinguished the plea from being raised by taking the matter in
appeal.341. Where the Central Government did not question the calculation of payment
of solatium and interest before the tribunal, it was not allowed to say that the same
were not payable under the Coal-Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act,
1957.342. Acquisition of title is inference of law arising out of certain set of facts. A
person who has not acquired any title in law, the title cannot be vested in him by reason
only of acquiescence or estoppel on the part of the other. A presumption by itself does
not discharge the burden of proof which lies on the claimant and would not create
title.343.
Where a party without raising any objection regarding the terms and conditions of a
tender, participated in a tender process, it would be estopped from raising any
objection at the subsequent stage.344. Where the successful bidder paid only a small
amount as earnest money and took no further steps to implement the project tendered
for, it was decided by the Port Trust to cancel the tender process. It was held that the
Port Trust Authorities were not bound by their promise.345.
A party by committing a fraud during consolidation proceedings got her name recorded
in revenue records in relation to the other person's half-share in the ancestral property
concerned. The other party raised objection before the Consolidation Oﬃcer, but later
on withdrew the same. It was held that the other party's right over the said property did
not stand extinguished by the withdrawal of the said objection.346.

[s 115.29.1] Acquiescence and waiver.—
The students of certain medical and technical institutions were to be exempted from
payment of tuition fee. Grant was to be given to green card holders, namely parents
who had undergone family planning operation. The institutions were not allowed to
withhold accrued beneﬁts. The institutions were already receiving grants-in-aid. Their
claim of refund by Government was something different from beneﬁt to students.347.
Levy was imposed for extra tariff for peak hour consumption by wind mill owners. For
more than ﬁve years they did not challenge the levy. How much more energy was
generated than the power consumed by the wind mills was not worked out. They were
held to be estopped by waiver and acquiescence from challenging the levy.348.
For a waiver of a legally enforceable right earned by an employee, it is necessary that
the same is clear and unequivocal, conscious and with full knowledge of the
consequences.349. An agreement or a contract, which seeks to waive an advantage of
law, is void ab initio on the ground of public policy.350.
Where there was no pleading and no issue was framed in regard to the validity of the
gift in question in the courts below, it was held to be too late in the day for the parties
concerned to question the validity of the said gift for the ﬁrst time before the Supreme
Court.351. A dispute alleging termination and demanding reinstatement was raised by
the workman after the lapse of 14 years, it was held that it could be said that the
dispute no longer existed and there was no "live dispute" due to acquiescence of the
workman.352.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.29.2] Acceptance of ﬁnal bill.—
In a works contract, the contractor accepted the ﬁnal bill, without raising any objection
about any item. It was held that the bill became binding on the contractor by virtue of
the agreement. A claim for additional payment and damages raised by the contractor
two years after acceptance of the bill was barred by estoppel.353.
In a suit for an injunction to restrain the publication of an autobiography which was
alleged to contain derogatory and defamatory matter, it was shown that the passages
complained of had already been published in magazines and books and that the nature
of the controversy was also the same as was commented upon in the proposed book.
It was held that the plaintiff could not make any grievance of the same matter being
published again so as to seek prevention of the publication itself. The plaintiff's silence
and not making any grievance against the prior publication amounted to
acquiescence.354.
In an election to the post of the president of a cooperative society, the defeated
candidate signed the proceedings and the certiﬁcate that he was 100% satisﬁed with
the polling. It was held that he was estopped by acquiescence from challenging the
validity of the election process.355. Where the licence fee for draftsmen was enhanced
and all draftsmen, including the present protestor agreed to the enhancement and also
started paying, there was acquiescence and, therefore, no challenge could be
presented to the process of enhancement.356.
A grant of temporary aﬃliation to a college by the State Government which was not
illegal and the beneﬁt of it was also accepted by the college, was not allowed to be
challenged afterwards for its validity.357.

[s 115.29.3] Acknowledgement of liability.—
The defendants acknowledged their liability in a suit by the bank for recovery of loan.
They were not subsequently permitted to deny their liability saying that a higher rate of
interest could not have been charged. The court said that acknowledgement of liability
by a party not only saves limitation, it also gives a cause of action to the plaintiff to
base its (bank's) claim.358.

[s 115.29.4] Acceptance of Tender.—
The State invited tenders for installation and maintenance of double hoarding. In
response to this tender, the petitioners were permitted to go ahead with the work. they
incurred huge expenditure in erecting the hoarding. The attempt on the part of the State
to allot the work to someone else was held to be arbitrary and not allowed. Writ petition
was maintainable for enforcement of the contract even if the contract was nonstatutory.359.

[s 115.30] Estoppel by standing by.—
When A stands by while his right is being infringed by B, the rule of estoppel by
acquiescence applies under the following conditions: (1) B must be mistaken as to his
legal rights; (2) B must expend money or do some act on the faith of his mistaken
belief; (3) A must know his own rights; (4) A must know of B's mistaken belief; and (5)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A must encourage B in his expenditure of money or other act directly or by abstaining
from asserting his legal rights.360. On the expiry of a lease term, the Government put up
the property on auction for further lease and the erstwhile lessee participated in all the
auctions. He did not insist upon his rights under the relevant rules at the proper
moment. He was not allowed to protest against the auctions at a later stage.361.

[s 115.31] Estoppel by negligence.—
In support of a plea of estoppel on the ground of negligence it must be shown that the
party against whom the plea is raised owed a duty to the party who raises the plea, or
towards the general public of which he is one and that the negligence on which it is
based should not be indirectly or remotely connected with the misleading effect
assigned to it but must be proximate or real cause of that result i.e. the negligence
which can sustain a plea of estoppel must be in the transaction itself and it should be
so connected with the result to which it led that it is impossible to treat the two
separately.362.

[s 115.32] Estoppel by recital in deed.—
A recital in a deed or other instrument is in some cases conclusive, and in all cases
evidence as against the parties who make it, and it is of more or less weight or more or
less conclusive against them according to circumstances. It is a statement deliberately
made by those parties, which, like any other statement, is always evidence against the
persons who make it. But it is no more evidence as against third persons than any
other statement would be.363.
Where the lease deed contained that a certain HUF was the owner of the premises
which was let out, the tenant could not challenge that the HUF was not the owner.364.

[s 115.33] Estoppel by election.—
Where a man has an option to choose one or other of two inconsistent things, when
once he has made his election, it cannot be retracted; it is ﬁnal and cannot be
altered.365. Where a person having two inconsistent alternative remedies chooses to
enforce one and thereby induces another to alter his position, an estoppel may arise on
the principle that no man can approbate and reprobate at the same time. If a person
chooses to accept a legacy under a will, he will be estopped from setting up a title
contrary to its provisions.366. Where the Collector, having exercised his alternative
power either to exclude the lands or to proceed to acquire the lands for a wildlife
sanctuary, proceeded to acquire the lands, it is no longer open to the Collector to
exclude the lands by a subsequent order.367.
The doctrine of election is based on the rule of estoppel—the principle that one cannot
approbate and reprobate inheres in it. The doctrine of estoppel by election is one of the
species of estoppels in pais (or equitable estoppel), which is a rule in equity. By that
law, a person may be precluded by his actions or conduct or silence when it is his duty
to speak, from asserting a right which he otherwise would have had.368.
A party cannot say at one time, that the transaction is valid and thereby obtain some
advantage to which he could only be entitled on the footing that it is valid, and at

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
another say it is void for the purpose of securing some further advantage.369. Estoppel
by election is applicable to all kinds of proceedings including civil and criminal.370.

[s 115.34] Estoppel by taking up a particular position.—
If the parties have taken up a particular position before the court at one stage of the
litigation it is not open to them to approbate and reprobate and to resile from that
position.371. This principle is based on the maxim "allegans contraria non est
audiendus". It means he shall not be heard to say things contrary to each other.372.
Where payment of costs is a condition precedent to the amendment in petition being
allowed and the other party accepts the costs, he cannot subsequently challenge the
order on merits.373. Relationship between pay phone operators and the Government is
that of an agent and the principal, and change in the rate of commission and billing
period is within the domain of the principal and doctrine of estoppel is not
attracted.374. Once having questioned the jurisdiction of the Co-operative Court, it is
not open for the petitioner to say that the dispute before the Co-operative Court was
maintainable. It is not possible for him to approbate and reprobate at the same
time.375. Acceptance of premature retirement and of beneﬁts due thereon as ordered
by the Service Tribunal could not be set at naught by writing a letter to the Government
that he should be allowed to continue till superannuation, though the letter remained
unreplied.376.
Where the insurance claim of the petitioner was processed by surveyors appointed by
the insurance company, the latter was not allowed to repudiate the claim as processed
by the surveyor.377.

[s 115.35] Estoppel by attestation.—
The Privy Council has held that attestation of a deed does not by itself estop the
person attesting from denying that he knew of its contents or that he consented to the
transaction which it effects, and that knowledge of the contents of a deed is not to be
inferred from the mere fact of attestation.378. If A, with the knowledge that the recital in
a sale deed that the land, thereby conveyed, belongs to B, and is in his (B's) enjoyment
as owner, attests the sale deed executed by B in favour of the plaintiff he is estopped
from setting up thereafter his title to the land, even though he (A) might be the certiﬁed
purchaser of the same in a previous Court auction.379. A person, who to his knowledge
is entitled to one-half share in a shop and who allows his co-sharer to mortgage the
whole shop, signing the mortgage deed as a witness and identifying the mortgagor and
mortgagee at the time of registration, is estopped from bringing a subsequent suit
against the mortgagee claiming a declaration of his right to one-half share in the
mortgaged property.380. Where a person attested a settlement deed which was in
favour of the defendant, and there was nothing to show that the attesting witness
(plaintiff) had acquainted himself with the contents of the deed or he was made aware
of those contents, he was prevented from challenging the deed. No estoppel arose
against him by attestation in ignorance.381. In a sale of land by a Muslim father, the son
attested the sale deed and raised no objection though the sale was against his interest,
the son was estopped from challenging the sale subsequently.382.

[s 115.36] Constructive estoppel.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
There is no such thing known to the law as constructive estoppel.383.

[s 115.37] Plea estoppel.—Alternative plea.—
The plaintiff pleaded that the agreement entered into by him for development of a plot
and construction thereon was void because he was deceived into the transaction for
lesser consideration. He also pleaded in the alternative for an order of speciﬁc
performance. The alternative was allowed to be raised. There was no estoppel against
it because of the ﬁrst plea. The defendant himself had pleaded for speciﬁc
performance.384.

[s 115.38] Estoppel by crediting cheque.—
Credit given in a passbook binds the banker, if on the faith of such credit the customer
has altered his position, as by drawing on the credit, etc., for by entering the sums to
the customer's credit, they lead him to suppose that they have received them on his
account. When, however, there has been no such alteration, the banker is allowed to
show that the entries were made by mistake; for the passbook is only prima facie
evidence against him.385.

[s 115.39] Estoppel by consent.—
Consent given in a Court that a controversy is covered by a judgment which has no
applicability whatsoever and pertains to a different ﬁeld, cannot estop the party from
raising the point that the same was erroneously cited.386.
In case of consent award of compensation, the question of seeking any amount over
and above the amount settled in the consent award does not arise.387.

[s 115.40] Estoppel by consent/compromise decree.—
A compromise decree is the acceptance by the court of something to which the parties
had agreed. Such a decree might create an estoppel by conduct between the parties
but such an estoppel must be specially pleaded.388. An estoppel by consent decree can
arise only when the question raised in the subsequent suit was present to the minds of
the parties and was actually dealt with by the consent decree. In order to effect an
estoppel it is also necessary that it should appear on record that the question had been
put in issue.389. The consent decree, resulting from the settlement entered by the
Government pleader, operates as an estoppel and is binding on the parties from which
the Government cannot wriggle out by taking an afterthought plea that its lawyer was
not authorised to enter into such a settlement.390.
Where in a suit to set aside alienation of property ﬁled by remote reversioners of the
alienor, a compromise decree in the shape of decree of declaration was passed which
was to take effect after the death of the alienor, declaring shares of the parties, and the
decree had become ﬁnal, the alienee could not take objection in a subsequent suit ﬁled
by the said remote reversioners for their share in terms of compromise that the next
reversioner of the alienor being alive, the suit was not maintainable.391. Where the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
property subjected to mortgage in four suits for claim was one and the same and the
appellant failed to contend before the trial Court that all the claims should have been
consolidated in one suit as required under section 67A of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882 and consented to decrees being passed separately, he was estopped from raising
that plea in appeal.392.

[s 115.41] Estoppel by participating in arbitration or other proceedings.—
A person who participates in arbitration proceedings as a party may become estopped
afterwards from dragging the same matter to civil courts, but he can nevertheless still
question the validity of the underlying arbitration agreement.393. Participation without
ﬁling counter statements does not create an estoppel, particularly where immediately
after inspecting the papers, the party challenged the existence of the arbitration
agreement.394. Where a Government servant was acting ex oﬃcio as an arbitrator and
continued, to the acceptance of the parties, even after his retirement, the parties were
not permitted to challenge his competence.395. Where a party ﬁrst moved the court in a
pending suit for stay under section 34 of the Arbitration Act and then resiled from the
stay application and thus permitting the suit to go on and abandoning the rights under
the arbitration agreement, a subsequent application for reference was not allowed.396.
Where one party concurred to the appointment of an oﬃcer of the other party as an
arbitrator and he participated in the proceedings, subsequently objection of bias could
not be raised by him against the arbitrator.397.
Where the objections as to the arbitration award were rejected by the court as timebarred and no review petition was ﬁled against the judgment, it was held that the party
was estopped from raising those objections on appeal to the High Court.398.
An Indian company and a foreign company agreed that their agreement including the
arbitration under it would be governed by laws of India. The court held that the arbitral
award made under the agreement could be regarded as made under Part I of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. It was a domestic award though made on a
foreign soil according to the ICC Rules and procedure. Recourse to section 34 of the
Act could not be said to have been waived by subscribing to the ICC Rules.399.
The competency of the arbitrator was challenged after long participation in
proceedings without protest. It was held that this precluded the party from saying that
the proceedings were without jurisdiction. The move seemed to have been promoted
by the fact that the party saw that the award was likely to go against him.400.

[s 115.42] Estoppel by participating in election and Assembly.—
Where a member challenged by a writ petition the election of a person as the Speaker
of the assembly (State Legislative Assembly) by elected representatives ﬁling his
petition after six months and himself taking part in the proceedings of the Assembly
for all the six months, it was held that his writ petition was barred by delay and
estoppel.401.
Where a party acquiesced in the invalidity in the conduct of arbitration proceedings and
took chances, it was held that he could not thereafter object to the award which went
against him. He could not say that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to pass the award.
The right of the party to raise the objection was deemed to have been waived.402.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the parties agreed to refer all their disputes to arbitration and identical disputes
were referred by the Municipal Corporation, the court said that the latter was estopped
by its conduct from raising the plea that the claims raised by the claimants were
outside the scope of the arbitration agreement particularly when the award was against
it.403.
Where an industrial unit participated in an auction proceeding without objecting to the
rejection of the proposal at the branch level, it was held that the rejection of the
proposal could not be challenged on the ground that it should have been considered by
the Board of directors of the State Financial Corporation.404. Where the party
participated in the arbitration proceedings without protest and allowed the award to be
passed, it was held that he was estopped from challenging the award on the ground
that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction.405.

[s 115.43] Estoppel against estoppel.—
The maxim is "estoppel against an estoppel setteth the matter at large." In a case of
one estoppel against another, the parties are set free and the court has to see what
their original rights really are.

[s 115.44] Estoppel by participation in selection.—
The Kerala State and Subordinate Services Rules, 1958 provided for reservation of
posts, for SC/ST candidates. They were adopted by the University. Certain posts were
advertised for selection of SC/ST candidates. The candidate who participated in the
selection but was not taken was not allowed to challenge the process. Omission in the
advertisement to state that it was a special selection was held to be not material.406.
The challenge to eligibility criteria as being contrary to service Rules was not allowed to
be raised by candidates who had participated in the selection process.407.

[s 115.45] No estoppel as to jurisdiction.—
An estoppel against a party cannot give the court jurisdiction where it has none.408.
There can be no estoppel against a statute and that consent cannot confer
jurisdiction.409. Admissions were made by parties that the subject-matter of the suit
was cognizable by the Wakf Tribunal. The disposal of the case on the basis of such
admissions was held to be not proper. The admission about the jurisdictional aspects
was challenged on the ﬁrst occasion itself. The court said that it was a question of law.
Parties could not be bound by their statements about law. The question had to be
considered on merits.410.

[s 115.46] Family arrangement.—
A family arrangement is an agreement between members of the same family intended
to be generally and reasonably for the beneﬁt of the family either by compromising
doubtful or disputed rights or by preserving the family property or the peace and
security of the family by avoiding litigation or by saving its honour.411. Parties agreeing
to the arrangement and acting upon it are estopped from questioning its validity or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
legality. Where the head of a family converted his self-acquired property into HUF
property, leaving out his son and daughter from the ﬁrst wife, subsequent suit for
partition by the son was not maintainable, particularly when he had accepted his left
out position in other proceedings.412. The provision by the father-in-law in his property
his daughter-in-law made at the marriage was protected by the Supreme Court by
awarding her an amount out of the sale proceeds of the property.413. Where ex parte
divorce decree was passed in favour of husband by a foreign Court which was a nullity
under the Indian Act, the husband having married a second wife there the wife was not
estopped from bringing a subsequent petition for divorce in India on the ground of
adultery, cruelty and desertion simply because she had accepted maintenance under
the foreign judgment.414.

[s 115.47] Maintenance allowance.—
The right of maintenance is a substantive and a continuing right and the quantum of
maintenance is variable from time-to-time. Neither the doctrine of res judicata nor that
of estoppel can be used to defeat the right of the claimant to seek revision of the
amount of maintenance according to the cost of living structure.415. Where a
compromise was reached by the parties in a case for enhancement of maintenance to
the wife and daughter, on the subsequent application by the wife for enhancement of
maintenance, it was held that the doctrine of estoppel or waiver did not apply in the
changed circumstances.416. Where in a maintenance proceedings, the parties were
Muslims and the order of maintenance was passed without obtaining the necessary
consent of the husband in writing with regard to his preference to be governed by
section 125, CrPC, the order was not binding upon the husband even if he had paid
some amount in the ﬁrst execution petition and he was not estopped from contending
that the order was not binding upon him.417.
Where the right to maintenance was granted to the wife under a compromise decree
against the husband, it was held that a subsequent cohabitation between them had no
effect on the decree. The decree was ﬁnal and could be modiﬁed only by a competent
Court.418.
Where the wife was granted relief of maintenance by a civil court in the presence of the
husband who did not object, and it was clariﬁed that the amount of maintenance was in
addition to the maintenance granted by a magistrate under section 125 CrPC, the
husband is estopped from challenging the same.419.

[s 115.48] Feeding the estoppel.—
The equitable principle of feeding the estoppel has been recognised to some extent in
section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, which says that where a person
fraudulently or erroneously represents that he is authorised to transfer certain
immovable property and professes to transfer such property for consideration, such
transfer shall, at the option of the transferee, operate on any interest which the
transferor may acquire in such property at any time during which the contract of
transfer subsists. But the right of transferees in good faith for consideration without
notice of the existence of the said option shall not be impaired. In such cases the
subsequent interest enuring to the beneﬁt of the transferor is said to feed the estoppel
which is subsisting in the transferee so as to preclude the transferor from contending
that the transferee has no right to his subsequently acquired property.420. This principle
applies in the case of sale, mortgage, lease, or any such grant.421.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 115.49] Banker's general lien.—
The bank cannot be estopped from retaining pledged goods under the exercise of its
general lien if the debtor had not cleared his amount in connection with another
loan.422.

[s 115.50] CASES
[s 115.50.1] Mortgagee concealing his lien.—
A mortgagee who caused the mortgaged property to be sold in execution of a decree
other than a decree obtained upon his mortgage, without notifying to intending
purchasers the existence of his mortgage lien, was held to be estopped for ever from
setting up that lien against the title of a bona ﬁde purchaser.423.

[s 115.50.2] Representation that lease is permanent.—
Where a lessor, being either ignorant of his rights or uncertain of their extent, by his
own act or representation created or induced in the mind of his tenant a mistaken
belief that he had a permanent interest in the land and might build thereon, and the
tenant, relying upon the act or representation so made, treated his interest as
permanent and incurred expense in building which he would not otherwise have done, it
was held that the lessor was estopped from denying the truth of that which it
represented.424. In 1894 the appellant agreed in writing to give the respondent a lease
of a plot of land "for the purpose of erecting buildings...from year to year at an annual
rental of Rs.180," and the respondent took possession. In 1903 the respondent wished
to build a pucca house upon the land, and in answer to inquiries the appellant wrote a
letter stating that the lease was a permanent lease though the rent was liable to
enhancement. Acting upon that letter the respondent built a house; the appellant knew
of the building and received a bonus in respect of it. In 1916, the appellant sued to eject
the respondent from the land. It was held that, whether or not the letting was a
permanent one upon the construction of the agreement, the statement in the letter that
it was so was a representation of fact, not an expression of opinion and that the
appellant was estopped from denying that the letting was of that character though
subject to enhancement of rent.425.
In a lease by the Government of a sea shore plot for carrying on the business of
manufacturing salt, the lessee was permitted to induct a ﬁnancial partner on certain
conditions to render ﬁnancial assistance only. The lessee retired from the ﬁrm leaving
the lease to the exclusive care of the ﬁnancial partner. The leasehold right did not
become a part of the partnership properties. The fact that the Government accepted
royalty from the ﬁnancial partner did not attract promissory estoppel.426.

[s 115.50.3] Trustee mortgaging trust property as his own cannot dispute sale
by mortgagee.—
A trustee, alleging that the trust property, consisting of land was his own property,
mortgaged it. The mortgagee took the mortgage in good faith, for valuable
consideration, and without notice of the trust. The mortgagee obtained a decree
against the trustee for the sale of the land, and the land was sold in execution of that
decree. The trustee subsequently brought a suit to recover the land from the purchaser

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
on the ground that it was trust property and that he had no power to transfer it. To this
none of the beneﬁciaries under the trust were parties. It was held that the plaintiff was
estopped by his conduct from recovering possession of the land.427. A valid trust was
created by the donor in respect of the suit property. The donor was one of the trustees.
The property was sold for recovering income tax dues of the donor. It was held that the
trustees were not estopped from challenging the auction sale of the trust property on
the ground that they were aware of the Notiﬁcation of sale.428.

[s 115.50.4] School tenancy in name of Head Master.—
The landlord was not allowed to contend that the tenancy of his premises which to his
knowledge was all along being used by the school was not that of the school because
it was held in the name of the headmaster. The school had been paying the rent out of
its funds.429.

[s 115.50.5] Profession of Muhammadanism.—
In a suit for divorce from a Muhammadan husband, brought by a Burmese woman
professing the Buddhist faith, but at the time of her marriage, simulating conversion to
Islam, and married with Muhammadan ceremonies, it was held that the Muhammadan
law should form the rule of decision.430.

[s 115.51] Adoption.—
In a suit to set aside an adoption brought by the adoptive mother against her adopted
son it was found that the plaintiff had represented that she had authority to adopt, and
this representation was acted on by the defendant; that the ceremony of adoption was
carried out on the faith of this representation; that the marriage of the defendant was
likewise on the strength of it celebrated, and the defendant performed the shradha
ceremony of his adoptive father. It was further found that the defendant had been
obliged to defend a suit brought against him by an alleged reversioner to the estate of
his adoptive father, and that for this purpose he had incurred heavy liabilities. It was
held that the plaintiff was estopped from maintaining a suit for a declaration that the
adoption was without authority and void.431. A childless Hindu widow agreed with the
plaintiff's father to adopt the plaintiff, stating that her husband had given her authority
to adopt. Subsequently she adopted the plaintiff and had his thread ceremony
performed in the adoptive family next day, and administered her husband's property as
the minor's guardian for about 18 months, when she repudiated the adoption and
refused to maintain the plaintiff. It was held that the adoption being invalid on the
ground that the widow had not as a fact, acted under authority from her husband, she
was not estopped from denying the adoption by the fact of her having treated it as
effective for the period of 18 months. In order that an estoppel by conduct may raise
the invalid adoption to the level of a valid adoption, there must have been a course of
conduct long continued on the part of the adopting family, and the situation of the
adoptee in his original family must have become so altered that it would be impossible
to restore him to it.432.

[s 115.52] Acquisition of Land.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The petitioner company had purchased the land in question after an earlier notiﬁcation
for acquisition had lapsed. The company spent huge amounts on external development
charges and obtained permission. The court said that the issue of a subsequent
notiﬁcation for acquisition was hit by the principle of promissory estoppel433. and
legitimate expectations.
The State had granted permission to the land owners for change of land use and
developing the area as an industry. It turned around after 26 years to acquire the said
land to develop it for residential purpose. It was held that permission for change of land
use as an industry has no relevance while considering the validity of acquisition,
otherwise a particular area could not be acquired for all times to come. Public interest
overrides the individual interest. Therefore, the State could not be estopped from
acquiring back the said land, of course, after appropriate compensation.434.

[s 115.53] Valuation of land.—
Where the Sarpanch himself participated in the meeting and passed a resolution
allowing exchange of land in his own favour and the land given to him was found to be
more valuable as compared to land given by him in exchange, it was held that the order
according approval to the exchange granted by the Collector was rightly set aside as
the question of promissory estoppel did not arise.435.

[s 115.53.1] Valuation of land in acquisition.—
A question before the J&K High Court was whether a claim for enhancement of
compensation was maintainable and a restricted claim was raised before the Collector,
it was held that the claimant was not estopped from claiming enhanced compensation
before the arbitrator. This was more particularly so because the land adjacent to the
land of the claimant which had similar soil and status and in the same village was
notiﬁed for compensation at enhanced rates.436.

[s 115.53.2] Rehabilitation on Acquisition of Lands.—
Agricultural land was to be offered to displaced families under a Policy of
Rehabilitation and settlement. The court said that it was the fundamental right of the
oustees and also the right of livelihood as a human right. It could not be defeated by
the Government under the plea that the oustees had accepted full compensation for
acquisition. The plea of waiver or estoppel could not defeat that right.437.

[s 115.54] Employment.—
Where an appointment was anti-dated by 10 years on the ground that the appointment
was denied to him for all that period under a ﬁnding that he was not qualiﬁed and the
grant of the seniority were held to be not permissible.438. Where certain applicants
were included in the panel made on merit basis but could not be appointed because
their number happened to go beyond the available posts, and they accepted the option
of being absorbed on lower posts on an undertaking that they would not lay claim to
the posts on which they were initially selected, it was held that the undertaking given by
them did not have the effect of preventing them from claiming absorption on senior
posts in accordance with the applicable Rules whenever any such posts fell vacant.439.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where a candidate got selected to a post by showing that he had the basic
qualiﬁcations but that was in fact a misrepresentation, it was held that the authorities
were not estopped from cancelling his selection.440.
In a dispute over termination of service, it was contended that the employees having
accepted beneﬁts of VRS cannot raise dispute about termination, the same was held to
be not tenable as estoppel does not bar Courts from adjudicating upon validity of a
contract.441.

[s 115.54.1] Terms of appointment.—
A person was appointed as advisor to a company on retainership basis. A letter of
appointment containing terms and conditions was issued to him. He admitted in his
correspondence with the company that the understanding arrived at as to terms was
ﬁnal. He was also accepting periodical payments on those terms. He was not allowed
to say that the letter was issued by an unauthorised person and, therefore, he was not
bound to comply with the terms.442.

[s 115.54.2] Re-employment.—
The employer company was fully owned by the Government. Certain employees were
permanently transferred to a joint venture company (JVC). After acceptance of the
option they were not put on deputation. Fresh appointment letters were issued to them.
Their original employment was terminated. Their lien on the job ended. No assurance
was given to them that they would be retained by the JVC till superannuation. They
were held to be not entitled to be reabsorbed. There was no estoppel in their favour.443.

[s 115.54.3] Resignation.—
The president of a Municipal Council resigned his oﬃce. The fact of resignation was
admitted by him in a subsequent meeting of the council. He also made a demand for
fresh election to the post. It was held that such conduct disentitled him from
subsequently claiming that as his letter of resignation was not properly addressed, he
had not effectively resigned.444.

[s 115.55] Promise of deposit on application for bail.—
A condition for making a deposit was imposed for grant of bail. The court said that
such condition should not be unreasonable and unjust. In the context of the offence of
criminal breach of trust, the court cannot proceed to recover the amount which is the
subject-matter of the complaint as a condition for grant of bail. But if the accused has
himself given the undertaking that he would deposit the amount by way of FDRs every
month for earning indulgence of the court, then he could not be permitted to resile from
such terms and conditions by reason of the doctrine of estoppel.445.

[s 115.56] Estoppels under Negotiable Instruments Act.—
The Negotiable Instruments Act binds the parties liable upon an instrument by certain
estoppel. The estoppels are as follows:

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(1) Against Denial of Validity [section 120].—The maker of a promissory note, the

drawer of a bill or cheque and the acceptor of a bill for the honour of drawer are
not permitted, as against a holder in due course, to deny the validity of the
instrument as originally made or drawn.
(2) Against Denial of Payee's Capacity [section 121].—The maker of a promissory

note and the acceptor of a bill payable to order are not permitted, as against a
holder in due course, to deny the payee's capacity at the time to indorse the
instrument.
(3) Against Endorser [section 122].—The endorser of a negotiable instrument is not

permitted, as against a subsequent endorser, to deny the signature or capacity
of any prior party to the instrument. The beneﬁt of these estoppels is available
only when due execution of the instrument has been proved. There should be
proof that the cheque was signed by the party against whom the estoppel is
claimed.446.

[s 115.57] Age.—
A person who declares his age at the time of appointment is bound by it. Under the
Rules contained in the All India Services (Death and Retirement) Beneﬁts Rules, 1958,
Rule 16-A as amended in 1978, he is entitled to seek a change only in case of a bona
ﬁde mistake in recording the date of birth at the time of employment. The principle of
estoppel applies otherwise.447.

[s 115.58] Extension of service.—
Before the superannuation of an employee, an order was issued for extension of his
service. The order was subsequently cancelled before the extension had become
operative. No hearing was given to him before cancelling his extension. The court did
not allow any challenge to the cancellation either on the ground of violation of natural
justice or on the basis of the doctrine of estoppel.448.

[s 115.59] Execution of decree.—
Where the objections to the execution of a decree were allowed to be dismissed for
non-prosecution, fresh objections were allowed to be made. The principles of
promissory estoppel and res judicata were not applicable.449.

[s 115.60] Recounting in election.—
Where a party consented to recounting and an order was accordingly issued, it was
held that such party would be estopped from challenging the correctness of the order
on the ground that the consent order was not permissible under the Haryana
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994.450.
The Orissa High Court held that the declaration of results on the basis of draw of lot on
the consent of the parties did not create any estoppel against the candidate who lost
on the lot. The election was held under the Orissa Gram Panchayat Election Rules,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1965. There was a dispute about acceptance and rejection of invalid and valid votes.
The court said that the dispute could not be adjudicated effectively without recounting
of votes. The order of the trial judge declaring the opposite party elected on recounting
of and scrutiny of votes was held to be proper.451.

[s 115.61] Tenancy.—
Where the tenant in Form No. C, under Maharashtra Housing and Area Development
Act, 1977, indicated at the time of allotment that his brother with his wife would be
occupying the premises and the Form was accepted by the Board, it was held that the
subsequent termination of the tenancy on the grounding that there was a sub-letting to
the brother and its regularisation was illegal.452.
Under the terms of a compromise, a declaration was made by the person concerned
that he was not a tenant of the land in question. His name was accordingly deleted.
The order of the court in the terms of the compromise had become ﬁnal. It was held
that a subsequent order of the Tehsildar under section 49-B of the Bombay Tenancy
and Agricultural Lands (Vidharbh Region) Act, 1958 declaring that person to be still a
tenant, was without jurisdiction.453.
A tenant gave an undertaking to the court that he would vacate the premises. But he
ﬁled an appeal against the order of eviction. The appeal was held to be
maintainable.454.
Where the entire undertaking of a company including let-out premises were taken over
by another company, it was held that the tenants could not refuse to deal with the
successor company as their new landlord. Ownership is not necessary for being a
landlord.455.

[s 115.62] Long enjoyment of caste beneﬁts.—
Where a person enjoyed caste beneﬁts on false basis for a pretty long time, it was held
that his caste certiﬁcate was liable to be cancelled and his beneﬁts terminated. Longperiod misuse of a privilege does not create an estoppel.456.

[s 115.63] Certiﬁcate of ﬁnal settlement.—
In the context of a dispute as to the contractor's claim under a works contract, it was
held that once the claimant issued a certiﬁcate of ﬁnal settlement of his claim, he was
estopped from raising further claims under the contract and demand reference to
arbitration.457. Where, in a consumer complaint, the insured had executed a discharge
voucher in full satisfaction of his claim, the court said that his challenge to the
discharge voucher would have been tenable only by showing that he executed it under
fraud or coercion, etc. Appropriate relief could be granted by the Consumer
Commission on such proof.458.

[s 115.64] Application for amendment of plaint.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
An application for amendment of plaint was allowed subject to payment of costs of Rs
50. A certiﬁed copy of the memo was ﬁled showing receipt of the money by the
defendant without any objection. It was held that the defendant was estopped from
challenging the order allowing the amendment of the plaint.459.

[s 115.65] Lease agreement.—
There was an agreement of lease between the parties in writing under which the owner
of the property was to bring the construction up to plinths and thereafter the lessee
was to take over the property under the lease for a period of 3 years. The owner
invested a huge sum of money in providing plinth level construction, but the lessee
backed out. The court held that he could not do so and that too just only under the
technical plea that the agreement was not a registered tenancy and, therefore, it being
only a month–to–month tenancy, it could be terminated under section 106 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882.460.

[s 115.66] Void order.—
A void order can create neither legal rights nor obligations. Therefore, the appellant
cannot be denied his right to recover possession of the property in dispute on the
ground that he did not choose to challenge such a void order.461.

[s 115.67] Levy of composite fee on tourists transport vehicles.—
A scheme for tourism promotion was adopted under the Motor Vehicles (All India
Permit for Tourist Transport Operators) Rules, 1993 and they contemplated levy of
composite fee only. The operators spent substantial sums of money on expensive
vehicles and undertook the work of carrying tourists. It was held that the authorities
were estopped from levying anything beyond composite fee.462.

1. Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder Laha, (1892) 19 IA 203 , 215, 216 : 20 Cal 296; Pickard v

Sears, (1837) 6 Ad & El 469. For a parallel example see Gulam Abbas v Haji Kayyam Ali, AIR 1973
SC 554 : (1973) 1 SCC 1 , relinquishment of the future possible right of inheritance by a Muslim
heir for a consideration may debar him from setting up his right when it actually comes into
being. RN Gosain v Yashpal Dhir, (1992) 4 SCC 683 : AIR 1993 SC 352 , a party who chooses to
accept a transaction and to take an advantage under it, cannot afterwards be permitted to
challenge the validity of the transaction. See generally, Advocate-General of Andhra Pradesh v
Chennamsetty Chakrapani CI of Police CCS Guntur, 1997 Cr LJ 3333 ; Karunakaran APKMP v
State, 1997 Cr LJ 3618 (Ker).
2. Gyarsi Bai v Dhansukh Lal, AIR 1965 SC 1055 : (1965) 2 SCR 154 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
3. HB Basavaraj v Canara Bank, (2010) 12 SCC 458 : [2010] 1 Mad LJ 383 : LNIND 2009 SC 1936

.
4. LML Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh, (2008) 3 SCC 128 ; also see UP Power Corp Ltd v Sant Steels

& Alloys Pvt Ltd, (2008) 2 SCC 777 : AIR 2008 SC 693 , wherein it was held that once a
representation is been made by one party and the other party acts on that representation and
makes investment and thereafter the ﬁrst party resiles, such act cannot be stated to be fair and
reasonable.
5. Kamaljit Singh v Sarabjit Singh, (2014) 16 SCC 472 : LNIND 2014 SC 768 , para 11.
6. Ariane Orgachem Pvt Ltd v Wyeth Employees Union, (2015) 7 SCC 561 , para 33.
7. B Coleman & Co v PP Das Gupta, AIR 1970 SC 426 : (1961) 2 SCC 1 .
8. Pickard v Sears, (1837) 6 Ad & El 469, 474.
9. Municipal Corp of Bombay v Secretary of State, (1904) 29 Bom 580 : 7 Bom LR 27.
10. Banwari Lal v Sukhdarshan, AIR 1973 SC 814 : (1973) 1 SCC 294 , estoppel does not create

interest in property. Sukumabai v Chandgonda Kalgonda Patil, AIR 2003 Bom 131 , it was a suit
for possession of land, the defendant pleaded that he was a tenant, he also pleaded in the
alternative that he was a trespasser. His plea failed. He could not approbate and reprobate at
the same time. Dhaniya Bai v Jiwan, AIR 2003 MP 71 , construction by a sister adjacent to the
house of his brother, the latter actively participated in the construction and allowed her to take
the support of his wall. The brother not allowed subsequently to such removal of construction,
but the sister not allowed further construction not even under easement.
11. BEST ON EVIDENCE, 12th Edn, section 533, p 463.
12. HR Basavaraj v Canara Bank, (2010) 12 SCC 458 .
13. Mercantile Bank of India Ltd v Central Bank of India Ltd, (1937) 40 Bom LR 713 : 65 IA 75:

(1938) Mad 360; Canara Bank v Canara Sales Corp, AIR 1987 SC 1603 : (1987) 62 Comp Cas 280
: (1987) 2 SCC 666 .
14. AP TRANSCO v Sai Renewable Power Pv tLtd, (2011) 11 SCC 34 .
15. Raj Kumar Jagannath Prashad v Syed Abdullah, (1918) 20 Bom LR 851 , 45 IA 97, 45 Cal 909;

Sebina v State of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 1291 (Ker).
16. Chemi Colour Agency v Chief Controller of Imports, AIR 1985 Cal 358 . See also Chhaganlal v

Narandas, AIR 1982 SC 121 : (1982) 1 SCC 223 . Where the claim of estoppel was not allowed to
the assignee of the person to whom the representation was made.
17. BL Shreedhar v KM Munireddy, AIR 2003 SC 578 : 2002 (9) Scale 183 : LNIND 2002 SC 779 ,

grant of land made under an Act to a family member. The beneﬁt of it ensured to the whole
family.
18. A limited application can take place in criminal matters also. See, for example, Sukhdev

Singh v UOI, 1989 Cr LJ 1340 (Del), copies of the documents mentioned in the statement of
grounds of detention not supplied to the prisoner, and, therefore, he could not make effective
reply, the Government was not heard to say that the documents were only casually mentioned.
19. Sangeetaben Mahendrabhai Patel v State of Gujarat, (2012) 7 SCC 621 : LNIND 2012 SC 1473

.
20. Dadu Dayalu Mahasabha, Jaipur (Trust) v Mahant Ram Niwas, (2008) 11 SCC 753 —referred

to Bhanu Kumar Jain v Archana Kumar (supra)
21. HA Shah & Co v CIT, Bombay, AIR 1956 Bom 375 : (1956) 58 Bom LR 45 : ILR 1956 Bom 79 .
22. Pratima Chowdhury v Kalpana Mukherjee, AIR 2014 SC 1304 : (2014) 4 SCC 196 : LNIND

2014 SC 80 , (para 35).
23. Stephen, 175.
24. Woodroffe and Ameer Ali, 9th Edn, p 850.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
25. Casamally v Sir Currimbhai Ebrahim, (1911) 13 Bom LR 717 , 760 : 36 Bom 214. Amita

Shekhawat v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2003 SC 230 , directions were given by the High Court for
redetermination of dead rent, this order was challenged by a writ petition. Not allowed to do so,
because once the party had agreed to pay the rent in a particular manner, the matter could not
be relitigated. Yamunabai Purushottam Deogirikar v Mathurabia Nilkanth Choudhary, AIR 2010
NOC 109 (Bom), points of difference restated.
26. Satyendra Kumar v Raj Nath Dubey, AIR 2016 SC 2231 , para 13.
27. LIC of India v OP Bhallah, AIR 1989 Pat 269 . Vijya Kumari Gujral v UOI, 1988 Cr LJ 1198 (Del),

waiver from not asking for examination of a witness; RF Charitable Trust v Spl. Dy. Collector
(General) Land Acquisition, AIR 1992 AP 130 , the land of the Trust was acquired on agreed
compensation, the trust waiving the right to ask for any addition amount, held bound by the
waiver.
28. Dawsons Bank Ltd v Nippon Menkwa Kabushiki Kaisha, (1935) 37 Bom LR 544 : 62 IA 100;

Uniply Industries Ltd v Unicorn Plywood Pvt Ltd, AIR 2001 NOC 49 (Mad) : 2001 CLC 411 , no
waiver or estoppel where the owner of a trade mark, having come to know of the infringement,
could not do anything for a certain period because of the inability to know the particulars of the
industry committing the infringement. Rhodia Ltd v Neon Laboratories Ltd, AIR 2002 Bom 502 ,
the defendant ﬁled an application under section 9-A, Maharashtra (Amendment) of CPC
questioning jurisdiction of the court. He also ﬁled reply to the plaintiff's application for
temporary injunction without prejudice to his application under section 9-A Plea of waiver raised
for the ﬁrst time in Civil Revision was rejected. Shiv Kumar Sharma v Wazir Ajay Vir Chand, AIR
1998 J&K 100, plea of waiver not established. Babu Ram v Indra Pal Singh, AIR 1998 SC 3021 :
(1998) 6 SCC 358 , there was an agreement preceding a sale deed which contained a clause for
reconveyance. The sale-deed was executed subsequently. It did not make any reference to the
agreement of reconveyance. The Court said that the failure to mention the right of reconveyance
in the sale deed could not lead to the inference that the right was given up by the plaintiff.
29. Basheshar Nath v IT Commissioner, AIR 1959 SC 149 : 1959 Supp (1) SCR 528 ; Provash

Chandra Dalui v Biswanath Banerjee, AIR 1989 SC 1834 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 487 . See also
Malina Mondal v Pushpa Rani, AIR 1991 Cal 291 , where a quit notice was followed by another
quit notice, the effect was that the ﬁrst stood waived and the second was valid for proceedings;
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v Dr Hakim Waddi Tenants' Assn., AIR 1988 SC 233 :
1988 Mah LJ 1 : 1988 Supp SCC 55 .
30. GK Kempegowda v Lucinda, AIR 1985 Kant 231 .
31. Rameshwar Pd v Bihar, AIR 1984 Pat 61 . See further Sen & Co v Mani Mala Sadhu, AIR 1980

SC 155 , where the Supreme Court explains the difference between waiver and estoppel; Chief
Wild Life Warden v NK Joshi, 1987 Cr LJ 1506 (Cal), a concession without knowledge of the
subject, held to be revocable.
32. Ram Raksh Pal v Brij Nandan, AIR 1967 All 325 .
33. Rajendra Ram v Devendra Doss, AIR 1973 SC 268 : (1973) 1 SCC 14 . Where no public

interest is involved and an assessee of property tax chooses to ﬁle a complaint against the
proposal to ﬁx or increase the rateable value, even without the issuance of a valid special notice,
the principle of waiver would apply, Municipal Corp, Ahmedabad v Oriental F&G Insurance Co Ltd,
AIR 1994 Guj 167 . Acceptance of compensation for acquisition of land under oral protest did
not amount to waiver of the right to claim proper compensation, Basant Kumar Jena v State, AIR
1995 Ori 288 .
34. Chetan Das v Annusuiya, 1996 AIHC 1706 (Raj), landlord withdrawing default rent from the

Court. Radha Kishan v Election Tribunal-cum-sub-Judge, AIR 2001 SC 68 , consent given to a
petition for recounting in an election prevented such party from questioning the validity of the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
order of recounting. St Anne's School Society v Urban Improvement Trust, AIR 2000 Raj 70 , a
party accepted half of the plot which was allotted to him and remained satisﬁed, he claimed the
other half after a gap of about a year, but it was allotted to a school which had done some
construction work on it. The doctrine of waiver of rights came into play. Anto Nitto v South Indian
Bank Ltd, AIR 1998 Ker 219 , the Court adopted the price which was offered by the decree-holder,
it was less than the amount due under the decree. The judgment-debtor made no objection.
Fixation of reserve price was mandatory as per rules, which was not done in this case. No
objection by the judgment debtor did not have the effect of waiver because there could be no
waiver of mandatory rules. Auto Trade and Transport v National Insurance Co, AIR 1998 MP 147 ,
suit against carrier for recovery of loss, the requirement of notice before ﬁling a suit was not
complied with. The carrier raised objections only belatedly. This was taken to be a waiver of the
requirement of notice.
35. Prithvi Raj Bhalla v Industrial Cables (India) Ltd, AIR 2002 Del 539 . Ferro Alloys Corp Ltd v

UOI, AIR 1999 SC 1236 : (1999) 4 SCC 149 , an area of mining lease distributed among two
claimants in terms of a committee report which was not challenged. This amounted to waiver.
36. State of J&K v Karan Singh, AIR 1997 J&K 132. Amar Nath Misra v District Inspector of

School, Ballia, AIR 1997 All 358 , High Court order found elections to be valid but allowed
representations to be ﬁled before the District Inspector of Schools over some issues,
representations were accordingly made, parties who made the representations were not
debarred from jointing appeal. Mohinder Singh v District Election Oﬃcer, AIR 1997 P&H 272,
employees who had earlier performed election duties, not barred from contending that they
should not be put under such duty. Subhash Chand Agarwal v Murli Manohar Lal, AIR 2000 Del
357 (Del), estoppel cannot be used to defeat a right conferred by law but there can be waiver of
such a right. It was an order of eviction which affected the sub-tenant also. Jagdishbhai Mafatlal
Patel v State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 Guj 329 , the plea that certain bye-laws ultra vires was not
taken at the appropriate time and, therefore, the principle of acquiescence applied.
37. Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai v Virgo Steels, Bombay, AIR 2002 SC 1745 .
38. Correspondent and Chairman, Standing Committee MES v M Syed Mohd, AIR 2007 NOC 882

(Ker).
39. Seth Satnarain v Dominion of India, (1968) 2 SC WR 335.
40. Pushpa Verma v UOI, AIR 2008 Jhar 54 .
41. Rukmani Devi v Prabhu Narayan, AIR 2007 NOC 1748 (Raj).
42. Ghasiram v Kundanbai, (1941) Nag 513.
43. Ramrao v Dattadayal, (1947) Nag 889.
44. Bigelow, 6th Edn, pp 406, 410, Woodroffe and Ameer Ali, 9th Edn, p 850.
45. Govindiji Javat & Co v Shree Saraswat Mills, AIR 1982 Bom 76 . A Party accepting the award

of a reference court was not allowed afterwards to challenge it. See Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti v
Ashok Singhal, AIR 1991 SC 1320 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 419 .
46. Amar Singh v Prahlad, AIR 1989 P&H 229. But a party accepting compensatory costs for the

restoration of a case dismissed in default has been held not to lose his right to question the
validity of the restoration order. KR Singh v AG Thakare, AIR 1991 Bom 296 .
47. Radheshyam Modi v Jadunath Mohapatra, AIR 1991 Ori 88 . Tax assessing oﬃcers are not

bound by the method adopted in earlier assessments. CIT v British Paints, AIR 1991 SC 1338 :
1992 Supp (1) SCC 55 . Chandrika Singh v Additional Member, Board of Revenue, AIR 1998 Pat
118 , parties who participated in the proceedings before the court after restoration of revision
were not allowed to challenge the validity of the proceedings. Food Corp of India v Dilip Kumar
Dutta, AIR 1999 Cal 75 , under the Arbitration Act, 1940, a party volunteered before the arbitrator
for extension of time, the same party questioned before the court the validity of extension of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
time. The court said that a party would not be allowed to approbate and reprobate at the same
time. Irregularity in extension of time could be regularised. United Bank of India v Abhijit Tea Co
Pvt Ltd, AIR 1999 Cal 81 , accepting part payment in terms of compromise, not debarred from
appealing against it. State of TN v K Sabanayagam, AIR 1998 SC 344 : (1998) 1 SCC 318 ,
exemption under the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, became waived because of the consistent
stand taken by the Housing Board.
48. Muthakke v Devanna Rai, AIR 2002 Ker 301 .
49. Darayas Bamanshah Medhora v Nariman Bamanshah Medhora, AIR 2002 Guj 166 .
50. MS Baliga v Mangalore City Corporation, AIR 1998 Kant 76 : LNIND 1997 Kant 428 .
51. Phipson, 10th Edn, p 848. PG Hariharan v Padaril, AIR 1994 Ker 36 , the party himself going

against the terms of family arrangement cannot be allowed to raise the plea of estoppel against
the other party.
52. Atmaram v State, AIR 1995 MP 225 . Chetak Constructions Ltd v Om Prakash, AIR 2003 MP

145 , the agreement for transfer of property stated that the vendors, who had received their
price, transferred possession also at the time of the agreement. They were not permitted to
deny the fact of handing over of possession also.
53. Ram Lal Sett v Kanai Lal Sett, (1886) 12 Cal 663 ; Hunoomanpersaud Panday v Mussumat

Babooee Munraj Koonweree, (1856) 6 Moo Ind App 393 , 411; Johnston v Gopal Singh, (1931) 12
Lah 546.
54. Param Singh v Laji Mal, (1877) 1 All 403 ; Johnston v Gopal Singh, (1931) 12 Lah 546; Deena

Bandhu Gan v Makim Sardar, (1935) 63 Cal 763 .
55. Per Brett, J, in Carr v London and North Western Railway Co, (1875) LR 10 CP 307, 316, 317,

318. No estoppel arises from a mere participation in the selection of a lessee. Pukh Raj v
Rajasthan, AIR 1980 Raj 83 . Dhirubhai D & Co v Nizam Sugar Factory Ltd, AIR 2010 NOC 660
(AP), till the time of preparation of ﬁnal bill, the contractor's claim for higher rates was under
consideration and not rejected. After about 2 years a small amount was paid. Its acceptance by
the contractor did not estop him from claiming higher rates.
56. G Sarana v Lucknow University, AIR 1976 SC 2428 : (1976) 3 SCC 585 .
57. Ramesh Kumar v High Court of Delhi, AIR 2010 SC 3714 : (2010) 3 SCC 104 .
58. KA Nagamani v Indian Airlines, AIR 2009 SC 3240 : (2009) 5 SCC 515 .
59. N Chellappan v Kerala SE Board, AIR 1975 SC 230 : (1974) 2 SCC 660 . Submitting to the

award of a Tribunal as to surplus land, cannot question afterwards. State of Maharashtra v
Harischandra, AIR 1986 SC 1192 : (1986) 3 SCC 349 . A simple participation in the proceedings
after the expiry of 4 months does not debar. State of Punjab v Hardayal, AIR 1985 SC 920 :
(1985) 2 SCC 629 .
60. S Muthumanicakam v State, AIR 1986 Mad 179 ; R Murali (Dr) v Dr R Kamalakhanan, AIR 2000

Mad 174 , the petitioner appeared for admission to PG Medical courses on the basis of a
prospectus which contained ﬁxation of quota for in service candidates by Government. He was
not allowed to challenge the prospectus. Kundan Mal v District College, Pali, AIR 2000 Raj 152 ,
the petitioner ordered to pay charges for conversion of land to commercial purposes and he
complied with the orders, not allowed subsequently to challenge the order by writ petition.
61. KA Nagamani v Indian Airlines, AIR 2009 SC 3240 : (2009) 5 SCC 515 ; Manish Kumar Shahi v

State of Bihar, (2010) 12 SCC 576 . Also see—Amlan Jyoti Borooah v State of Assam, (2009) 3
SCC 227 (wherein it was held that the appellant, having accepted the change in the selection
procedure sub silentio, cannot be permitted to turn round and contend that the procedure
adopted was illegal); UOI v Dalbir Singh, (2009) 7 SCC 251 (wherein the candidate having applied
only for the OBC vacancy, when his OBC certiﬁcate was found to be defective, he was held to be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
estopped from seeking his inclusion in the general list on the ground that the last candidate in
the general list had scored less marks than him).
62. Lalit Taori v Nagpur University, AIR 1986 Bom 255 .
63. Amrit Kaur v Chaman Lal, AIR 1994 HP 21 . Balkrishna Menon v Padmavathy Amma, AIR 1993

Ker 218 , ﬁrst fact-ﬁnding commissioner's report not accepted by the party, got his replacement
and on receiving the second report, not allowed to rely on the ﬁrst report. Pine Chemical
Suppliers v Collector of Customs (Bombay), AIR 1993 SC 1185 : 1993 Supp(2) SCC 124 , an
importer accepted test reports indicating misdeclaration of goods, valuation on the basis of the
test reports could not be challenged.
64. Dr Hafzur Rahaman Quadri v State of West Bengal, AIR 2012 NOC 235 (Cal.).
65. Rup Chand Ghosh v Sarveswar Chandra, (1906) 33 Cal 915 . There are decisions which lay

down that these sections are exhaustive: see Asmatunnessa Khatun v Harendra Lal Biswas,
(1908) 35 Cal 904 .
66. Ganesh Shet v Dr CSGK Setty, AIR 1998 SC 2216 : (1998) 5 SCC 381 , speciﬁc relief not

allowed on the evidence of incomplete contract and the plaintiff not competing even after
opportunity.
67. PN Wankundre v CS Wankundre, AIR 2002 Bom 129 : 2002 1 Bom LR 613 .
68. At p 133.
69. 45 Indian Appeals 118 at 124 : AIR 1918 PC 70 , at P 74.
70. Haryana Cooperative Transport Societies Welfare Assn. v State of Haryana, AIR 2000 P&H

230. Navayuga Exports Ltd v AP Mineral Development Corp, AIR 1998 AP 391 , acceptance of
mining rights for 6 months period, not allowed to say afterwards that under the relevant Act,
lease should have been for 20 years.
71.

Scindia Steam Navigation Co Ltd v UOI, AIR 1998 Ker 250 . Bapulal Walchand Jain v

Pandurang Vithal Pingle, AIR 2003 Bom 5 , payment of decree, the judgment debtor pleaded that
only a small amount remained to be paid, the decree-holder's income-tax return also showed the
same fact, he was estopped from saying that no payment had been made. Syed Ali Mossa Raza
v Razia Begam, AIR 2003 AP 2 , construction over the plaintiff's property under bona ﬁde belief,
but not able to show any conduct on the part of the plaintiff to create an estoppel against him.
The plaintiff could assert his normal property rights. State of Karnataka v Stellar Construction Co,
AIR 2003 Kant 6 , the contractor had nothing more than the agreed work, no claim for extraexpenditure could be built on the basis of a letter, a part of internal correspondence, from a
lower oﬃcer to a higher oﬃcer. Parvatewava v Bhagawwa, AIR 2003 NOC 116 (Kant) : 2002 AIHC
3395 , an ex parte order was set aside subject to payment of costs, the defendant paid belatedly
but even so the plaintiff withdrew it. He was not allowed to challenge the restoration. Heirs
Kantilal Purshottamdas patel v Dahlben Jagdish Rathod, AIR 2003 Guj 82 , questioning validity of
sale deed by legal heir after 4 years, after the death of her husband she operated the account in
which the sale consideration was deposited, sale deed contained clear recitals about legal
necessity. Sale deed not liable to be set aside. MTW Tenzing Namgyal v Motilal Lakhotia, AIR
2003 SC 1448 , plaintiff's suit for possession of immovable property on the basis of ownership,
the plaintiff failed to prove ownership on the basis of documents on record, the Khasra entry
was found to be of no evidentiary value. The land in question was acquired and the plaintiff's
predecessor in title received compensation without any objections. The plaintiffs became
estopped from claiming title.
72. Shitla pd. Dubey v State of UP, AIR 1999 All 260 .
73. Life Insurance Corp of India, Patna v Lalita Devi, AIR 2016 Pat 6 , para 11.
74. Ganges Manufacturing Co v Sourujmull, (1880) 5 Cal 669 , 678; S. Butail v HP Forest Corp, AIR

2002 HP 1 , the fact that the plaintiff (chartered accountant) repeatedly asked for payment of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the balance fee after he received the initial payment, showed that the payment was not received
by him in full and ﬁnal settlement and, therefore, his subsequent claim for full payment could
not be prevented by invoking the doctrine of estoppel. It would be inequitable to do so.
75. Maddanappa v Chandramma, AIR 1965 SC 1812 : (1965) 3 SCR 283 .
76. Baidyanath Mahapatra v State of Orissa, AIR 1989 SC 2218 : (1989) 4 SCC 664 .
77. RK Deka v UOI, AIR 1992 Del 53 .
78. Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh, (1979) 2 SCR 641 , AIR 1979

SC 621 —referred to and followed in D Boopalan v Madras Metropolitan Water Supply and
Sewerage Board, (2007) 12 SCC 569 .
79. Halsbury's Laws of England (3rd Edn), Vol 15, p 175, para 344, applied by VIMADALAL J, in

Air Corp. Emp. Union v GB Bhirade, (1969) 71 Bom LR 707 . Doctrine of promissory estoppel is
evolved by equity in order to prevent injustice, Intrans Systems Pvt Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 1996
Ker 161 . The doctrine cannot be invoked against public interest, National Oxygen Ltd v TN
Electricity Board, AIR 1996 Mad 229 . Promissory estoppel proceeds on the footing that when on
the representation of a promisor, a promisee alters his position, then the former should keep his
words and should not be allowed to recede from them, Kimti Lal Rahi v UOI, AIR 1993 Del 211 .
The rule of promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine is not a rule of thumb or a hard and
fast rule but elastic one in the hands of courts to do complete justice between the parties, State
of HP v Ganesh Wood Products, AIR 1996 SC 149 : (1995) 6 SCC 363 . No clear cut promise or
representation, doctrine of promissory estoppel not attracted, Ude Ram v State of Haryana, AIR
1994 P&H 175. No assurance or promise, no estoppel, Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd v
Adarsh Textiles, AIR 2015 SC 511 (paras 29 and 30); no fraudulent misrepresentation or false
statement to other party, no estoppel, Bhagwati Vanaspati Traders v Senior Superintendent of
Post Oﬃces, Meerut, AIR 2015 SC 901 (para 7). A promise of full efforts to secure employment
to trainees does not create any estoppel, UPSRTC v UP Parivahan Sangh, AIR 1995 SC 1115 :
(1995) 2 SCC 1 . Recognition as freedom ﬁghter, type of evidence in one case (certiﬁcate from
another freedom ﬁghter) does not estop the Government from rejecting similar evidence in
other cases, Chaitnya Charan Das v State of WB, AIR 1995 Cal 336 . Doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot be invoked outside the terms of contract, Nagappa v State, AIR 1994 Kant 77 .
The principle of promissory estoppel is akin to the principle of legitimate expectation. Unless
there is overriding reason of public policy or other compelling or overriding consideration of
public interest or other extenuating circumstances the State is bound to fulﬁl its promise, Shakti
Tubes Ltd v State of Bihar (FB), AIR 1994 Patna 162 .
80. LML Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh, (2008) 3 SCC 128 .
81. Managing Director, Tamil Nadu Magnesite Ltd v S Manickam, (2010) 4 SCC 421 .
82. State of Arunachal Pradesh v Nezone Law House, Assam, AIR 2008 SC 2045 : (2008) 5 SCC

609 , which was not the case here. Ansal Properties and Infrastructure Ltd v State of Haryana, AIR
2008 NOC 2045 (P&H-DB), acquisition of land, departmental correspondence for allotment, not
communicated to any hopeful builder, no estoppel.
83. Standard Chartered Bank v Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd, (2006) 6 SCC 94 : AIR 2006

SC 3626 .
84. Jacob Philip v UOI, AIR 1985 Ker 255 ; R.B Jodhanand v State, AIR 1984 J&K 10. Ashok

Kumar v Union Territory, Chandigarh, AIR 1995 SC 461 : (1995) 1 SCC 631 , change of policy in
licencing rules. Haryana State Industrial Devp. Corp v Inderjeet, AIR 1996 SC 2244 : (1996) 9 SCC
49 , offered plot size reduced, accepted by the applicant, not allowed to go back on his
acceptance. Bharat Wools v State of Punjab, AIR 1996 P&H 215, invitation for applications, does
not bind the Government.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
85. Bajrang Industries v General Manager, DIC., Vizianagaram, AIR 1994 AP 10 , relying upon UOI

v Godfrey Philips India Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806 : (1985) 4 SCC 369 , Jit Ram Shiv Kumar v State of
Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 1285 : (1981) 1 SCC 11 and Motilal Patampat Sugar Mills Co Ltd v State of
UP, AIR 1979 SC 621 : 1979 All LJ 368 : (1979) 2 SCC 409 and distinguishing Pournami Oil Mills v
State of Kerala, AIR 1987 SC 590 : 1986 Supp SCC 728 .
86. C Jayasree v Commissioner, MC.H, AIR 1994 AP 312 .
87. Dasarathi v AP, AIR 1985 AP 136 ; Pramodhbhai v Oﬃcer on Spl. Duty No. 2, AIR 1989 Guj 187

, notiﬁcation can be withdrawn before acted upon.
88. Excise Commr. UP v Ram Kumar, AIR 1976 SC 2237 : (1976) 3 SCC 540 .
89. Mahabir Auto Stores v IOC Ltd, AIR 1989 Del 315 . See also Ramlal Khurana v State of Punjab,

AIR 1989 SC 1985 : (1989) 4 SCC 99 , no estoppel against compulsory retirement.
90. TR Kapoor v State of Haryana, AIR 1989 SC 2082 : (1989) 4 SCC 71 .
91. Bhim Singh v Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 768 : (1981) 2 SCC 673 .
92. Tara Singh v Kehar Singh, AIR 1989 SC 1426 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 316 .
93. Syndicate Bank v Sudhir Surgicals & Allied Industries, AIR 1992 Ker 146 .
94. Surendra Kumar Rai v Zila Parishad, Jhansi, AIR 1997 All 387 .
95. Gopi Chand Television v Director, Doordarshan Kendra, Hyderabad, AIR 1995 AP 199 .
96. Gujarat Ambuja Cements Ltd v UOI, AIR 1994 Guj 104 . Davinder Singh v State, AIR 1995 J&K

77, transport authorities asked the bus owner to complete all the formalities and he complied
with the order by depositing fee etc., the authority was not permitted to go back, relying on AIR
1979 SC 1628 : (1979) 3 SCC 489 .
97. Tilak Chitra Mandir v State, AIR 1993 All 30 . Akhara Brahm Buta v State of Punjab, AIR 1993

SC 366 : (1992) 4 SCC 243 , acquisition of land against promise, houses built, market- value
allowed as compensation. Tulsi v State of Rajasthan, 1996 AIHC 1824 (Raj) promise of land at
certain rate to land oustees, not allowed to be altered to commercial value. Promise of loan for
rebuilding cinema hall damaged in cyclone, the successor party to power not allowed to resile, B
Sanjeeva Reddy v Govt of AP, 1996 AIHC 2426 (AP). Belated compliance with terms and
conditions did not create estoppel, Chemech Engineers P Ltd v Director of Industries and
Commerce, AIR 1994 Mad 14 . Failure to observe packing rules, no estoppel against licencing
authority, GTN Textiles Ltd v R.OT Commr., AIR 1993 SC 1596 : (1993) 3 SCC 438 . Withdrawal of
proposed rebate on electricity charges before compliance by anybody with the scheme, held
effective, APSEB v Sarada Ferro Alloys, AIR 1993 SC 1521 : (1993) 2 SCC 425 ; Hindustan Ferro
Alloys Ltd v UPSEB, AIR 1995 All 209 .
98. Sanjiv Textiles Pvt Ltd v State Bank of India, AIR 1993 Guj 132 . For promissory estoppel to

arise it is necessary that the contract between the parties is made in the prescribed form and
manner, BC Raju v Karnataka Housing Board, AIR 1995 Kant 356 . Non-compliance with
requirements, no estoppel, Kimti Lal Rahi v UOI, AIR 1993 Del 211 .
99. Mangalam Timber Products Ltd v State, AIR 1996 Ori 13 ; Suvarna Cements Ltd v UOI, AIR

2002 AP 244 , accepting base on certain terms including the term as to interest on late
payments, not allowed to say that those terms are not to be of binding effect.
100. Bhagwati Vanaspati Traders v Senior Superintendent of Post Oﬃces, Meerut, (2015) 1 SCC

617 (para 8), approving Moorgate Mercantile Co Ltd v Twitchings, 1977 AC 890 : (1976) 3 WLR
66 : (1976) 2 All ER 641 (HL).
101. The Government has to place before the Court all the necessary material to enable the

court to decide whether estoppel would arise or not. The mere ipse dixit of being a Government
is not enough for this purpose. American Dry Fruit Stores v UOI, AIR 1990 Bom 376 . Promissory
estoppel cannot be used to compel the Government or a public authority to carry out a
representation or a promise which is contrary to law or which was outside the authority or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
power of the oﬃcer of the Government or of the public authority to make, Ram Nath Sahu v UOI,
AIR 1996 All 19 . Where sanction or promise is ultra vires of the authority, no estoppel arises, PV
Balakrishnan Nair v State of Kerala, AIR 1994 Ker 6 , holding Robertson, Robertson v Minister of
Pensions, (1949) 1 KB 227 not a good law.
102. AK Thangudrai v DFO, Madurai, AIR 1985 Mad 104 . Similarly, the extension of lease of

ﬁshery was not allowed to be withdrawn after the grantee had acted upon it. Ikop Laidakol
Fishing Corp v State of Manipur, AIR 1982 Gau 14 .
103. Nandkishore v Nagar Palika Shajapur, AIR 1991 MP 99 .
104. Dhampur Sugar Mills v UOI, AIR 1985 Del 344 .
105. See UOI v Indo-Afghan Agencies, AIR 1968 SC 718 : (1968) 2 SCR 366 .
106. Motilal Padmapat Sugar Mills v UP, (1979) 2 SCR 641 : AIR 1979 SC 621 : (1979) 2 SCC 409

. Followed in Indo-American Hybrid Seeds v Chandigarh I & TD Corporation, AIR 1995 P&H 134.
The same result followed where there was incentive scheme for industry in backward areas.
Tapti Oil Industries v Maharashtra, AIR 1984 Bom 161 . Followed by the Calcutta High Court in
Steel Crakers Ltd v MSTC, AIR 1992 Cal 86 emphasising the duty of the Court as laid down by the
Supreme Court in successive cases like Mahabir Auto Stores v IOC, AIR 1990 SC 1031 : (1990) 3
SCC 752 , and Kumari Shrilekha Vidyatri v State of UP, 1990 (4) JT SC 211 to set right arbitrary
Government action. Modi Alkalies & Chemicals Ltd v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1992 Raj 51 ,
remission of electricity duty announced to promote industry, the Government held bound. Vinay
Cement Ltd v State of Assam, AIR 1997 Gau 34 , the promoter of a company acted on a scheme
sponsored by the Government and established an industry in the notiﬁed backward area. He
obtained letters of intent and necessary licences and all clearance certiﬁcates and also booked
machinery supplied at a cost of crores of rupees. The State Government was not allowed to go
back on its assurances. Arya Durga Industries v GM, District Industries Centre, acting on
Government scheme for setting up industry. Government not allowed to revoke the scheme
retrospectively. Kalu Chand v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1998 Raj 33 , allotment of plot of land by
Municipal Board. The allottee made heavy payments to the Board and also for securing water
and electricity connection, construction was also done after securing sanction of the Board.
Refusal by the Board at this stage to execute lease deed was held to be improper. Equitable
considerations and legitimate expectation demanded that the Board be directed to execute
lease in favour of the allottee. National Engineering Industries Ltd v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1998
Raj 229 , an area of agricultural land oﬃcially converted into industrial for the use of the allottee
which spent money on its use, the Government not allowed to go back on the promise. UNI-ADS
Pvt Ltd v Commissioner of MCH, Hyderabad, AIR 1999 AP 278 , the corporation invited tenders
for leasing out electricity poles for advertising in the city. The petitioner company was the
highest bidder. The petitioner acted in a bona ﬁde manner on the representations made by the
corporation and deposited the requisite amounts as well as made certain other expenses. The
action of the corporation in not entering into the agreement was held to be not proper. The Court
directed it to honour its promised commitments.
107. AIR 1979 SC 61 : (1979) 2 SCC 409 , at 426.
108. Relying upon similar statements in Municipal Corporation of Bombay v Secretary of State,

ILR (1905) 29 Bom 580 at p 607 : 7 Bom LR 27. Commercial contracts already concluded,
remedies have to be provided have to be for their breaches under the law of contract and not
that of estoppel, Trident Tubes Ltd v Govt of Bihar, AIR 1995 Pat. 50 .
109. Crabb v Arun District Council, (1975) 3 All ER 165 : (1975) 3 WLR 847 .
110. (1979) 2 SCC 409 , at p 430 : AIR 1979 SC 61 .
111. The court also cited Robertson v Minister of Pensions and Evenden v Guildfold City Assn

Football Club Ltd, (1949) 1 KB 227 : (1948) 2 All ER 767 and (1975) 3 All ER 269 , where it is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
observed that promissory estoppel is no longer the same passive equity. Vinjay Cements Ltd v
Assam, AIR 1997 Gau 34 , the Government restrained from resiling from an announced scheme.
The Government was required to give eligibility certiﬁcate to an entrepreneur who acting on the
basis of the scheme prepared to establish an industry in the most backward area and obtained
ﬁnal licences, and clearance from Pollution Board and placed ﬁrm orders upon suppliers.
Arguments were built upon the following authorities: MP Sugar Mills v UP, AIR 1979 SC 621 :
(1979) 2 SCC 409 ; UOI v Godfrey Philips (India) Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806 : (1985) 4 SCC 369 ; Bakul
Oil Industries v Gujarat, (1987) 1 SCC 31 : AIR 1987 SC 142 ; Pine Chemicals Ltd v Assessing
Authority, (1992) 2 SCC 683 : 1992 AIR SCW 702.
112. Ashok Kumar Maheshwari v State of UP, (1998) 2 SCC 502 : AIR 1998 SC 966 .
113. State of Kerala v Kerala Rare Earth and Minerals Ltd, AIR 2016 SC 1817 , para 58.
114. State of Kerala v New World Investment Pvt Ltd, AIR 2016 NOC 369 (Ker) : 2016 AIR CC 426

(Ker).
115. AP Dairy Development Corp Federation v B Narasimha Reddy, (2011) 9 SCC 286 .
116. SVA Steel Re-rolling Mills Ltd v State of Kerala, (2014) 4 SCC 186 (para 30).
117. Sah Mahadeo Lal Mohan Lal v State of Bihar, AIR 1982 Pat. 158 .
118. This also emerges from the decision of the Supreme Court in Jit Ram Shiv Kumar v State of

Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 1285 : (1981) 1 SCC 11 .
119. State of Karnataka v KK Mohandas, AIR 2007 SC 2917 : (2007) 6 SCC 484 , no estoppel on

the basis of a speech of a minister as to ban on sale of toddy. The Government had revised
policy in the meantime.
120. Shanmugraja v Superintending Engineer, AIR 2002 Mad 159 . The court also held that the

plea of estoppel would have to be taken in the petition itself. It cannot be raised for the ﬁrst time
at the hearing.
121. Shree Sidhbali Steels Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 2011 SC 1175 : (2011) 3 SCC 193 .
122. Shree Sidhbali Steels Ltd v State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 2011 SC 1175 : (2011) 3 SCC 193 .
123. See cases cited under "promissory estoppel". KML Narasimhan, Larsen & Toubro Ltd v UOI,

AIR 1994 Mad 82 following Motilal Sugar Mills v UP, (1979) 2 SCR 641 : AIR 1979 SC 621 : (1979)
2 SCC 409 and dissenting from Jeet Ram v State of Haryana, (1980) 3 SCR 689 : AIR 1980 SC
1285 : (1981) 1 SCC 11 to the extent it is in conﬂict with Motilal's case. Where the Government
resolution assured the petitioners to supply them timber for twenty years at the prevailing
market rate to be revised after every three years, the show cause notice to reduce the price
revision period from three years to one year would not amount to breach of any material
promise on the part of the Government, Vidarbha Veneer Industries Ltd v State of Maharashtra,
AIR 1994 Bom 155 . Subsequential change of export policy by the Government, doctrine of
promissory estoppel applies, UOI v Rizwan International, AIR 1993 Mad 336 . Withdrawal of
customs duty exemption notiﬁcation in public interest would not attract promissory estoppel,
Kasinka Trading v UOI, AIR 1995 SC 874 : (1995) 1 SCC 274 ; Darshan Oils P Ltd v UOI, AIR 1995
SC 370 : (1995) 1 SCC 345 . Where the Government granted facility to operate pay phone on
commission basis with a right to vary the conditions of agreement, the Government was not
estopped from changing the commission of operators as a public policy to augment public
revenue, UOI v Binani Consultants Pvt Ltd, AIR 1995 Cal 234 . Where the Government granted
licences to open bars only to those who had licences for retail selling shops without any
representation by Government that the bars would be for a certain period, the Government was
not estopped from rescinding the Rules of granting licences in public interest, AJ Joy v Govt of
Tamil Nadu, AIR 1993 Mad 282 .
124. MP Mathur v DTC, AIR 2007 SC 414 : (2006) 13 SCC 706 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
125. Sadhna Agarwal v Indore Devp. Auth., AIR 1986 MP 88 . Tandon Brothers v State of WB, AIR

2001 SC 1866 , a notiﬁcation under the West Bengal Estate Acquisition Act, 1954 was not
allowed to be superseded for changing its conditions by a subsequent notiﬁcation.
126.

UOI v Godfrey Philips India Ltd, AIR 1986 SC 806 : (1985) 4 SCC 369 . Where the

Government promised to give interest free sales tax loan to industrial units and it did not go
back from its promise but pleaded its inability due to paucity of funds, promissory estoppel was
not applicable, Shakti Tubes Ltd v State of Bihar (FB), AIR 1994 Pat 162 . Taxes already realised
(sales-tax year) cannot be promised to be refunded. That would be against public interest,
Intrans Systems P Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 1996 Ker 161 . The terms, restrictions and conditions
of the import policy of the Government announced for a ﬁnancial year could be changed only
prospectively, Nath Bros. Exim International Ltd v UOI, AIR 1995 Del 280 .
127. East India Hotels Ltd v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2001 Raj 286 .
128. Vij Resins P Ltd v State of J&K, AIR 1989 SC 1629 : (1989) 3 SCC 115 ; Uma Paliwal v UOI,

AIR 2002 Raj 348 , grant of forest lease on acceptance of deposit on the expectation the
contractor had employed a large number of workers, not allowed to be cancelled. There was no
illegality in the initial renewal of the lease.
129. Vinod Kumar Mittal v UOI, AIR 1991 All 1 . Promise of allotment of land to schools on no

proﬁt no loss basis not permitted to be shifted to market value basis. Delhi Development
Authority v Lala Amar Nath Educational Human Society, AIR 1991 Del 96 . Hitech Electro Thermics
& Hydropower Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 2003 SC 2091 , the owner of the unit was allowed to
claim beneﬁts of the announced scheme under which he acted though he could not
commission it within the time period, the delay in commissioning being due to delay in providing
electric energy. Ras Resorts & Apart Hotels Ltd v UOI, AIR 2010 SC 2599 : (2010) 11 SCC 601 ,
plot allotted for construction of hotel, proposal in the draft ﬁve year plan, and annual plan of UT
to grant interest subsidy on loan taken to construct hotel, created no promissory estoppel
because it was not a ﬁrm offer or representation.
130. Garments International Pvt Ltd v UOI, AIR 1991 Kant 52 . Sree Rayalaseema Alkalies & Allied

Chemicals Ltd v Govt of AP (FB), AIR 1993 AP 278 , where the petitioner never applied for
registration under the new incentive scheme of the Government, he was not entitled to invoke
the doctrine of promissory estoppel. Arivind Industries v State of Gujarat, AIR 1995 SC 2477 :
(1995) 6 SCC 53 , the notiﬁcation by the Government to give certain beneﬁts to new industries
did not contain any promise that the beneﬁts given would not be altered from time to time, the
Government was not estopped from modifying the same.
131. Sanjaya Sales Corp v National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, AIR 1993 AP 62 .

Where the policy of the Government was provisional and was liable to change, doctrine of
estoppel would not be attracted, Kimti Lal Rahi v UOI, AIR 1993 Del 211 .
132. Exotic Granite Exports v Govt of AP, AIR 2008 NOC 2109 (AP).
133. Old Village Industries Ltd v UOI, AIR 1993 Del 321 .
134. Rizwan International v UOI, AIR 1994 Mad 112 .
135. Bhilai Steel Plant v Special Area Devp. Authority, AIR 1991 MP 332 . Promise to allot land for

HAL colony has been held to be similarly binding. Aeronautic Employees v AP Govt, AIR 1990 AP
331 . MN Rao J said [at p 335] : "Had the Government told the management of the HAL in the
beginning itself in 1981 when vast tracts of land were readily available for construction
purposes, the management would have explored alternative arrangements to provide housing
accommodation to their employees. Because of the promise made by the State Government, the
management, thinking that the promise would be [fulﬁlled], did not explore other possibilities. It
is the promise of the Government that altered the position of the petitioner society."

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
136. State of Maharashtra v Jethmal Himatmal Jain, 1994 Cr LJ 2613 (Bom); Laxmi Udyog Rock

Cement Pvt Ltd, AIR 2001 Ori 51 , exemptions granted for a certain period can be withdrawn
before the expiry of the period in public interest. The principle of promissory estoppel would not
be applicable.
137. Trident Tubes Ltd v Govt of Bihar, AIR 1995 Pat 50 .
138. Bhoruka Power Corp Ltd v State of Karnataka, AIR 1994 NOC 314 (Kant); UP Power Corp Ltd

v Sant Steels & Alloys P Ltd, AIR 2008 SC 693 : (2008) 2 SCC 777 , promised concession to new
connections in hire areas could not be withdrawn because of theft of energy. Concessions
ceased after statutory changes. Saini Alloys P Ltd v UP Power Corp, AIR 2007 NOC 978 (All-DB) :
(2007) 2 All LJ 5, exemptions or concessions can be granted only by the authorised person or
body under statutory provisions, otherwise there would be no estoppel. Saharanpur Electric
Supply Co Ltd v State of UP, AIR 2007 NOC 145 (All-DB) : (2006) 6 All LJ 588, change in market
value on basis of subsequent Amendment Act, not hit by promissory estoppel, it does not apply
against statute. AP Steel Rerolling Mill Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 2007 SC 797 : (2007) 2 SCC 725 ,
no concession could be claimed by a party who failed to comply with terms and conditions of
the scheme within reasonable time.
139. Shri Bajrang Extraction Pvt Ltd v Secretary, Govt of MP, AIR 1993 MP 202 .
140. Selvi Travels v UOI, AIR 1993 Mad 216 .
141. TK Ghosh's Academy v TC Palit, AIR 1975 SC 1496 : 1975 Cr LJ 1233 .
142. Even in the case of legislative functions an overriding public necessity would be necessary

to change a policy. UOI v JK Industries Ltd, AIR 1991 Raj 45 , a matter of Central Excise Rules;
Nilagiri Tea Emporium v Govt of India, 1990 Cr LJ 155 (AP), change in Tea Standard Rules, a
matter of delegated legislation, no estoppel. Pioneer Agro Extracts Ltd v State of Punjab, AIR
2002 P&H 135, the fact that under a package of incentives, exemption from payment of sales
tax was granted by the State Government for growth of industry in the State, did not estop the
Government from imposing social security cess under an Act. MP Cement Mfr's Assn. v State of
MP, AIR 2002 MP 62 , the state permitted the petitioners to set up captive power plants for
production of electrical energy in their industries, the State Government was held to be not
prevented by promissory estoppel from imposing cess on energy produced by the petitioners.
Dayalbagh Educational Institute v State of UP, AIR 2001 All 290 , no estoppel by constructing
building on land allocated under the Master Plan for educational purposes Shiv Kr. Pandit v State
of Assam, AIR 1999 Gau 68 , no estoppel in matters of tax.
143. Bansal Exports v UOI, AIR 1983 Del 443 .
144. State of Karnataka v KK Mohandas & Etc., 2008 (4) CCC 492 (SC).
145. CV Enterprises v Brathwait & Co, AIR 1984 Cal 306 , a Govt. Co. not bound by contracts

entered into under mistake of its rights; Chatlal Sao v State, AIR 1986 Pat 267 , acts done in
violation of directions or adminsitrative instructions; Chandrakant Bhailal Patel v TV
Krishnamurthy, AIR 1991 Cal 63 , grant of extension of lease on a well without observing the
prescribed procedure, being ultra vires was open to challenge.
146. Bihar EGP Co-op Soc v Sipahi Singh, AIR 1977 SC 2149 : (1977) 4 SCC 145 . Similarly there

can be no estoppel where the requirements of exemption are not satisﬁed. DR Kohli v Atul
Products Ltd, AIR 1985 SC 537 : (1985) 2 SCC 77 .
147. Turner Morrison & Co v Hungerford Investment, (1972) 1 SCR 711 : AIR 1972 SC 1311 :

(1972) 1 SCC 857 ; Jasjeet Films v DDA, AIR 1980 Del 83 , programme for the development of
area adjoining a cinema site; Assistant Custodian of EP v Brij Kishore, (1975) 2 SCR 359 : AIR
1974 SC 2325 : (1975) 1 SCC 21 , declaration about evacuee property; Paradise Printers v UT of
Chandigarh, (1988) 1 SCC 440 : AIR 1988 SC 354 , promise of allotment of land for industrial

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
purposes; Chandigarh Food And Services Ltd v UOI, AIR 1990 P&H 206, promise to allot a
contract by negotiations and not by tender, no estoppel.
148. Sah Mahadeo Lal v State, AIR 1982 Pat 158 .
149. PC Sethi v UOI, AIR 1975 SC 2164 : (1975) 4 SCC 67 .
150. Foreshore Co-op Housing Society v N H S Samiti, (1991) 2 SCC 75 . Doctrine of promissory

estoppel cannot be invoked for preventing Government from discharging its duty under the law.
Intrans Systems Pvt Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 1996 Ker 161 . State of HP v Padam Devi, AIR 2002
SC 2477 , two schemes formulated by the State Government for providing training to
unemployed educated youth, they were found to be valid because of intelligible differentia.
Refusal to give additional training under one scheme to those who joined the other schemes
was held to be neither arbitrary nor discriminatory. No estoppel in spite of litigation. Summer
Chand Chhajed v Administrator, AIR 2002 Raj 76 , State Government appointed administrator for
a society, subsequently notiﬁcation issued for holding election to constitute the managing
committee. The administrator was not allowed to claim any injunction against the notiﬁcation
for election. Riaz Construction Co v UOI, AIR 2001 J&K 7, a tender admitted by subsequently
rejected because both the requirements of technical and ﬁnancial capability were found to be
not satisﬁed. No unfairness and no estoppel. Prashant K Patel v UOI, AIR 2001 Guj 58 , National
Savings Certiﬁcates taken by a person by virtue of power of attorney holder of another person,
the account operating for 10 years, the Government was not allowed to deny interest on the
ground that such accounts were not allowed. NK Mettala High School v State of Gujarat, AIR
2001 63, issuance of general policy resolution inviting applications for opening schools does
not create an estoppel compelling the Government to do so, the same being a matter of policy
and ﬁnancial considerations. Lotus Constructions v Govt of AP, AIR 1997 AP 200 , the
Government sponsored a scheme for development of tourism and other related activities in
certain areas. The petitioner's proposal was approved and negotiations were going on when the
government, acting in public interest withdrew the scheme. The decision was not of malaﬁde
nature. No estoppel against Government. KAS Semthinathan v UOI, AIR 1997 Mad 208 , revision
of PCO commission rates from time to time, being a policy matter, no PCO owner can present a
challenge against it. Ajantha Travels v Govt of India, AIR 2001 Ker 112 , the system of
recognising travel agents and renewal of agencies was changed in view of larger public interest
and national security was held to be not arbitrary. There was no estoppel against the
Government. Y Konda Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1997 AP 121 , a letter of provisional acceptance
was issued to a tenderer. He was fully aware that the matter was under consideration. The
Government cancelled the tender. The tenderer was held to be not entitled to invoke the doctrine
of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation on the basis of the letter of provisional
acceptance. AND Adasingarahar v Collector of Dharmapuri, AIR 2000 Mad 71 , there is no
question of promissory estoppel or isolation of natural purposes in the Government carrying out
anti-encroachment operations. Cosmopolitan Club v Govt of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2000 Mad 120 :
2000 1, non-renewal of the lease of the Golf Club in the interest of bringing it up to the
international standard, the decision being in public interest, it could not be said to be unfair or
unjustiﬁed, no violation of legitimate expectations.
151. Steel Authority of India Ltd v SUTNI Sangam, AIR 2010 SC 112 : (2009) 16 SCC 1 .
152. ML Dhar v Collector Land, AIR 2007 J&K 15.
153. Himalaya Rice Mills v State of UP, AIR 1997 All 155 ; Punjab Travel Co v UOI, AIR 2000 Raj

294 , the doctrine cannot be used to prevent the Government from exercising its taxing power.
154. Sales Tax Oﬃcer v Shree Durga Oil Mills, AIR 1998 SC 591 : (1998) 1 SCC 572 .
155. UOI v Godhawani Bros., AIR 1999 SC 1604 : (1997) 11 SCC 173 .
156. State of Rajasthan v Mahavir Oil Industries, AIR 1999 SC 2302 : (1999) 4 SCC 357 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
157. Ashok Kumar Maheshwari (Dr) v State of UP, AIR 1998 SC 966 : (1998) 2 SCC 502 .
158. UOI v Shri Hanuman Industries, (2015) 6 SCC 600 , para 20.
159. Chanchal Goyal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2003 SC 1713 .
160. UOI v Pritilata Nanda, AIR 2010 SC 2821 : (2010) 11 SCC 674 .
161. Sheelawanti v DDA (FB), AIR 1995 Del 212 ; Mangalore Municipal Market Welfare Socy. v

Corp of Mangalore, AIR 1993 Kant 220 , no proof of promise to provide alternative
accommodation. Samsuddin v State of WB, 1996 AIHC 930 (Cal), ferry operator handing over
ferry to Zila Parishad for auction, bound, distinguishing Narendra Prosad Singh v The State of
West Bengal, (1959) 63 Cal WN 158.
162. Bhagat Singh Negi v HP Housing Board, AIR 1994 HP 60 . Acceptance of the scheme of plot

allotment on the basis of the brochures and also payments thereunder, no change could be
demanded, Ghaziabad Devp. Authority v Sanchar Vihar Sahkari Avas Samiti Ltd, AIR 1996 SC 2021
: (1996) 9 SCC 314 .
163. Anokh Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1994 P&H 157. Those who apply for after change or

modiﬁcation of the scheme are not entitled to claim under the original scheme, Jai Prasad Singh
v State of UP, 1996 AIHC 3639 (All). Rajiv Moudgil v HP Housing Board, AIR 2000 HP 77 ,
escalation costs in accordance with the rules of the scheme allowed to be recovered. No
estoppel against it.
164. DDA Self Finance Flats Owners Society v UOI, AIR 2001 Delhi 39 . Sukhpal Singh Kang v

Chandigarh Admn, AIR 1999 P&H 156, terms and conditions of auction of leasehold sites not
challenged at that time, not allowed to be challenged subsequently.
165. Raja Ram Gaur v Rajasthan Housing Board, AIR 2010 NOC 525 (Raj).
166. Mayﬂower Hotels P Ltd v State of Kerala, AIR 2007 NOC 827 (Ker-DB).
167. Ganpati Shopping Mall P Ltd v State of Haryana, AIR 2007 NOC 793 (P&H-DB).
168. Bharat Explosives Ltd v Pradeshiya Industrial Corp of UP Ltd, AIR 1994 All 123 .
169. Kranti Hotels P Ltd v State of J&K, AIR 1997 J&K 91.
170. Atul Products Ltd v State of Gujarat, AIR 2007 NOC 662 (Guj).
171. Badri Kedar Paper P Ltd v UP Electricity Regulatory Commission, AIR 2009 SC 1783 : (2009)

3 SCC 754 .
172. Southern Petrochemical Industries Ltd v Electricity Inspector, AIR 2007 SC 1984 : (2007) 5

SCC 447 .
173. Kerala State Electricity Board v Hamsaveni Carbides, AIR 2014 Ker 57 (para 27).
174. UOI v Kashmir Finance Ltd, AIR 2007 J&K 4.
175. Dalbir Singh Sihag v Minister of Rural Development, AIR 2006 P&H 191.
176. Hardwari Lal v GD Tapase, AIR 1982 P&H 439.
177. Satish Kumar v Gorakhpur University, AIR 1981 All 377 .
178. Kedar Lal v Secy., HS. Board, AIR 1980 All 32 . For another case of patent error on the

marksheet and, therefore, cancellation of the result, see Prabhat Kishor Sahu v Sambal University,
AIR 1992 Ori 83 .
179. Bharti Shrivastva v Jiwaji University, AIR 1989 MP 197 . But see Basanta Kumar Mohanty v

Utkal University, AIR 1990 Ori 10 , a marksheet not allowed to be rectiﬁed after 5 years. Maxey
Charan v Rohilkhand University, AIR 1992 All 122 , University not allowed to cancel marksheet
which showed the candidate successful, she taking further admission and there was no fraud in
her. Reeta v Berhampur University, AIR 1993 Ori 27 (FB), the petitioner suppressed the knowledge
of cancellation of his result of BA. Final and sought admission to higher studies, he was not
entitled to any relief by invoking promissory estoppel, overruling Rajkishore Senapati v Utkal
University, AIR 1982 Ori 189 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
180. Ambika Pd Mohanty v Orissa Engg. College, AIR 1989 Ori 173 ; M Hussain v Bharathiyar

University, AIR 1991 Bom 45 , MBBS admissions not allowed to be cancelled after semester on
the ground of ineligibility. NE Krishna Murthy v University of Mysore, AIR 1991 Kant 35 , a
provisional result permitted to be revised when that was being done within two and a half
months. Shri Prashant Kanabar v Gujarat University, AIR 1991 Guj 23 , subsequent changes in
criteria under statutory rules, not precluded, Raﬁa Durani v University of Kashmir, AIR 2002 J&K
126, the candidate was admitted on the basis of declared result, she was allowed to attend and
complete the course and to appear at the ﬁnal examination as a regular candidate, the
University Authorities, were not allowed to withhold her result by questioning the validity of the
original admission.
181. Nilofar Insaf v State of MP, AIR 1991 SC 1872 : (1991) 4 SCC 279 .
182. Reetanjali Pati v Board of Secondary Education, AIR 1990 Ori 90 .
183. Karupa Sindhu v Orissa Board of Sec. Edu., AIR 1981 Ori 91 .
184. NB Rao v Principal, Osmania Medical College, AIR 1986 AP 196 . State of TN v A Gurusamy,

AIR 1997 SC 1199 : (1997) 3 SCC 542 , an admission obtained on the basis of a false caste
certiﬁcate allowed to be cancelled. PN Bhadra v Registrar, University of Agricultural Sciences, AIR
1997 Kant 100 , admission obtained by submitting false marks card, allowed to be cancelled. K
Shashidhara Rao v Ambedkar Institute of Technology, AIR 1998 Kant 294 , an admission made in
violation of rules was held to be cancellable. Sitam Seshanka v Principal, College Pharmaceutical
Societies, AIR 1997 Ori 62 , admission cancelled, it was made on the recommendation of a
colledge which had not scrutinised papers carefully. Charan Singh v Punjab University, AIR 1997
P&H 278, mistaken admission allowed to be cancelled. SD Kapoor v Chancellor, Jai Narain Vyas
University, AIR 1997 Raj 217 , nomination to membership at syndicate for a period of three years
was superseded by the Chancellor in public interest and in the interest of the University, no
estoppel. Abila v MDS University, AIR 1998 Raj 328 , admission granted on the basis of qualifying
marks obtained at the post-graduate examination was not allowed to be cancelled by saying
that qualifying marks were not there at the graduate level examination.
185. Madhuri Patil v Addl. Commr., Tribal Development, AIR 1995 SC 94 : (1994) 6 SCC 241 .

Where an error in the admission merit list was detected in just three days, the admission was
allowed to be cancelled because the candidate had not yet lost anything in terms of other
opportunities, Brajendra Singh Chouhan v State of MP, AIR 1995 MP 23 .
186. MK Sankaran v Govt of TN, AIR 1998 Mad 332 .
187. Amresh Kumar v Principal, Bhagalpur Medical College, AIR 1982 Pat 122 .
188. Israr Ad. Mansuri v MP, AIR 1982 MP 205 .
189. Harpal Singh v Rajasthan, AIR 1981 Raj 8 . See also Jaisree Pal v State of WB, AIR 1990 Cal

253 , admission not allowed to be cancelled after the completion of one year. Amarjeet Jena v
Council of Higher Secondary Education, AIR 1999 Ori 129 , help to a student in matters where his
father was transferred to a place where there was a different Board of Examination and
Education.
190. Neelam Kumar v State of Bihar, AIR 1994 Pat 15 ; Rajkumar Gadpayle v State of MP, AIR

1997 MP 85 , new conditions on admission to medical and technical education which were not
announced before were not allowed to be enforced.
191. Shruti Chaturvedi v Allahabad University, AIR 1998 All 291 .
192. Ibid. Biju Patnaik University of Technology v Sairam College, AIR 2010 NOC 691 (Ori), private

University permitted to conduct special examination and result declared, not permitted to cancel
aﬃliation. Vedica College of Education, Bhopal v Barkatullah University, AIR 2008 MP 219 , DB,
institution recognised for B.Ed. course. Results of candidates not allowed to be withheld for the
reason that the recognition was not published in the Oﬃcial Gazette.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
193. Dalip Singh v Pracharya & Adhikshak, AIR 1986 All 158 ; Baldev Singh Rana v State of HP, AIR

2002 HP 41 , the appointment of the petitioner to the post of demonstrator which was made due
to some mistake and inadvertence, did not attract the doctrine of promissory estoppel. The
mistake could not be allowed to be perpetuated by applying the doctrine of estoppel.
194. Sangeeta Srivastva v UN Singh, AIR 1980 Del 27 . For other admission cases see Manoj

Kumar v Co-ordinator, MNR, AIR 1985 All 257 ; Gladson Menino Vaz v Goa Medical College, AIR
1981 Goa 21 .
195. Kaniska Agarwal v University of Delhi, AIR 1992 Del 105 . A student got admission in a

particular course by the mistake of the academic body and she pursued the course for a
reasonable period, her admission could not be cancelled subsequently. However, the admission
sought fraudulently by the student will not attract estoppel, Smita Shukla v University of
Allahabad, AIR 1994 NOC 109 (All). Fake and bogus certiﬁcates, admission cancelled, Dinesh v
State, AIR 1993 Raj 187 .
196. Anjum Afshan v State of J&K, AIR 1994 NOC 313 (J&K); State of TN v G Samathi, AIR 1999

Mad 327 , a candidate who acquiesces in the terms of a prospectus may not afterwards
question them. N Vanajakshi v Principal, University College for Women, AIR 1999 AP 323 , the
examinee who had, in fact, failed, was declared successful due to typographical error, she was
not allowed to claim the beneﬁt of promissory estoppel.
197. Harpreet Singh Randhawa v State of Punjab, AIR 2001 P&H 107.
198. Ruchira Chauhan v Rohilkhand University, Bareilly, AIR 1996 All 12 , the two examinations

were the improvement test and the M Sc. Part II examination. Surendra Kumar v Board of
Secondary Education, AIR 1995 Raj 115 , a private school admitting a failed High School
candidate into XI, did not prevent the Board from refusing to permit him intermediate
examination. Mukund Prasad Khare v State, AIR 1996 MP 130 , admission not allowed to be
cancelled after three and a half years without giving opportunity, the allegation was that his
certiﬁcate of being an agriculturist's son was false. Naresh Singh v State, AIR 1994 J&K 42, caste
certiﬁcate not ﬁled at right time, refusal to provide caste beneﬁt not allowed to be challenged. B
Seenaiah v Health Ministry, Vijayawada, AIR 1995 AP 181 , caste status not proved up to II-yr in
MBBS, admission liable to be cancelled. Prabhjot Wahi v Guru Nanak Dev University, AIR 1995
P&H 269, admission under pressure and connivance, cancelled. Vinod Kumar Razdan v State, AIR
1995 J&K 68, ineligibility detected after permission for entrance, cancellation of candidature
allowed, distinguishing AIR 1976 SC 376 : (1976) 1 SCC 311 .
199. Abu Zaid v Principal, Madrasa, AIR 1999 All 64 .
200. B Jayalakshmi v SC University of HS Vijayawada, AIR 1994 AP 297 . Calling a candidate for

interview does not create a promise of admission, AIR 1994 Sikkim 1 .
201. Randhir Singh v State, AIR 1995 Raj 44 , relied on Sanatan Gauda v Berhampur University,

AIR 1990 SC 1075 : (1990) 3 SCC 23 .
202. Competitive test held without reservation, subsequent reservations not allowed. Anand

Kumar v State, AIR 1981 Pat 104 ; Deepak v State, AIR 1981 Pat 104 . See also Tripureswar Malik
v Council of Higher Secondary Education, AIR 1990 Ori 228 , exemption from papers in which the
candidate passed, not allowed to be withdrawn.
203. AV Gopalakrishnan v Byju N, AIR 1999 Ker 10 .
204. Nishant Singh Sipehia v Regional Engineering College, AIR 2000 HP 99 ; V Ramalakshmi (Dr.)

v Director of Medical Education, AIR 1998 Mad 55 , candidate not allowed to challenge admission
rules contained in the prospectus.
205. Meenakshi College for Women v University of Madras, AIR 1991 Mad 32 . Procedural

matters as distinguished from substantive rights do not create an estoppel. Anant Kumar v VC,
Magadh University, AIR 1990 Pat 205 ; Ashwin Prafulla Pimpalwar v State, AIR 1992 Bom 233 , an

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
educational institution (medical college here), whether private or public, can change rules for the
future including curtailment of privileges after completion even if they deprive the candidates of
their expectations.
206. Varinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1998 P&H 42.
207. GN Nayak v Goa University, AIR 2002 SC 790 . The court cited the following authorities

Madan Lal v State of J&K, AIR 1995 SC 1088 : (1995) 3 SCC 486 ; Om Prakash Shukla v Akhilesh
Kumar, AIR 1986 SC 1043 : 1986 Supp SCC 285 .
208. Shiv Kumar Tiwari v Jagat Narain Rai, AIR 2002 SC 211 .
209. A Krishnappa v Thinunarajappa, AIR 2001 Kant 470 .
210. Vice Chancellor, University of Allahabad v Som Prakash, AIR 2001 All 319 .
211. Principal, Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences v State of Orissa, AIR 2010 Ori 124 .
212. G Sreenivasan v Principal, Regional Engg. College, AIR 2000 Ori 56 . Jesja PK v Director,

School of Distance Education, AIR 2000 Ker 281 , choices already made by candidates on the
basis of existing cannot be upset by changing admission rules. Anop Singh Ratnu v Maharishi
Dayanand Sarswati University, AIR 1998 Raj 54 , eligibility percentage revised, in accordance with
the law from 40% to 45% no estoppel against it.
213. Principal, Madhav Institute of Technology and Science v Rajendra Singh, AIR 2000 SC 2487 :

(2000) 6 SCC 608 .
214. Osmania University v R. Madhavi, AIR 1998 AP 130 .
215. Birendra Nath Mondal v Vidyasagar University, AIR 1999 Cal 283 .
216. Thomas P John v Cochin University of Science and Technology, AIR 2003 Ker 238 .
217. Reeta v Behrampur University, AIR 1993 Ori 27 (FB).
218. Desai Devang V v Registrar, South Gujarat University, AIR 1996 Guj 96 .
219. Association of Management of Pvt Colleges v State of TN, AIR 1998 Mad 34 .
220. Ummul Qura Educational Society Govt of AP, AIR 2002 NOC 121 : (2001) 5 Andh LT 422

(AP).
221. Kuzhithurai Peruntheru Vellalar Samudayam Sreerooba Narayanapillayar Devasthanam, v The

Commissioner, AIR 2007 NOC 585 (Mad).
222. GP Sinha v State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 458 : 1971 Cr LJ 420 : (1970) 2 SCC 905 ; Nilofar

Insaf (Dr. Kumari) v State of MP, AIR 1991 SC 1872 : (1991) 4 SCC 279 , a settled issue cannot be
sought to be unsettled belatedly particularly when it is sought to be done in a collateral attack
and on a ground which does not go to the root of the matter.
223. GN Deshpande v Ishwaribai U Ahuja, 1992 Cr LJ 2665 (Bom).
224.

Ramesh Chandra Biswas v State, 1994 Cr LJ 1134 (Cal). See also Sangeetaben

Mahendrabhai Patel v State of Gujarat, (2012) 7 SCC 621 , para 23.
225. R v Secy of State, (1984) 1 All ER 956 at 964 and Ali v Secy. of State, (1984) 1 All ER 1009 ,

noted All ER Annual Rev 1984 at 160-161.
226. Thayammal v K Subramaniam, AIR 1989 Mad 317 . Issue estoppel would not have the

effect of compelling the Government which ﬁled two identical cases and withdrew one, to
withdraw the other also. PR. Rao v G Soma Reddy, 1987 Cr LJ 1629 (AP). Roop Kumar v Mohan
Thedani, AIR 2003 SC 2418 , the parties agreed that instead of remanding the matter, the
appellate court should consider the material on record and render a verdict. The Supreme Court
said that it was not open to any party to take the plea that no concession was given. Muthake v
Devanna, AIR 2002 Ker 301 , in a suit for partition, there were ﬁndings of courts in earlier two
suits that there had been oral partition, the plaintiff, a minor at the time was represented through
guardian, there was no plea that the earlier proceedings were null and void, or that the decrees

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
passed in those suits should be set aside, no evidence to show that the minor was adversely
affected, rather he had the fruits of the decrees, not allowed to sue.
227. Crown Estate Commissioners v Dorset County Council, (1990) 1 All ER 19 (Chapter D).
228. Industrial Finance Corp v Oﬃcial Liquidator, AIR 1993 SC 1524 : (1993) 3 SCC 40 ; Shree

Anupar Chemical (India) Pvt Ltd v Dipak G Mehta, AIR 1999 Bom 349 , averment in the petition of
20% shareholding, objection to the petition that on account of subsequent increase of capital,
the petitioner's shareholding was reduced to less than 10% and therefore, he was not qualiﬁed
for the petition. The objection was held to be not maintainable. The objector had agreed in an
earlier proceeding not to raise any such objection.
229. Barber v Staffordshire County Council, (1996) 2 All ER 748 (CA); Udit Gopal Beri v State of

Rajasthan, AIR 2001 Raj 147 , petition for conversion of agricultural land, the same plea was
taken by the predecessor of the petitioner and was negatived by a reasoned order which was
conﬁrmed by a Division Bench. Thus the plea was directly and substantially in issue in the
earlier proceeding, not allowed to be reopened in a subsequent writ petition.
230. Hodgkinson and Corby Ltd v Wards Mobility Services Ltd, 1997 FSR 178 (ChD).
231. RK Kawatra v DSIDC, AIR 1992 Del 28 .
232. Chhaganlal Keshavlal Mehta v Patel Narendas Haribhai, AIR 1982 SC 121 : (1982) 1 SCC 223

: (1982) 1 Guj LR 325. No estoppel arose on the facts of the case because there was no
representation by the legal heirs of the mortgagors to the mortgagee.
233. UOI v Indo-Afghan Agencies Ltd, (1968) 2 SCR 366 : AIR 1968 SC 718 .
234. Century Spg & Mfg Co v Ulhasnagar Municipality, AIR 1971 SC 1021 : (1970) 1 SCC 582 .
235. Niranjan Panda v Narayan Panda, (1953) Cut 508.
236. RK Kawatra v DSIDC, AIR 1992 Del 28 .
237. Gadigeppa v Balangowda, (1931) 33 Bom LR 1313 : 55 Bom 741 (FB); Brohmo Dutt v

Dharmo Das Ghose, (1898) 26 Cal 381 ; Manmatha Kumar Shaha v Exchange Loan Co Ltd, (1937)
1 Cal 283 ; Nakul Chandra v Sasadhar, (1941) 45 Cal WN 907; Vaikuntarama Pillai v Authimoolam
Chettiar, (1914) 38 Mad 1071; Radhe Shiam v Behari Lal, (1918) 40 All 558 ; Radha Kishan v Bhore
Lal, (1928) 50 All 862 ; Kumar Ganganand Singh v Maharaja Sir Rameshwar Singh Bahadur, (1927)
6 Pat 388; Khan Gul v Lakha Singh, (1928) 9 Lah 701 (FB). The former Judicial Commissioner's
Court at Nagpur had held likewise; Gulabchand v Chunnilal, (1929) 25 NLR 85.
238. Khan Gul v Lakha Singh, (1928) 9 Lah 701 (FB); Vaikuntarama Pillai v Authimoolam Chettiar,

(1914) 38 Mad 1071; Kumar Ganganand Singh v Maharaja Sir Rameshwar Singh Bahadur, (1927)
6 Pat 388.
239. Jagar Nath Singh v Lalta Prasad, (1908) 31 All 21 ; Radha Kishan v Bhore Lal, (1928) 50 All

862 .
240. Mohori Bibee v Dharmodas Ghose, (1903) 30 IA 114 , 122 : 30 Cal 539, 545 : 5 Bom LR 421,

424.
241. Devi Dayal v Secy. to Govt, Haryana, AIR 1985 P&H (NOC) 223.
242. Centrury Spg & Mfg Co v Ulhasnagar Muncply., AIR 1971 SC 1021 : (1970) 1 SCC 582 . Abdul

Dadamiya Shaikh v Murlidhar Rathi, AIR 2002 Bom 413 , the vendor made no representation
about his ownership of land about which the purchaser could say that he acted on it, the vendor
became the owner by some alteration in the mutation records. He was not bound by any
estoppel.
243. R Leslie, Ltd v Sheill, (1914) 3 KB 607 .
244. Ibid. p 618.
245. Mahomed Syedol Ariﬃn v Yeoh Ooi Gark, (1916) 43 IA 256 : 19 Bom LR 157: (1916) 2 AC

575 , followed in Mt. Muliabai v Garud, (1919) 15 NLR 149.
246. Express Newspapers Ltd v UOI, AIR 1986 SC 872 : (1986) 1 SCC 133 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
247. Kantilal v Chairman, Improvement Trust, Ratlam, AIR 1986 MP 134 .
248. K Satyanarayanan v K Ramaiah, AIR 1983 SC 452 : (1984) 2 SCC 439 .
249. Abdul Wahid v UOI, AIR 1982 Del 291 .
250. Kalyani Sundaram v ASST Controller of Estate Duty, AIR 1989 SC 1654 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC

635 .
251. P Ram Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1990 AP 76 .
252. Amali English Medium H School v Govt of AP, AIR 1993 AP 338 (FB). Appointment of

Commission of Inquiry after court order, the Govt not allowed to go against the Report, State v
Janmohan Das, AIR 1993 Ori 180 .
253.

S. Veneer and Saw Mills, Dimapur v State of Nagaland, AIR 1995 Gau 37 , following

Amalgamated Coalﬁelds Ltd v Janapada Sabha, Chhindwara, AIR 1961 SC 964 : (1962) 1 SCR 1
and Indira Bai v Nand Kishore, (1990) 4 SCC 668 : AIR 1991 SC 1055 .
254. Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder Laha, (1892) 19 IA 203 , 219 : 20 Cal 296, 314, quoted

in Niharbala Debi v Shasdhar Ray Chaudhuri, (1930) 58 Cal 358 , 364.
255. Rajnarain Bose v Universal Life Assurance Co, (1881) 7 Cal 594 . The principle of estoppel

will come into play only in case the plaintiff had accepted an agreement and had acted in
accordance with that in detriment to his own interest, State of Haryana v Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd,
AIR 1996 Del 198 .
256. Vishnu v Krishnan, (1883) 7 Mad 3 (FB); Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder Laha, (1892) 19

IA 203 : 20 Cal 296; Tek Chand v Mussammat Gopal Devi, (1912) PR No. 46 of 1212 (Civil).
257. Narsingdas v Rahimanbai, (1904) 28 Bom 440 : 6 Bom LR 440; Jhinguri Tewari v Durga,

(1885) 7 All 878 (FB); Hem Nolini v Isolyne Sarojbashini, AIR 1962 SC 1471 : 1962 Supp (3) SCR
294 .
258. UOI v KP Mandal, AIR 1958 Cal 415 .
259. National High School, Madras v Education Tribunal, AIR 1992 SC 717 : 1992 Supp (3) SCC

106 . See also Rajendra Kumar Arya v New India Assurance Co Ltd, AIR 1992 Cal 110 , prolonged
negotiations about an insurance claim with no indication that the claim would be refuted,
disclaimer of the claim not allowed.
260. Arun Kumar v RBI, AIR 1981 Del 314 .
261. Muhammad Shaﬁ v Muhammad Said, (1929) 52 All 248 ; Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder

Laha, (1892) 19 IA 203 : 20 Cal 296.
262. Kazi Syed Karimuddin v Meherunisa Begum, (1947) Nag 341; Muddanappa v Chandramma,

AIR 1965 SC 1812 : (1965) 3 SCR 283 ; Abdul Dadamiya v Jagannath Murlidhar, AIR 2002 Bom
413 , a buyer of property did not part with his money and thus, having not acted on the basis of
the representations made to him, he was not allowed to say that the seller was bound by his
representations.
263. Mahalaxmi Rice Mills v State of WB, AIR 1996 Cal 162 .
264. Anil Bajaj (Dr) v PG Institute of Medical Education and Research, AIR 2002 SC 2414 .
265. Jethabhai v Nathabhai, (1904) 28 Bom 399, 407 : 6 Bom LR 428; Rivett Carnac v New

Mofussil Co, (1901) 26 Bom 54 : 3 Bom LR 846; Parshottam v Secretary of State, (1937) 39 Bom
LR 1257 .
266. Ma Pyu v Maung Po Chet, (1916) 2 UBR (1914-1916) 148.
267. AAA Film Motion Picture Producers v UOI, AIR 1999 Delhi 178 .
268. Honapa v Narsapa, (1898) 23 Bom 406; Mohori Bibee v Dharmodas Ghose, (1903) 30 IA 114

: 5 Bom LR 421: 30 Cal 539; Ranchhodlal v Secretary of State, (1910) 13 Bom LR 92 : 35 Bom
182; Jacks & Co v Joosab Mohomed, (1923) 48 Bom 38 : 25 Bom LR 1170.
269. Deva Prasad Reddy v Kamini Reddy, AIR 2000 Kant 356 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
270. Nawab Zakia Begam v The Lucknow Improvement Trust, (1937) 13 Luck 192 ; Rai Sunil

Kumar v Thakur Singh, AIR 1984 Pat 80 , where the truth of the matter was known to both
parties.
271. UOI v M Bhaskaran, AIR 1996 SC 686 : 1995 Supp (4) SCC 100 .
272. Cairncross v Lorimer, (1860) 3 Macq. HLC 827.
273. Harbans Lal v Divl Supdt, Central Rly, AIR 1960 All 164 .
274. Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder Laha, (1892) 19 IA 203 , 215 : 20 Cal 296, 311,

overruling Ganga Sahai v Hira Singh, (1880) 2 All 809 (FB); Vishnu v Krishnan, (1883) 7 Mad 3
(FB); Assudibai v Haribai, (1943) Kar 227 .
275. Per Lord Esher, MR, in Seton v Lafone, (1887) 19 QBD 68 , 70.
276. Sarat Chunder Dey v Gopal Chunder Laha, (1892) 19 IA 203 : 20 Cal 296.
277. Gajanan v Nilo, (1904) 6 Bom LR 864 ; Gaura Dei Musammat v Raja Mohammad Yasin Ali

Khan, (1934) 10 Luck 361 .
278. Mowji v National Bank of India, (1900) 2 Bom LR 1041 : 25 Bom 499; Rani Mewa Kuwar v

Rani Hulas Kuwar, (1874) 1 IA 157 .
279. Raghava Rajagopala Chari v State of Assam, AIR 1965 Assam, 109. Operation of law cannot

be prevented by estoppel. CIT v BN Bhattacharjee, 118 ITR 461 : 1979 Tax LR 1180 ; Elson
Machines Pvt Ltd v Collector of Central Excise, AIR 1989 SC 617 ; (1989) 9 ECC 80 : 1989 Supp
(1) SCC 671. There cannot be any estoppel against settled principles of law, nor against any
person who is not the maker of the statement, C Doctor & Co Ltd v Belwal Spinning Mills Ltd, AIR
1995 All 19 . The constitutional validity of admission rules was allowed to be challenged though
they had been there for 29 years, Ekta Arvind Kumar Shah v HS. Shah, AIR 1993 Guj 90 . See also
Dugar Tea Industries Pvt Ltd v State of Assam, AIR 2016 SC 4696 , para 21.
280. CIT v BN Bhattacharjee, AIR 1979 SC 1725 at 1738 : (1979) 4 SCC 121 .
281. Halsbury's Law of England, para 1515 (Vol 4).
282. Maritime Electric Co Ltd v General Dairies Ltd, 1937 AC 610 ; Hudson v Hudson, (1948) 1 All

ER 748 (PC).
283. Jagwant Singh v Silan Singh, (1899) 21 All 285 ; UOI v KS Subramaniam, AIR 1989 SC 662 :

1989 Supp (1) SCC 331 : 1989 SCC (L&S) 404, party not estopped from pleading against earlier
admissions made in court on a wrong apprehension of law.
284. Union Carbide Corp v UOI, AIR 1992 SC 248 : (1991) 4 SCC 584 .
285. Dunlop India Ltd v UOI, AIR 1977 SC 597 : (1976) 2 SCC 241 ; Hamir Ram v Varisng Ramal,

AIR 1998 Guj 165 , application in administrative law explained.
286. Shanker Lal v Narendra, AIR 1967 All 405 .
287. Dhanraj v Soni Bai, (1925) 27 Bom LR 837 : 52 IA 231: 52 Cal 482.
288. Ravinder Sharma v State of Punjab, AIR 1995 SC 277 : (1995) 1 SCC 138 ;. Jagdish Chandra

Mitra v District Municipal Election Oﬃcer, 1996 AIHC 101 (Cal), however, the case involved pure
question of law and there can be no estoppel against statute. Service of notice and its receipt
do not amount to submission to jurisdiction.
289. MR Jayaswal v Secretary, State Board of Technical Education and Training, AIR 1998 AP 263

.
290. Narayan v Venkatacharya, (1904) 28 Bom 408 : 6 Bom LR 434; Krishnaji v Rajmal, (1899) 24

Bom 360 : 2 Bom LR 25; Shanti Prasad v Kalinga Tubes Ltd, AIR 1962 Ori 202 . Jagannatha
Swamy Varu v Vana Venugopalanaidu, 1996 AIHC 1397 (AP), relying on Veeramma v Appayya, AIR
1957 AP 965 .
291. Isabella Johnson v MA Sasai, AIR 1991 SC 993 : (1991) 1 SCC 494 .
292. Phoneix Impex v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1998 Raj 100 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
293. Indira Bai v Nand Kishore, AIR 1991 SC 1055 : (1990) 4 SCC 668 .
294. Munshi Singh v Sohan Bai, AIR 1989 SC 1179 : (1989) 2 SCC 265 .
295. Ghulam Md. v State of J&K, AIR 1999 J&K 74. Lords Food Products (India) Pvt Ltd v Orissa

State Provincial Corp, AIR 2002 Ori 156 , the borrower unit participated in auction proceedings
without any objection to the rejection of the proposal at Branch level.
296. Hari Singh v State, 2000 Cr LJ 1964 (Delhi).
297. Tamil Nadu Housing Board. v Sea Shore Apartments Owners Welfare Assn., AIR 2008 SC

1151 : (2008) 3 SCC 21 .
298. Delhi Development Authority v Joint Action Committee of SFS Flats, AIR 2008 SC 1343 :

(2008) 2 SCC 672 .
299. G Ram v Delhi Development Authority, AIR 2003 Delhi 120 .
300. Kailash Chand Poddar v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2008 NOC 1497 (Raj).
301. Jagabandhu Saha v Radha Krishna Pal, (1909) 36 Cal 920 ; Abdul Aziz v Kanthu Mallik,

(1910 39 Cal 512 ; Dhanu Pathak v Sona Koeri, (1936) 15 Pat 589 (SB); Ma Mo E v Ma Kun Hlaing,
(1941) Ran 309; Workmen v Hindustan Lever Ltd, AIR 1984 SC 516 : (1984) 1 SCC 728 ;
Yamunabai Anantrao Adhav v AS Adhav, AIR 1988 SC 644 : 1988 Cr LJ 703 : 1988 Mah LJ 335 :
(1988) 1 Ker LT 416 ; Aliakutty Paul v State, AIR 1995 Ker 291 ; Bengal Iron Corp v CTO, AIR 1993
SC 2414 : (1994) Supp (3) SCC 310 ; National Textile Corp v Bank of Madura Ltd, AIR 1998 Mad
113 , the remand of a case in violation of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisational) Act,
1974 was held to be not binding. It created no estoppel.
302. Shridhar v Babaji, (1914) 16 Bom LR 586 : 38 Bom 709; Ahmed Bhauddin v Babu, (1929) 31

Bom LR 778 : 53 Bom 676; Mathra Parshad v State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 745 : 1962 Supp (1)
SCR 913 ; BN Ellias & Co v Fifth Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1965 Cal 166 ; Gopi Krishna v Anil Bose,
AIR 1965 Cal 59 . The course of legislation cannot be prevented by estoppel. Amrit Bhikaji Kale v
Kashinath Janardan, AIR 1983 SC 643 : (1983) 3 SCC 437 : 1983 Mah LJ 711 . Estoppel not
available against statute, Vishnu Kumar Khatar v State, AIR 1995 Pat 168 (FB). Change of salestax law with retrospective effect, refund due under changed law, recoverable, no question of
estoppel or res judicata, Comorin Match Industries Pvt Ltd v State of TN, AIR 1996 SC 1916 :
(1996) 4 SCC 281 .
303. Hackbridge Hewitic & Easun Ltd v Provident Fund Inspector, Madras, 1992 Cr LJ 303 (Mad).

See also Ramesh Narang v Rama Narang, 1995 Cr LJ 1685 (Bom). National Oxygen Ltd v TN
Electricity Board, AIR 1996 Mad 229 , not compelled to act against the provisions of a statute.
304. Barrow's Case, (1880) 14 Chapter D 432, 441; Madras Hindu Mutual Beneﬁt Permanent Fund

v Ragava Chetti, (1895) 19 Mad 200.
305. Johri v Mahila Drupati, AIR 1991 MP 340 .
306. Harda Municipality v H Electric Supply Co, AIR 1964 MP 101 ; Municipal Board v Mahendra

Singh Chawla, AIR 1982 SC 1493 : (1982) 3 SCC 331 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 19 : 1982 Lab IC 1783 .
307. Jit Ram Shiv Kumar v Haryana, AIR 1980 SC 1285 : (1981) 1 SCC 11 . Relying upon, Excise

Commr., UP v Ram Kumar, AIR 1976 SC 2237 : 1976 Supp SCR 532; N Ramanatha Pillai v Kerala,
(1974) 1 SCR 515 : AIR 1973 SC 2641 and State of Kerala v Gwalior Rayon, (1974) 1 SCR 671 :
AIR 1973 SC 2734 .
308. MI Builders v Radhey Shyam Sahu, AIR 1999 SC 2468 : (1999) 6 SCC 464 .
309. Jallandhar Improvement Trust v Sampuran Singh, AIR 1999 SC 1347 : (1999) 3 SCC 494 :

1999 (2) SC 598 .
310. Monte De Guirim Edul Soc. v UOI, AIR 1980 Goa 1 , Minority institutions; Preethi Srinath v

Saleedion Com Govt and Pvt Med College, AIR 1981 Kant 58 , no reservation made for
sportsmen. KR. Shenoy v Udipi Municipality, AIR 1974 SC 2177 : (1994) 2 SCC 506 , exercise of
statutory power. The right of a Road Transport Corpn. to allot routes to a fresh lot of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
unemployed graduates cannot be questioned because the earlier allottees had been allowed
good time. Krishan Gopal Dixit v SRTC, AIR 1986 MP 103 .
311. Filter Co v Sales Tax Commissioner AIR 1986 SC 626 : (1986) 2 SCC 103 .
312. Plasmac Machine Mfg. Co P Ltd v Collector of Central Excise, AIR 1991 SC 999 : 1991 Supp

(1) SCC 57 . The authority sealing the cinema tickets is not bound by the tax mentioned on the
tickets and is not estopped from raising any demand of tax more than what is speciﬁed thereon,
Theatre, Sangamesh v Entertainment Tax Dy. Commr., Kurnool, AIR 1993 AP 137 (FB).
313. Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti v Shree Gopal Products, AIR 2009 Raj 121 (DB).
314. Divisional Forest Oﬃcer v CC Aravindan, AIR 2000 Ker 121 .
315. Dinbai Petit v Dominion of India, (1950) 53 Bom LR 229 ; S.B Noronah v Prem Kumari, AIR

1980 SC 193 : (1980) 1 SCC 52 ; Subhash Kumar v R.C. Chibba, (1988) 4 SCC 709 : AIR 1989 SC
458 where the tenants were not estopped from challenging the validity of a lease under Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958; Indra Bahadur Singh v Bar Council of UP, AIR 1986 All 56 , no estoppel
against statute. Kakubhai & Co v Nathmal, AIR 1980 Bom 25 , proceeding about validity of lease
withdrawn, no estoppel against proceeding again. 3 ACES, Hyderabad v MC. of Hyderabad, AIR
1995 AP 17 , approval of a building map plan does not create an estoppel against the authority.
The building can be pulled if the construction was against regulations provided that the
deviation from prescribed regulations endangered public safety but not if it is of minor nature.
Karnataka State Road Transport Corp v Karnataka State Transport Appellate Tribunal, AIR 1995
Kant 103 , renewal of a road permit in violation of statute, no estoppel against renewing
authority. Adhartal Shiksha Samiti v State of MP, AIR 2001 MP 3 , allotment of land for school
building on concessional rate, without taking approval of the State Government, as required
under the statute, was held to be not capable of creating any estoppel against cancellation of
the allotment.
316. Olga Tellis v Bom MC, AIR 1986 SC 180 . Followed in Ammini EJ v UOI, AIR 1995 Ker 252

(SB).
317. Vasantkumar Radhakisan Vora v Board of Trustee of the Port of Bombay, AIR 1991 SC 14 :

(1991) 1 SCC 761 , an ultra vires promise in this case by the estate manager to allot premises.
318. Sukumar Chakraborty v Asst. Assessor-Collector, AIR 1991 Cal 181 .
319. Ramanathan v Ranganathan, (1917) 40 Mad 1134. No conduct or agreement can amount

to waiver of the right to insist upon the law of limitation. Ajab Enterprises v Jayant Vegoiles and
Chemicals Ltd, AIR 1991 Bom 35 . Where ceiling was retrospectively imposed by the statute
upon the incentive granted to industries, promissory estoppel could not be invoked, Sree
Rayalaseema Alkalies & Allied Chemical Ltd v Govt of AP, AIR 1993 AP 278 (FB). Bankey Bihari v
Surya Narain, AIR 1999 All 167 , a document under the title of family arrangement in fact
involved partition of family property and, therefore, required a registered deed. The arrangement
was acted upon by all members drawing their respective beneﬁts. When it was ultimately
questioned, it was held that estoppel was not applicable because it would defeat the purposes
of the Registration Act and the Stamp Act.
320. Mahesh Kumar Tewari v RD Vishwavidaya, AIR 1989 MP 292 .
321. Pundalik Vishram Patil v Bandu Chintaman Sonar, AIR 1991 SC 486 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 590

.
322. Sidi Nitinkumar v Gujarat University, AIR 1991 Guj 43 , right of a candidate belonging to

reservation category to seek admission in general category.
323. Tamil Nadu Electricity Board v Status Spinning Mills Ltd, AIR 2008 SC 2838 : (2008) 7 SCC

353 , industries which had started production before the cut-off date and had applied for
connection, were held entitled to the beneﬁt of concession.
324. Sigma Agencies Pvt Ltd v PV Thomas, AIR 1991 Ker 102 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
325. Darshan Singh v Kartar Singh, 2007 (4) CCC 344 (P&H).
326. Anees Ahmed v University of Delhi, AIR 2002 Delhi 440 . Association of Independent Schools,

Bihar v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 Pat 9 , requisitioning of accommodation of private schools or
state managed schools for holding a convention of newly elected members of Panchayat
Samitis was held to be violative of Articles 300-A, 19(1)(d), 21, 25 of the Constitution, the fact
that school managements had not protested against it did not create an estoppel against them
by acquiescence. Kanchan Bhai Kanbhai v MC of Vadodra, AIR 2002 Guj 31 , written petition to
question the validy of acquisition of property in public interest (for establishing the press of a
daily newspaper was allowed because the facts showed that such installation of press was
done at the site. Kamala Solvent v Manipal Finance Corp Ltd, AIR 2001 Mad. 440 , under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the High Court is vested with jurisdiction to pass interim
orders to safeguard and protect the interests of the parties but not to challenge the
appointment of an arbitrator and the venue. Pritam Kaur v Harpal Singh, AIR 2001 P&H 300, right
to question the validity of a will is a statutory right. An agreement not to exercise that right by
raising objections to validity or otherwise did not create any estoppel. The right to question
validity remained available. Star Diamond Co v UOI, AIR 1987 SC 179 : (1986) 4 SCC 246 , an
earlier letter issued by the Government did not have the effect of creating any estoppel against
the subsequent letter issued by the Government for the purpose of clarifying the correct
position. Kennedy Sigamani v Kiruba Gnanaseeli Prema, AIR 2000 Mad 357 , concurrent ﬁnding
by courts below on the basis of oaths taken by both parties that they were married was not
disturbed, though it was a question of law but it did not mean that there could be an estoppel
against a statute.
327. Suresh Saggar v Vijay Saggar, AIR 2010 P&H 104.
328. Madala Venkata Akshay v Comedk Uget, AIR 2016 NOC 219 (Kar).
329. Hameed v Jameela, AIR 2010 Ker 44 .
330. Madhumuri Surya Narayana Raja v State, 2003 Cr LJ (NOC) 75 (Kant).
331. Vilas Shankar Donode v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2008 Bom 10 (DB).
332. Jones Brothers (Holloway) Ld. v Woodhouse, (1923) 2 KB 117 ; Delhi University v Ashok

Kumar, AIR 1968 Del 131 .
333. Jokhomull Mehera v Saroda Prosad Dey, (1908) 7 Cal LJ 604 ; Dhanpat Rai v Guranditta Mal,

(1921) 2 Lah 258.
334. Syed Abdul Khader v Rami Reddy, AIR 1979 SC 553 : (1979) 2 SCC 495 ; Sailala v Ngurtaiveli,

AIR 1980 Gau 70 .
335. Rahaman Bhai v State of Orissa, AIR 1989 Ori 233 .
336. DC Oswal v VK Subhiah, AIR 1992 SC 184 : (1992) 1 SCC 370 .
337. Roopi Bai v Mahaveer, AIR 1994 Raj 133 .
338. Shanimahatma Swamy v C Gangaiah, AIR 1994 Kant 303 .
339. Ferro Alloys Corp Ltd v APS.E Board, AIR 1993 AP 183 .
340. Power Control and Appliances Co v Sumeet Machines Pvt Ltd, AIR 1993 Mad 120 .
341. Rukmini Amma Saradamma v Kallayani Sulochana, AIR 1993 SC 1616 : (1993) 1 SCC 499 ;

Ganpat Lal v State, AIR 1999 Raj 225 , land donated by owner to Government for establishing
school, a further area of adjoining land taken from him for expansion of school and another area
of land was allotted to him in lieu thereof. This allotment was cancelled by the Government after
13 years and without any notice to the allottee. The cancellation was held to be illegal.
Hindustan Copper Ltd v Rana Builders Ltd, AIR 1999 Cal 229 , enforcement of bank guarantee,
bank honoured it. The amount had to be returned subsequently on appeal being ﬁled. The
plaintiff was held not debarred from ﬁling an appeal because of acquiescence or waiver.
342. UOI v Kashinath Mahto, AIR 1998 Pat. 100 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
343. Kamakshi Builders v Ambedkar Educational Society, AIR 2007 SC 2191 : (2007) 12 SCC 27 .
344. B Himmatlal Agarwal v Maharashtra State Power Generation Co Ltd, Nagpur, AIR 2014 Bom

108 (para 34) (DB). See also Ashok Thakur v State of HP, AIR 2014 HP 30 (para 23) (DB).
345. Rishi Kiran Logistics Pvt Ltd v Board of Trustees of Kandla Port Trust, AIR 2014 SC 3358

(para 25).
346. Amar Nath v Kewla Devi, (2014) 11 SCC 273 (para 16).
347. Ku Tarang Kapil v State of MP, AIR 2008 NOC 184 (MP).
348. BMF Beltings Ltd v Chairman TNEC, AIR 2007 NOC 529 (Mad-DB).
349. Shashikala Devi v Central Bank of India, AIR 2015 SC 2434 (para 14).
350. RCC (Sales) Pvt Ltd v ES.I Corp, AIR 2015 AP 134 (para 26) (FB).
351. Phool Patti v Ram Singh, (2015) 3 SCC 164 (para 28). See also Rajesh Vig v Shiv Prakash

Mundra, AIR 2015 Ori 161 , para 11.
352. Prabhakar v Joint Director Sericulture Department, AIR 2016 SC 2984 , para 34. See also

PEPSU Road Transport Corp v S.K Sharma, AIR 2016 SC 3662 , para 17.
353. Government of Gujarat v RL Kalathia, AIR 2003 Guj 185 .
354. Khushwant Singh v Maneka Gandhi, AIR 2002 Del. 58 .
355. Nand Prakash Vohra v State of HP, AIR 2000 HP 65 .
356. Municipal Council, Pali v State, AIR 2000 Raj 157 ; Badam Singh v UOI, AIR 1998 Del. 162 ,

land acquisition, challenge after 20 years, compensation was also accepted, not allowed.
Girdharilal M Pittie v AAIFR, AIR 1998 Del 400 , negligence in obtaining copy, delay in ﬁling
appeal, no condonation.
357. Managing Director, Rajkot Homeopathic Medical College, AIR 1998 Guj 161 .
358. Syndicate Bank v R Veeranna, AIR 2003 SC 2122 .
359. Enkon P Ltd v Bijoli Studio Pvt Ltd, AIR 2008 NOC 179 (Cal-DB).
360. Sidde Gowda v Sidda Naika, (1952) Mys 384.
361. Murali Krishnan v A Nagarajan, AIR 1991 Mad 108 .
362. New Marine Coal Co v UOI, AIR 1964 SC 152 : (1964) 2 SCR 859 .
363. Brajeshware Peshakar v Budhanuddi, (1880) 6 Cal 268 ; Tehilram Girdharidas v Kashibai,

(1908) 10 Bom LR 403 : 33 Bom 53.
364. Kelvinator of India Ltd v AF Bagai, AIR 1994 NOC 297 (Del); Noor Md. v SH Amin, 1996 AIHC

2550 (Ker), position taken under a settlement deed.
365. Scarf v Jardine, (1882) 7 App Cas 345 , 360.
366. Probodh Lal Kundu v Harish Chandra Dey, (1904) 9 Cal WN 309; MP Rajan v Kerala State

Election Commission, AIR 1999 Ker 399 , members of the Panchayat who approached the
Election Commission to determine whether they were in fact disqualiﬁed. They were held bound
by their choice of the remedy. Purshottam v Bhagwat Sharan, AIR 2003 MP 128 , the plaintiff
claimed property as coparcenary in a suit for partition. He had also claimed a part of the
property under a will in a suit against the tenant. The doctrine of election was held to be not
attracted.
367. NSV Ramanuj Jeer Swamigal v State of TN, 1996 AIHC 204 (Mad).
368. Cauvery Coffee Traders v Hornor Resources (International) Co Ltd, (2011) 10 SCC 420 . See

also State of Punjab v Dhanjit Singh Sandhu, (2014) 15 SCC 144 , para 26.
369. Ambu Nair v Kelu Nair, (1933) 35 Bom LR 807 : 60 IA 266 : 56 Mad 737.
370. PJ Kurien v Renjitha, 2000 Cr LJ 1731 (Ker).
371. Udraj Raj Singh v Ram Bahal Singh, (1946) All 549 ; see also State of Bihar v BL Agarwalla,

AIR 1966 Pat 410 ; IT Commr., Mysore v Canara Bank, AIR 1967 SC 417 : (1967) 1 SCR 859 . For
estoppel by pleadings see Jai Kishan v Mumtaz Beg, AIR 1984 SC 1890 : (1984) SCC 623 ; M

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Printer v Mareel Martins, AIR 2002 Kant 191 , a person in whose name the purchase of a property
was effected contended that he alone paid for but some others contended that he was a part
benami and that the latter also contributed towards the purchase price, the Court said that the
purchaser having taken up the position that he was the sole buyer was estopped from going
against his stand. The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was not applicable. Raghu
Forwarding Agency v UOI, AIR 2000 Gau 27 , railway asking for reweighment of the consignment
was held to be not bound by the result of reweighment.
372. BS Lail v Sardar Mal, AIR 1964 MP 124 ; Bhopal Singh v Chatter Singh, AIR 2000 P&H 34,

withdrawal of a suit and its settlement were the necessary consequences of the opposite
party's statement, the latter was held estopped from resiling from his statement.
373. Bijendra Nath Srivastawa v Mayank Srivastawa, AIR 1994 SC 2562 : (1994) 6 SCC 117 .

Radheshyam Palod v Shantidevi, AIR 1994 NOC 191 (MP), estopped from challenging
amendment after accepting costs for the same.
374. UOI v Binani Consultants Pvt Ltd, AIR 1995 Cal 234 .
375. Mario Shaw v Martin Fernandez, AIR 1996 Bom 116 .
376. GM Telephones v VG Desai, AIR 1996 SC 2062 : (1996) 7 SCC 444 ; Jagdishbhai Mafatlal

Patel v State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 Guj 320 , estoppel by acquiescence arose when the validity of
bye- laws was challenged at a belated stage and not when they were ﬁrst put in question.
377. Nand Construction Co v Regional Manager, Oriental Ins Co, AIR 2002 Raj 272 .
378. Pandurang Krishnaji v Markandeya Tukaram, (1921) 49 Cal 334 : 24 Bom LR 557 : 49 IA 16.
379. Kandasami v Nagalinga, (1912) 36 Mad 564.
380. Shori Lal v Damodar Das, (1937) 18 Lah 783.
381. Annadurai v Mayazaghu, AIR 2001 NOC 44 (Mad) : 2001 AIHC 1677 .
382. Mahboob Sahab v Syed Ismail, AIR 1995 SC 1205 : (1995) 3 SCC 693 .
383. Parsomtad Gir v Narbada Gir, (1899) 26 IA 175 : 1 Bom LR 700 : 21 All 505.
384. Krishnabai C Kadam v Wellworth Developers, AIR 2001 Bom. 9 .
385. Mowji v National Bank of India, (1900) 2 Bom LR 1041 : 25 Bom 499.
386. State of Rajasthan v Surendra Mohnot, (2014) 14 SCC 77 (para 17).
387. Sidramappa v State of Karnataka, AIR 2014 Kar 100 (para 10) (FB).
388. Subba Rao v Jagannadha Rao, AIR 1967 SC 591 .
389. Gokul Prasad v Saran Das Mahant, (1946) 22 Luck 270 ; AP Sarpanchs Assn v Govt of AP,

AIR 2001 AP 474 , directions were issued by the Court on consensus of parties as to
identiﬁcation of backward classes on the basis of voters' lists. The Court did not sustain the
objection that the process would result absurdity because no door to door survey was
conducted.
390. Y Sleebachen v State of Tamil Nadu, (2015) 5 SCC 747 , para 23.
391. Bakshi Ram v Brij Lal, AIR 1995 SC 395 : 1994 Supp (3) SCC 198 .
392. Annapurna Industries v Syndicate Bank, AIR 1993 Kant 279 .
393. Waverly Jute Mills v Raymon & Co, AIR 1963 SC 90 : (1963) 3 SCR 209 .
394. Hindustan Cables Ltd v Bombay Metal Co, AIR 1981 Cal 350 . Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd v

Motorola India P Ltd, AIR 2009 SC 357 : (2009) 2 SCC 337 , the High Court appointed an
arbitrator on the application of the respondent. The appellant did not raise any objection prior to
the ﬁrst hearing. The appellant was deemed to have waived the right of objection.
395. Mohinder Pal Mohindra v Delhi Admn, AIR 1989 Del 270 .
396. Kishandas Parasram Ahuja v Bhagchand Dwarkadas Nagdev, AIR 1991 MP 309 .
397. Noble Engineering Works v HP State Electricity Board, AIR 1994 HP 153 . Where a party

participated in the proceedings of division of assets and liabilities of a ﬁrm, he could not be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
allowed to make an objection that the assets and liabilities were not the part of reference and
division was beyond the scope of arbitration. RC Bhalla v NC Bhalla, AIR 1996 Del 24 . Mokha
Light House v Indian Tourism Development Corp, AIR 2003 NOC 9 (Del), a clause in the
agreement gave power to the chief engineer or managing director to appoint arbitrator. No
objections raised to the appointment. No objection was allowed to be raised after the death of
the arbitrator.
398. Shiv Lal v Food Corp of India, AIR 1997 Raj 93 .
399. Nirma Ltd v Lurgi Energic Und Entsorgung GmbH, AIR 2003 Guj 145 .
400. Soyabean Processors Assn. of India v Assardas Wadhwani (Constructions) Pvt Ltd, AIR 2010

MP 179 .
401. AElumalai v Administrator-cum-Lt. Governor of Pondicherry, AIR 2001 Mad 265 .
402. Inder Sain Mittal v Housing Board, Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 1157 .
403. International Security to Intelligence Agencies Ltd v MCD, AIR 2001 Del. 283 .
404. Lords Food Products (India) Pvt Ltd v Orissa State Financial Corp, AIR 2002 Ori. 156 .
405. Vaish Bros & Co v UOI, AIR 1999 Del. 105 .
406. University of Cochin v NS. Kanjoojamma, AIR 1997 SC 2083 : (1997) 5 JT 379 .
407. Dhananjay Malik v State of Uttaranchal, AIR 2008 SC 1913 : (2008) 4 SCC 171 .
408. Saiyid Mohd. Mohsin v Saiyid Ainul Husain, (1946) 22 Luck 283 .
409. Uda v Jagdish Narayan, (1963) Raj 652 ; Hari Nath v Raghu Nath, AIR 1998 HP 28 , earlier

judgment of the High Court holding that the jurisdiction of the civil court to decide the disputed
question of title to the suit land was not barred by the HP Land Revenue Act. The same
jurisdiction could not be challenged again in a civil proceeding. State of Gujarat v Vishnu
Automobiles, AIR 1999 Guj 92 , an order against a statute, an appeal against such order not
barred, it being without jurisdiction. IFB Automotive Seating and System Ltd v UOI, AIR 2003 Cal
80 , question of jurisdiction, no estoppel by reason of ﬁling of papers.
410. Abdul Rahiman Musaliar v TR Muhammed Sahib, AIR 2003 Ker 84 .
411. Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd EdnVol 17, pp 215-216; Dhiyan Singh v Jugal Kishore,

(1953) 1 All 25 .
412. Partha Talukdar v Mina Hardinge, AIR 1993 Cal 118 ; Papanna v Madappa, AIR 1993 Kant 24

, no evidence of exclusion from family, no estoppel against claiming family rights.
413. NA Md Kasim v Sulochana, AIR 1995 SC 1624 : (1995) Supp 3 SCC 128.
414. Ram Shanker Rastogi v Vinay Rastogi, AIR 1991 All 255 .
415. Veena Kalia v Jatinder Nath Kalia, AIR 1996 Del 54 ; Jawan v Mewa Singh, AIR 2001 P&H

344, matters of partition of agricultural land between family members not allowed to be raised
in an application by tenants for grant of proprietary rights.
416. Joydel Kumar Biswas v Maduri Biswas, 1994 Cr LJ 3342 (Cal).
417. Nazimunnisa Begum v Abdul Majeeth, 1995 Cr LJ 3156 (Mad); Bansidhar Mohanty v J

Mohanty, AIR 2002 Ori 182 , grant of maintenance to wife under the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956, she was estopped from claiming maintenance under section 125, CrPC.
Surendra Bhatia v Punam Bhatia, AIR 2001 Raj 338 , admission by the defendant in his written
statement that the deceased testator and the plaintiff were husband and wife. He also led
evidence to that effect. He was not allowed to retract the admission and raise the plea that there
was no marriage at all.
418. Kudupudi Lakshmi v Kudupudi Srikrishna, AIR 1999 AP 226 .
419. Anant Tukaram Nalawade v Sou. Latika Anant Nalwade, 2008 Cr LJ (NOC) 1291 (Bom.).
420. Krishna Chandra Ghosh v Rasik Lal Khan, (1916) 21 Cal WN 218.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
421. Deolie Chand v Nirban Singh, (1879) 5 Cal 253 ; Vithabai v Malhar, (1937) 40 Bom LR 147 .

Renu Devi v Mahendra Singh, AIR 2003 SC 1608 , property coming to the share of certain family
members under a priliminary decree passed in a suit for partition. They donated it to their sons
and daughters. The donation being valid, they became estopped from denying its validity. When
the preliminary was conﬁrmed by the ﬁnal decree, it operated as feeding the grant by estopped.
422. State Bank of India, Kanpur v Deepak Malviya, AIR 1996 All 165 , distinguishing Syndicate

Bank v Devendra Karkera, AIR 1994 Kant 1 ; State Bank of India v Javed Akhtar Hassan, (1992) 2
Bank CLR 339 : AIR 1993 Bom 87 and RK Agency v Central Bank of India, 1992 (2) Bank CLR 453
: AIR 1992 Cal 193 .
423. Muhammad Hamid-ud-din v Shib Sahai, (1899) 21 All 309 ; Agarchand Gumanchand v

Rakhma Hanmant, (1888) 12 Bom 678; RMPAL Chettiar Firm v Ko Maung Gale, (1935) 13 Ran
346.
424. Forbes v Ralli, (1925) 27 Bom LR 860 : 52 IA 178: 4 Pat 707; Bansi Singh v Chakradhar

Prashad, (1938) 17 Pat 358.
425. Fobres v Ralli, ibid; Bahir Das Chakravarti v Nobin Chunder Pal, (1901) 29 Cal 306 . For an

example of estoppel by acceptance of rent see Narendra Bahadur Tandon v Shanker Lal, AIR
1980 SC 575 at 579 : (1980) 2 SCC 253 .
426. Ganpat Salt Works v State of Gujarat, AIR 1995 Guj 61 , applying the ratio laid down in Ved

Gupta v Apsara Theatres, Jammu, (1983) 4 SCC 323 : AIR 1983 SC 978 .
427. Gulzar Ali v Fida Ali, (1883) 6 All 24 .
428. Institute of Education Saraswathipuram v Sri Sowcar A Siddanna Endowment, AIR 2003 Kant

226 .
429. Anadi Mohan Rashit v Nalin Sarkar Street UP School, AIR 2002 Cal 22 .
430. Kumal Sheriff v Mi Shwe Ywet, (1875) SJLB 49.
431. Dharam Kunwar v Balwant Singh, (1908) 30 All 549 . See Muhammad Niaz-ud-din Khan v

Muhammad Umar Khan, (1906) PR No. 1 of 1907 (Civil).
432. Parvatibayamma v Ramakrishna Rau, (1894) 18 Mad 145.
433. Eros City Developers Pvt Ltd v State of Haryana, AIR 2008 NOC 1565 (P&H-DB).
434. State of Haryana v Vinod Oil and General Mills, (2014) 15 SCC 410 , paras 8 and 9. See also

Maheshwari Vani Prakashan Pvt Ltd v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2016 NOC 237 (Raj).
435. M Pyarali v M Sarifbhai, 1996 AIHC 716 (Guj), distinguishing BK Srinivasan v State of

Karnataka, AIR 1987 SC 1057 : (1987) 1 SCC 471 .
436. UOI v Kamal Kant Gupta, AIR 2002 J & K 115.
437. Narmada Bachan Andolan v State of MP, AIR 2008 MP 142 .
438. Ramvir Singh v UOI, (1993) Supp 2 SCC 262 : (1993) 24 ATC 255 .
439. Rakesh Ranjan Verma v State of Bihar, AIR 1992 SC 1348 : 1992 Supp (2) SCC 343 .
440. Central Airmen Selection Board v Surinder Kumar Das, AIR 2002 SC 240 .
441. Ariane Orgachem Pvt Ltd v Wyeth Employees Union, AIR 2016 1761, para 26.
442. Sociedale de Fomento Industries Ltd v Ravindranath Subraya Kamal, AIR 1999 Bom. 158 .
443. MD, TN Magnestite Ltd v S Manickam, AIR 2010 SC 3125 : (2010) 4 SCC 421 .
444. Prabharani Vishwakarma v State of MP, AIR 1999 MP 223 .
445. MR Narayanan v State, 2003 Cr LJ 1472 (Del).
446. CT Joseph v IV Philip, AIR 2001Ker 300.
447. UOI v C Ramaswamy, AIR 1997 SC 2055 : (1997) 4 SCC 647 .
448. State of UP v Girish Bihari, AIR 1997 SC 1354 : (1997) 4 SCC 362 .
449. Kamta Prasad v 2nd Addl. DJ, AIR 1997 All 201 .
450. Radha Kishan v Election Tribunal-cum-Sub-judge, AIR 2000 P&H 1.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
451. Basanti Das v Kamala Nayak, AIR 1999 Ori. 187 .
452. Dattaram S Vichare v Thukaram S Vichare, AIR 2000 SC 103 : (1999) 6 SCC 764 ; Kusum

Anand v Mohinder Kaur, AIR 1999 Del. 221 , tenancy through power of attorney holder, the owner
could not prove lack of authority.
453. Vijyabai v Shriram Tukaram, AIR 1999 SC 431 : (1999) 1 SCC 693 . PK Vasudeva v Zenobia

Bhanot, AIR 1999 SC 3322 : (1999) 7 SCC 377 , estoppel arising out of review petition against
eviction order.
454. AVGP Chettiar & Sons v JPalanisamy, AIR 2002 SC 2171 .
455. Kamla Rani v Texmaco Ltd, AIR 2007 Del 147 .
456. KS. Vijayalakshmi v Tahasildar, AIR 2000 Ker 262 .
457. UOI v Raj Brothers, AIR 2000 Gau 132 .
458. United India Insurance v Ajmer Singh, AIR 1999 SC 3027 : (1999) 6 SCC 400 .
459. Sk. Zahural Islam v Tanweer Jahan Begum, AIR 2000 Ori 140 .
460. Food Corp of India v Babulal Agarwal, AIR 1998 MP 23 .
461. Shivshankar Gurgar v Dilip, (2014) 2 SCC 465 (para 14).
462. Indo Canadian Transport Co v UOI, AIR 1999 P&H 130.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VIII ESTOPPEL
[s 116] Estoppel of tenant; and of licensee of person in possession.—
No tenant of immoveable property, [s 116.3] or person claiming through such tenant,
shall, during the continuance of the tenancy, [s 116.4] be permitted to deny that the
landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, [s 116.5] a title to such
immoveable property; and no person who came upon any immoveable property by the
license of the person in possession [s 116.6] thereof shall be permitted to deny that
such person had a title to such possession at the time when such license was given.

COMMENT
This section enumerates the principle of estoppel which is merely an extension of the
principle that no person is allowed to approbate and reprobate at the same time.463.
The section deals with estoppel of (1) a tenant, and (2) a licensee of the person in
possession. It is not exhaustive as containing all kinds of estoppel which may arise
between landlord and tenant. It postulates that there is a tenancy still continuing464.
and that it had its beginning at a given date from a given landlord, and provides that
neither a tenant nor any one claiming through a tenant shall be heard to deny that the
particular landlord had at that date a title to the property, and there is no exception even
for the case where the lease itself discloses the defect of title. In the ordinary case of a
lease intended as a present demise the section applies against the lessee, any
assignee of the term and a sub-lessee or licensee.465. Even before the Act came into
force, the Bombay High Court recognised an estoppel of this kind.466. After the Act
came into force, the Privy Council in Kumar Raj Krishna Prosad Lal v Baraboni Coal
Concern Ltd,467. declared that the section does not deal with all kinds of estoppel
which might arise between the landlord and tenant. The estoppel under this section is
wide enough to cover the case of a grantee who occupies and enjoys under a grant
disputing the grantor's title. Even a mere attornment creates an estoppel against the
tenant but that estoppel is not the same as is given statutory effect by this section.
There are other kinds of estoppel between tenant and landlord which fall outside the
scope of the section. Such an estoppel does not prevent the tenant from showing that
he attorned in ignorance of the fact that the landlord had no title. The test for the
purposes of this section is whether the attornment creates a new tenancy.468. This
happened in Adyanath Ghatak v Krishna Pd Singh,469. where the attornment was under
the threat of eviction by the title paramount and a new jural relationship of landlord and
tenant was created. The estoppel thereafter arises against the attorned landlord.470.
The rule of estoppel embodied in this section is not applicable to the case of a tenant
who purchases subsequently the share of a co-sharer in the leased property and ﬁles a
suit for partition on the basis of such purchase. The Supreme Court also pointed out in
this case that the rule of estoppel stated in this case is not exhaustive of the law of
estoppel.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The underlying policy of section 116 is that where a person has been brought into
possession as a tenant by the landlord and if that tenant is permitted to question the
title of the landlord at the time of the settlement, then that will give rise to extreme
confusion in the matter of relationship of the landlord and tenant and so the equitable
principle of estoppel has been incorporated by the legislature in the said section.471.
The doctrine of estoppel which operates between landlord and tenant has no
application to the same parties even while the tenancy exists, where the question of
title arises between them, not in the relation of landlord and tenant, but of vendor and
purchaser.472. Where the tenant was eager to pay the rent due to the transferee but
demanded certain documents from him proving his title, it was not a denial of the title
of the landlord.473. Where the executant of a lease deed and to whom the rent was paid
brought a suit for eviction, the tenant was estopped from challenging the title of the
landlord.474.
This section estops a defendant from challenging the title of the predecessors in
interest of the plaintiff from whom he takes the land. Apart from the section the
doctrine of estoppel applies even to a case where the tenant attorns to the landlord.
The estoppel to deny the title of the lessor continues to apply to the lessee until he has
given possession to the lessor on determination of the tenancy. If there has been
eviction by title paramount the lessee is not estopped from denying the title of the
lessor.475.
The estoppel of a tenant is founded upon contract between the tenant and his landlord.
It is one of the most noticeable instances of estoppel by contract. The estoppel
disappears if the landlord's title is extinguished subsequent to the inception of the
tenancy,476. or if there is eviction by title paramount.477.
Where a man having no title obtains possession of land under a demise by a man in
possession, who assumes to give him a title as tenant, he cannot deny his landlord's
title; as, for instance, if he takes for 21 years and he ﬁnds the landlord has only ﬁve
years' title, he cannot after the ﬁve years set up against the landlord the jus tertii,
though, of course, the real owner can always recover against him. That is a perfectly
intelligible doctrine. He took possession under a contract to pay the rent as long as he
held possession under the landlord, and to give it up at the end of the term to the
landlord, and having taken it in that way he is not allowed to say that the man whose
title he admits, and under whose title he took possession, has not a title.478. This is
estoppel by contract. The estoppel arises, not by reason of some fact agreed or
assumed to be true, but as the legal effect of carrying the contract into execution, of
the tenant taking possession of the property from the hand of the lessor.479. Where
occupants were occupying the land in question of the Gram Panchayat from time-totime on payment of speciﬁed rate of rent, they were held to be lessees under the Gram
Panchayat and they could not dispute the title of their landlord.480. An unauthorised
occupant of a property, subsequently converting his possession into that of a tenant by
executing a rent note, would be estopped from challenging the title of the landlord and
his right to recover rent or arrears of rent.481.

[s 116.1] Title paramount.—Exceptional situation.—
An exceptional situation is to be found in the following statement of the Supreme Court
in D Satyanarayana v P Jagdish:482. "During the continuance of the tenancy, the tenant
cannot acquire by prescription a permanent right of occupancy in derogation of the
landlord's title by mere assertion of such a right to the knowledge of the landlord. The
general rule is, however, subject to certain exceptions. Thus, a tenant is not precluded
from denying the derivative title of the persons claiming through the landlord. Similarly,
the estoppel under section 116 of the Evidence Act is restricted to the denial of the title

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
at the commencement of the tenancy. From this, the exception follows, that it is open
to the tenant even without surrendering possession to show that since the date of the
tenancy, the title of the landlord came to an end or that he was evicted by a paramount
title holder or that even though there was no actual eviction or dispossession from the
property, under a threat of eviction, he had attorned to the paramount title-holder. In
order to constitute eviction by title paramount, it has been established by decisions in
England and in India that it is not necessary that the tenant should be dispossessed or
even that there should be a suit for ejectment against him. It will be suﬃcient if there
was threat of eviction and if the tenant as a result of such threat attorns to the real
owner, he sets up such eviction by way of defence either to an action for rent or to a
suit in ejectment. If the tenant gives up possession voluntarily to the title-holder, he
cannot claim the beneﬁt of this rule. When the tenancy has been determined by
eviction by title paramount, no question of estoppel arises under section 116 of the
Evidence Act. The principle must equally apply when the tenant has attorned under a
threat of eviction by the title paramount and there comes into existence a new jural
relationship of landlord and tenant as between them. The law is thus stated in
Halsbury's Laws of England:483.
238. Eviction under title paramount, In order to constitute an eviction by a person
claiming under the title paramount, it is not necessary that the tenant should be put out
of possession, or that proceedings should be brought. A threat of eviction is suﬃcient,
and if the tenant, in consequence of the threat, attorns to the claimant, he may set this
up as an eviction by way of defence to an action for rent, subject to his proving the
evictor's title. There is no eviction, however, if the tenant gives up possession
voluntarily.
The ruling in the Satyanarayana484. case could not be applied to a case in which there
was no ﬁnding that the title of the landlord had come to an end. The corporation (which
was the other claimant of title over the suit property) had not established its title in any
proceedings in accordance with the law. In these circumstances, the exception to the
rule of estoppel embodied in section 116 could not be pleaded by the licencee.485.
However, in a case,486. the respondents had ﬁled a suit against appellants 1 to 4 for
ejectment and resumption of possession of the suit land. The case of the respondents
in the plaint was that the appellants had taken lease of the suit land from their common
ancestor, late Shri Dwaraka Pershad who had purchased the suit land from Nawab
Rayees Yar Bahadur. The further case of the respondents was that as the appellants
failed to pay any rent from 1986 and renewed the lease after 1986, the respondents
gave a notice to the appellants to vacate the suit land. Referring to the law laid down in
D Satyanarayana's case,487. that the tenant who has been let into possession by the
landlord cannot deny the landlord's title, however defective it may be, so long as he has
not openly surrendered possession by surrender to his landlord, it was held by Supreme
Court that although, there are some exceptions to this general rule, none of the
exceptions have been established by appellants in the instant case. Accordingly, the
appellants who were the tenants of respondents were required to surrender possession
to the respondents before they can challenge the title of the respondents.488.

[s 116.2] Whether tenant should be in possession of property to estop him
from denying his landlord's title.—
The Privy Council has laid down that a tenant is estopped from denying his landlord's
title whether he was or was not already in possession of the property at the time when
he took his lease.489. The Bombay,490. the Madras,491. and the Allahabad492. High
Courts have held similarly. The decisions of the Calcutta High Court are not unanimous

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
on the point.493. A tenant who wishes to dispute his landlord's title must not only see
that the tenancy has come to an end, but that the possession which was in him as a
tenant has been surrendered. A tenant who holds over and remains in possession
cannot be allowed to use that possession as a lever to support a case in which he
denies the landlord's title.494. The estoppel operates in the case of a tenant who
remains in possession even after the termination of the tenancy by notice to quit.495. A
tenant who has been let into possession cannot deny his landlord's title, however
defective it may be, so long as he has not openly restored possession by surrender.
Without openly and actually going out of the occupation, the tenant cannot deny the
landlord's title.496. Where a tenant denied the title of his landlady claiming himself to be
absolute owner of the premises in his occupation but could produce no evidence for
his claim, it was held that the denial was mala ﬁde and the tenant was liable to be
evicted on that ground.497.

[s 116.3] "Immoveable property".—
A several ﬁshery is considered immoveable property for the purposes of this
section.498.

[s 116.4] "During the continuance of the tenancy".—
A tenant is only precluded, during the continuance of the tenancy, from denying that the
landlord had "at the beginning of the tenancy" a title to the property, the subject of the
tenancy. The section is no bar to a tenant showing that his landlord had no title at a
date previous to the commencement of the tenancy. The words of the section leave it
open to the tenant to show that his landlord's title has subsequently expired.499. If the
term of lease has expired when a suit is brought, the tenant can dispute the title of the
landlord. Though the tenancy may be continuing, it is quite open to the tenant to plead
and show that his liability to pay the rent has wholly or partially or for a time ceased:
such a plea is really one of confession and avoidance (not denial), and has been held
available to the tenant.500. A tenant is estopped from challenging the title of the coowner landlord.501. A tenanted trust property was sold by public auction for recovery of
tax dues. It was purchased by the tenant himself. The sale was subsequently set aside.
The property came back to the trustees. They sued the tenant for recovery of
possession. It was held that the tenancy had ended when the tenant purchased the
property. He was not entitled to be restored to his tenancy after the sale to him had
been set aside.502. In a case, the suit ﬁled by a Club questioning the title of the Trust as
its lessor, was dismissed and nothing was given to show that it was restored. It was
held that the Club was not facing the threat of eviction from anybody except the Trust
and there was no question of a superior landlord. Therefore, section 116 was held to be
prima facie applicable and the Club was estopped from challenging the title of the
Trust.503.
Possession and permission being established, estoppel would bind the tenant "during
the continuance of the tenancy" and until he surrenders his possession. The words
"during the continuance of the tenancy" have been interpreted to mean during the
continuance of the possession that was received under the tenancy in question, and
the courts have repeatedly laid down the estoppel operates even after the termination
of the tenancy so that a tenant who had been let into possession, however defective it
may be, so long as he has not openly surrendered possession, cannot dispute the title
of the landlord at the commencement of the tenancy. The rule of estoppel is thus

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
restricted not only in extent but also in time i.e. restricted to the title of the landlord and
during the continuance of the tenancy; and by necessary implication, it follows that a
tenant not estopped, when he is under threat of eviction by the title paramount, from
contending that the landlord had no title before the tenancy commenced or that the
title of the landlord has since come to an end. The rule of estoppel embodied under
section 116 of the Evidence Act is that, a tenant who has been let into possession
cannot deny his landlord's title, however defective it may be, so long as he has not
openly restored.504.
Where the tenant has been evicted or has surrendered possession, the rule of estoppel
ceases to operate.505.

[s 116.5] "At the beginning of the tenancy".—
This section only provides that a tenant cannot be permitted to deny that the landlord
at the beginning of the tenancy had a title to the property. The section does not
disentitle a tenant to dispute the derivative title of one who claims, since the beginning
of the tenancy, to have become entitled to the reversion. In that sense the principle only
applies to the title of the landlord who "let the tenant in" as distinct from any other
person claiming to be reversioner.506. The tenancy under this section does not begin
afresh every time the interest of the tenant or of the landlord devolves upon a new
individual by succession or assignment.507.

[s 116.6] "No person who came upon any immoveable property by the license
of the person in possession".—
Where it is proved that the occupation by a person of immoveable property is by
permission of another, the occupier is estopped from denying that other's title.508.
"There is no distinction between the case of a tenant and that of a common licensee.
The licensee, by asking permission, admits that there is a title in the licensor. The law
would imply a tenancy under such circumstances".509. Where defendant No. 1 came
into possession of certain coal mining lands as a licensee of the plaintiff, and
subsequently defendant No. 2, as the assignee of, and claiming through, defendant No.
1, entered into possession thereof, it was held that the possession of the lands by both
the defendants must be attributed to the possession given to defendant No. 1 by the
plaintiff and they were both barred by this section from questioning the plaintiff's title
to those lands until they had surrendered possession thereof again to him.510. A tenant
surrendered his tenancy right in favour of a registered society without the consent of
the landlord. The tenant paid the rent in the name of the registered society. The
acceptance of such rent was held as not constituting tenancy in favour of the
society.511.

[s 116.7] Suit by a co-owner.—
A suit for eviction could not be dismissed on the ground that all the co-owners were not
impleaded. The court said that a suit for eviction at the behest of one of the co-owners
of the property in question is maintainable. The premise were handed over under
tenancy by the plaintiff co-owner and, therefore, the tenant was estopped from
challenging the right of the plaintiff co-owner.512. However, in a case it was urged by
the appellant that in the suit ﬁled by respondents they had not asserted that they were

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
ﬁling it as co-owners but they claimed that they were ﬁling it as executors/executrix.
Rejecting this contention, it was held by Supreme Court that if the status of the
respondents as co-owners of the property transpires clearly from the admitted facts of
the case, they cannot be denuded of the said status at the instance of some objections
by the tenants. Normally, a tenant's right to question the title of a landlord is very
limited in view of the rule of law which is codiﬁed in section 116 of the Evidence Act. A
co-owner of a property is an owner of the property, till the property is partitioned.513.

[s 116.8] Sub-lease or Sub-tenancy.—
In a case before the Calcutta High Court514. a sub-tenant questioned the right of the
tenant to ask for eviction. His ground was that the tenant had himself lost his right to
possession. The court said:515.
The point is well-settled by the authorities and is a hardened principle of law. A tenant, in so
far as he claims as a tenant, is not permitted to dispute the title of the landlord from whom
his tenancy and possession have been derived. On that basis, even a trespasser landlord
can maintain a suit for eviction as against his tenant and it would not be open to the tenant
to challenge the title of the landlord in any manner whatsoever. The reason for this long
standing rule is simple to understand. The tenant comes into possession from and by
reason of the landlord. As such, he shall hand over possession to that person from whom he
originally came to acquire it and shall not raise pleas or obstacles in that regard.
The expiry of the lease of the tenant was not a matter about which the sub-tenant could
enquire. There is a decision on another cause between the same parties. In this case a
head-lessee ﬁled a suit against his sub-lessee for eviction. The lease in favour of the headlessee expired while the suit was still pending. The lessor also ﬁled a suit against his lessee
as a result of which the sub-lease would also come to an end and the sub-lessee would be
evicted. The court said that the sub-lessee was entitled to deny the title of the head-lessee
in view of the subsequent developments, namely the termination of the lease. The actual
eviction of the head-lessee was not necessary to enable him to do so.516. Railways allotted
premises to one of its oﬃcers. He refused to vacate on retirement. The Railway's suit to
eject him was allowed. He was not entitled to deny the person from whom the premises
were taken.517.

[s 116.9] Transfer of premises by will.—
Where the landlord transferred his premises, which was under tenancy, to a legatee by
his will, the questioning of the title of the new owner by the tenant was held to be
wrongful. The tenant remained by the estoppel even when the premises came into the
hands of the new owner. The court said that the tenant had incurred a ground for his
eviction.518.

[s 116.10] Mortgagor and mortgagee.—
As between a mortgagor and his mortgagee neither can deny the title of the other for
the purposes of the mortgage. A mortgagor cannot derogate from his grant so as to
defeat his mortgagee's title, nor can the mortgagee deny the title of his mortgagor to
mortgage the property.519. The rule of estoppel between the mortgagor and the
mortgagee cannot be invoked in a case where the suit is not based on the mortgage,
but is one in repudiation of the mortgage.520. Where the object of a mortgage is to
defraud a third person and the mortgagee is cognisant of and indeed a party to that
intended fraud, the mortgagor is not estopped from pleading and proving against his
mortgagee seeking to enforce the mortgage that it was a sham transaction a device to
defeat a possible attachment of the properties by a creditor.521. A mortgagor of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
immoveable property is not estopped from pleading, or taking advantage of, the
invalidity of his mortgage deed on the ground that, by the inclusion of a ﬁctitious
property in the document and getting it registered in an oﬃce where otherwise it could
not have been registered, a fraud on the registration law was committed in which he
participated.522.

[s 116.11] Benami title.—
The Madras High Court has held that where a lease is executed by a tenant in favour of
a benamidar, the real owner and not the benamidar is regarded as the landlord whose
title the tenant is estopped from denying under this section. In a suit by such benamidar
for rent, the tenant can deny his right to sue on the ground that he is not the person
entitled. A benamidar has no right to sue unless he can show a legal right to sue under
the general law.523. The Calcutta High Court is of the opinion that a tenant is estopped
from raising the question that his lessor is a benamidar of someone to whom he has
paid rent.524.
The defendants entered into possession of plaintiff's property by executing a registered
agreement, but no lease was executed. In a suit by the plaintiff to recover rent, the
defendants pleaded that without a lease there was no contract of tenancy and that the
plaintiff was not entitled to recover the rent. It was held that in view of the fact that the
defendants entered into and continued in occupation of the land with the plaintiff's
consent, they could not be heard to say that they were not liable for rent for use and
occupation.525.

[s 116.12] Sale of tenanted premises.—
A tenant was not allowed to claim that the sale of the tenanted premises to the new
owner was null and void because he had not raised that plea in the earlier suit by the
erstwhile landlord. An acknowledgement of the title of the owner was held to have
taken place by reason of payment of rent and tax in the name of the real owner. Such
payment amounted to acknowledgement unless it could be shown that it was made
under compelling circumstances.526.

463. Kusum Lata Bansal v Avadhesh Kumar Gupta, 2017 (9) ADJ 638 : 2017 (124) ALR 371 .
464. Sheikh Rashid v Hussain Baksh, (1943) Nag 340; Dangam Venkat Rajam v Peddi Gundla

Rajia, (1953) Hyd 288. Bansraj Lalta Prasad Mishra v Stanley Parker Jones, (2006) 3 SCC 91 : AIR
2006 SC 3569 , the Supreme Court discussed in detail the object and scope and underlying
policy of the provision enshrined in the section.
465. Krishna Prosad Lal Singha Deo v Baraboni Coal Concern, (1937) 64 IA 311 : 39 Bom LR

1034: (1938) 1 Cal 1 ; Ata Muhammad v Shankar Das, (1925) 6 Lah 319; Yusuf v Jyotishchandra
Banerji, (1931) 59 Cal 739 ; M Manphul Bai v Ladhuram, (1952) Raj 58 ; UG Sakhare v C.G
Gawande, AIR 1960 Bom 238 : 60 Bom LR 1150.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
466. Vasudev Daji v Babaji Ranu, (1871) 8 Bom HCR 175. The section is a recognition and

adoption of the same demand of equity. Pal Singh v Sunder Singh, AIR 1989 SC 758 : (1989) 1
SCR 67 : (1989) 1 SCC 444 .
467. (1937) 64 IA 33 : AIR 1937 PC 251 . See also Harbans Singh v Tekamani Devi, AIR 1990 Pat

26 , a tenant not allowed to challenge the title of the person with whom he entered into the
kirayanama.
468. Nadjarian v Trist, (1944) 47 Bom LR 209 : (1945) Bom 343; Amar Devi v Nathu Ram, (1994)

4 SCC 250 , the buyer of the premises became a new landlord who sued for eviction on a
permitted ground. The tenant not allowed to challenge his title.
469. Adyanath Ghatak v Krishna Pd. Singh, AIR 1949 PC 124 . Followed by the Supreme Court in

D Satyanarayana v P Jagadish, AIR 1987 SC 2192 : (1987) 4 SCC 424 .
470. Tej Bhan Madan v II Addl DJ, AIR 1988 SC 1413 : 1988 1 KLJ 686 : (1988) 3 SCC 137 ; JJ Lal

Pvt Ltd v MR Murali, AIR 2002 SC 1061 , eviction suit against tenant on ground of default in
payment of rent, plea by the tenant that he was willing to pay the overdue amount, could not be
construed as bona ﬁde denial of title. Badrinath v Gaushala Trust Society, AIR 2010 NOC 890
(P&H), in his written statement, the tenant admitted the relationship of landlord and tenant,
estopped from challenging the title of the landlord; Nirmala Devi v Jai Dutt, 240 (2017) DLT 424 :
2017 SCC Online Del 7353 : LNIND 2017 Del 807 , once the tenant admitted the relationship of
the landlord and tenant, he is estopped from denying the title of the legal heir during the
continuance of the beneﬁt that he had drawn under this relationship.
471. Bansraj Laltaprasad Mishra v Stanley Parker Jones, (2006) 3 SCC 91 .
472. Muhammad Hussain v Abdul Gaffoor, (1946) Mad 44.
473. Gandabhai Ranchhodji Gandhi v Noshir Ka Vasji Sabowala, AIR 1994 Guj 18 . Rajendra

Kumar v DJ, Jaunpur, AIR 1996 All 178 , paying rent to the plaintiff, not allowed to question his
title as a landlord.
474. PS Bedi v Project & Equipment Corporation of India Ltd, AIR 1994 Del 255 .
475. Gajadhar Lodha v Khas Mahatadih Colliery Co, (1959) Pat 806; A person admitted in the

cross-objections and also admitted before the Municipal Authorities under a document, to be a
tenant, held, estopped from claiming to be owner of the property against the lessor which was a
trust, even if he had a registered sale deed, executed by the Managing Trustee in his favour. In
view of such admissions, his contention that subsequent to entering the property as a tenant he
had acquired ownership thereof, refused to be examined in SLP.See also Orissa Olympic
Association v State of Orissa, (2015) 13 SCC 417 , para 3 : 2017 (4) Scale 217 ; Om Prakash v
Mishri Lal, AIR 2017 SC 1597 : 2017(122) ALR 123 : (2017) 5 SCC 451 , a tenant during the
continuance of the tenancy is debarred from denying the title of his landlord through whom he
claims tenancy.
476. Mangat Ram v Sardar Meharban Singh, AIR 1987 SC 1656 : (1987) 4 SCC 319 .
477. Krishna Prasad Singh v Adyanath Ghatak, (1943) 22 Pat 513. The section does not create a

ground for eviction. Lena Pereira v Mary Boracho, AIR 1992 Bom 93 ; Nirvikar Gupta v Ram Kumar,
AIR 1992 MP 115 , the denial of the landlord's title is not a ground for eviction. Rita Lal v Raj
Kumar Singh, AIR 2002 SC 3341 , rent note proved to have been signed by the tenant, he also
admitted the title of the landlord in his deposition in an earlier judicial proceeding. Denial by him
of his landlord's title did not raise any triable issue, because he was already under an estoppel.
C. Chandramohan v Sengottaiyan, AIR 2000 SC 568 : (2000) 1 SCC 451 , the mere assertion by
the tenant that his landlord was co-owner and that too because he was not aware of the release
of the other co-owner's share to the landlord, was held to be not denial of the position of the
landlord so as to enable the latter to evict him. Dunlop India Ltd v TK Mukhopadhayay, AIR 1998
Cal 59 , a tenant can show that he has acquired title to the property.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
478. Per JesseL, MR, in Re Stringer's Estate, Shaw v Jones-Ford, (1877) 6 Ch D 1 , 9; Vertannes v

Robinson, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1017 : 54 IA 276: 5 Ran 427; Musammat Bilas Kunwar v Desraj
Ranjit Singh, (1915) 17 Bom LR 1006 : 42 IA 202: 37 All 557.
479. Bamandas Bhattacharjee v Nilmadhab Sahu, (1916) 44 Cal 771 , 777.
480. Kartar Singh v Collector, Patiala, 1996 AIHC 1538 (P&H).
481. Ziauddin v Bansi Lal, 1996 AIHC 1425 (Del). Jagmohan Singh Wadhera v K M Bhatnagar,

1996 AIHC 415 Del, failure to examine ex-landlord, no adverse presumption.
482. D Satyanarayana v P Jagdish, AIR 1987 SC 2192 : (1987) 4 SCC 424 , 427, 428.
483. Vol 27, 4th Edn, para 238. Another decision of the Supreme Court on the point is in S.

Thangappan v P Padmavathy, AIR 1999 SC 3584 : (1999) 7 SCC 474 , the tenant was not allowed
to say that the property did not belong to his landlord but to a Devasthanam. The latter had
never made any such claim on the tenant.
484. D Satyanarayana v P Jagdish, AIR 1987 SC 2192 : (1987) 4 SCC 424 .
485. E Parshuraman v V Doraiswamy, (2006) 1 SCC 658 : AIR 2006 SC 376 .
486. State of AP v D Raghukul Pershad, (2012) 8 SCC 584 .
487. D Satyanarayana v P Jagadish, AIR 1987 SC 2192 : (1987) 4 SCC 424 .
488. State of AP v D Raghukul Pershad, (supra).
489. Krishan Prosad Lal Singha Deo v Baraboni Coal Concern, (1937) 64 IA 311 : 39 Bom LR 1034

: (1938) 1 Cal 1 ; Musammat Bilas Kunwar v Desraj Ranjit Singh, (1915) 17 Bom LR 1006 : 42 IA
202: 37 All 557, 567; Vertannes v Robinson, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1017 : 54 IA 276 : 5 Ran 427.
490. Vasudev Daji v Babaji Ranu, (1871) 8 BHCR (ACJ) 175; Shankar v Jagannath, (1928) 33 Bom

LR 741 .
491. Venkata Chetty v Aiyanna Goundan, (1916) 40 Mad 561 (FB).
492. Ganpat Rai v Multan, (1916) 38 All 226 , 228.
493. Lal Mohomed v Kallanus, (1885) 11 Cal 519 , dissented from in Nagindas Sankalchand v

Bapalal Purshottam, (1930) 54 Bom 487 : 32 Bom LR 692; Ketu Das v Surendra Niath Sinha,
(1903) 7 Cal WN 596.
494. Ekoba v Dayaram, (1919) 22 Bom LR 82 ; Patel Kilabhai Lallubhai v Hargovan Mansukh,

(1894) 19 Bom 133; Nadri Begum v Nasrat Bibi, AIR 1980 All 210 , the defendant continued in
possession after expiry of licence in the right of his father, estopped from denying the plaintiffs
title.
495. Mujibar Rahman v Isub Surati, (1928) 56 Cal 15 ; Re Ganesh Trading Co Pvt Ltd, AIR 1985

Cal 37 , lessee remained bound by estoppel as long as he was in actual possession; Mahabir Pd
v KC Thapar & Bros Ltd, AIR 1985 Cal 209 ; Sri Ram Pasricha v Jagannath, AIR 1976 SC 2335 :
(1976) 4 SCC 184 .
496. A clear decision of the Supreme Court to this effect is to be seen in D Satyanarayana v P

Jagadish, 1987 4 SCC 424 : AIR 1987 SC 2192 . Jamila Khatoon v Ajodhya Pathak, 1996 AIHC
2928 (Gau). In the instant case the tenant purchased the house in his occupation from a third
person under belief that he was the owner and not the person who let him the house. He must
prove the ownership of that third person or face the consequences of denial of title of the
person who let him the premises.
497. M Narayanaswami v Roya Poulle Amala, 1994 AIHC 2591 (Mad).
498. Lakshman v Ramji, (1920) 23 Bom LR 939 .
499. Bala v Abai, (1909) 11 Bom LR 1093 ; Devidas v Shamal, (1919) 22 Bom LR 149 ; Ata

Muhammad v Shankar Das, (1925) 6 Lah 319; Deena Bandhu Gan v Makim Sardar, (1935) 63 Cal
763 ; Krishna Prosad Lal Singha Deo v Baraboni Coal Concern, (1937) 64 IA 311 : 39 Bom LR
1034: (1938) 1 Cal 1 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
500. Jogendra Lal Sarkar v Mohesh Chandra Sadhu, (1928) 55 Cal 1013 ; Shantabhai v Narayan

Rao, (1948) Nag 290.
501. Kishan Gopal Agarwalla v Ramdulari Sah, AIR 1996 Gau 39 .
502. Institute of Education, Saraswathipuram v Sri Sowcar A Siddanna Endowment, AIR 2003 Kant

226 .
503. Karam Kapahi v Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust, (2010) 4 SCC 753 .
504. D Satyanarayana v P Jagadish, AIR 1987 SC 2192 : (1987) 4 SCC 424 .
505. Brij Lal Sharma v Kanhiya Lal, AIR 2009 NOC 175 (Del).
506. Krishna Prosad Lal Singha Deo v Baraboni Coal Concern, supra. Pushpa Sharma v Gopal Lal,

AIR 1986 Raj 187 , the tenant led evidence and proved the title of a third person. See also Aras
Khan v Ali Mian, AIR 1985 Pat 126 , where in a suit for ejectment the plaintiff was not able to
establish relationship of landlord and tenant, but did establish his ownership. There was no
reason to deny him the equitable relief of recovery of possession.
507. Krishna Prosad Lal Singha Deo v Baraboni Coal Concern, supra.
508. See Mah Hli v Maung San Dun, (1892) PJLB 4. Also Ramuthi Madalaichamy v Thangarathina

Nadar, AIR 1991 Mad 229 , involving denial of title and eviction proceeding on that ground. SK
Sarma v Mahesh Kumar Verma, 2002 Cr LJ 4318 (SC), a premises allotted to an employee by the
railway. He was not allowed to raise the question that the railway had no rights over the
property. He came into possession taking it from railway. section 116 squarely applied. Karam
Kapahi v Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust, AIR 2010 SC 2077 : (2010) 4 SCC 753 , estoppel of
lessee against challenging the title or right of the lessor.
509. Per Coleridge J, in Doe dem Johnson v Baytup, (1835) 3 Ad & El 188, 192.
510. Currimbhoy & Co v Creet, (1932) 35 Bom LR 223 : 60 IA 297 : 60 Cal 980. Bansraj Lalta

Prasad Mishra v Stanley Parker Jones, (2006) 3 SCC 91 : AIR 2006 SC 3569 , emphasising the
irrelevance of the title of the licensor in respect of the immovable property in question to the
position of the licencee, the concept of construction possession applicable under the section.
The person from whom possession was taken would have right to take back possession
irrespective of questions of title.
511. Ram Saran v Pyare Lal, AIR 1996 SC 2361 : (1996) 11 SCC 728 .
512. Dhanraj Bhuddsingh Gupta v Dinesh Purshottam, AIR 2002 Bom 456 . The suit was ﬁled by

the plaintiff under his ownership created by a registered deed of partition and, therefore, he
could not be non-suited by saying that there was a will also which was not probated.
513. FGP Ltd v Saleh Hooseini Doctor, (2009) 10 SCC 223 , 2010 (1) CCC 14 (SC).
514. Vithalbhai Pvt Ltd v Union Bank of India, AIR 1992 Cal 283 .
515. Ibid, at p 284.
516. UOI v Vithalbhai Pvt Ltd, AIR 2002 Cal 144 .
517. SK Sarma v Mahesh Kumar Verma, AIR 2002 SC 3294 .
518. Jalal & Sons v Sita Bai, AIR 2001 NOC 41 (AP) : 2001 ALHC 1860.
519. Hillaya v Narayanappa, (1911) 13 Bom LR 1200 : 36 Bom 185.
520. Musammat Rajna v Musaheb Ali, (1937) 13 Luck 178 .
521. Arunachalam v Rengaswami, (1935) 59 Mad 289.
522. Ramnandan Prasad Narayan Singh v Chandradip Narain Singh, (1940) 19 Pat 578.
523. Kuppu Konan v Thirugnana Sammandan Pillai, (1908) 31 Mad 461; Bogar v Karan Singh,

(1906) PR No. 141 of 1906 (Civil).
524. Deena Bandhu Gan. v Makim Sardar, (1935) 63 Cal 763 .
525. Sheo Karan Singh v Maharaja Parbhu Narain Singh, (1909) 31 All 276 (FB).
526. Bhagwan Agarwalla v Puranmal Bhut, AIR 2003 Ori 75 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VIII ESTOPPEL
[s 117] Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.—
No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor shall any bailee or licensee be
permitted to deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or
license commenced, authority to make such bailment or grant such license.
Explanation (1).— The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really
drawn by the person by whom it purports to have been drawn.
Explanation (2).— If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the bailor,
he may prove that such person had a right to them as against the bailor.

COMMENT
This section deals with further instances of estoppel by agreement. Sections 116 and
117 are however not exhaustive of the doctrine of estoppel by agreement.527. Agents,
for instance, are not ordinarily permitted to set up the adverse title of a third person
defeat the rights of their principals.
Under this section an acceptor of a bill of exchange cannot deny that the drawer had
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it. But he may deny that the bill was really
drawn by the person by whom it purports to have been drawn (Explanation 1). A bailee
or licensee cannot deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the commencement of the
bailment or license, authority to make the bailment or grant the license. But a bailee, if
he delivers the goods bailed to a third person, may prove that such person had a right
to them as against the bailor (Explanation 2).

[s 117.1] Bill of exchange.—
Estoppels in the case of negotiable instruments are instances of estoppel by
agreement or contract. See sections 41 and 42 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.

[s 117.2] Forged endorsement.—
No person can claim a title to a negotiable instrument through a forged endorsement.
Such endorsement is a nullity and must be taken as if no such endorsement was on the
instrument.528.

[s 117.3] Bailee.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The bailee and the licensee are placed in the same position as the tenant in the
preceding section. The bailee is protected by the bailor's title so long as any better title
is not advanced. A bailee entrusted with the care of goods is estopped from claiming
that the bailor had no title at the time of bailment. He cannot set up the title of a third
person. But the bailee has no better title than the bailor, and consequently if a person
entitled as against the bailor claims the goods, the bailee has no defence against him.

[s 117.4] Licensee.—
As between landlord and tenant so between licensor and licensee the former's right
cannot be questioned by the latter. A licensee cannot be permitted to deny that his
licensor had at the time when the license commenced authority to grant such license.
The licensee of a trademark cannot put an end to the relation of licensor and licensee
by repudiating the contract, inasmuch as the concurrence of the other party is
essential. In a suit for royalty, brought by the licensors of certain jute trademarks
against the licensees, the defence taken was that the plaintiffs had no title to the marks
in question, and that the license was void. It was held that by virtue of this section the
licensees were estopped from questioning their licensors' title, or the validity of the
license.529.

527. Rup Chand Ghosh v Surveswar Chandra, (1906) 33 Cal 915 .
528. Banku Behari Sikdar v Secretary of State for India, (1908) 36 Cal 239 .
529. Hannah v Juggernath & Co, (1914) 42 Cal 262 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 118] Who may testify.—
All persons shall be competent to testify [s 118.3] unless the Court considers that they
are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational
answers to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of
body or mind, or any other cause of the same kind.
Explanation .—A lunatic is not incompetent to testify, unless he is prevented by his
lunacy from understanding the questions put to him and giving rational answers to
them.

COMMENT
Under this section all persons are competent to testify, unless they are, in the opinion of
the court (a) unable to understand the questions put to them, or (b) to give rational
answers to those questions, owing to (i) tender years, (ii) extreme old age, (iii) disease
of mind or body or (iv) any other such cause. Even a lunatic, if he is capable of
understanding the questions put to him and giving rational answers, is a competent
witness.
The position as to who should give evidence in regard to matters involving personal
knowledge, has been summarized by Supreme Court1. in the following words:
(a) An attorney-holder who has signed the plaint and instituted the suit, but has no

personal knowledge of the transaction can only give formal evidence about the
validity of the power of attorney and the ﬁling of the suit.
(b) If the attorney-holder has done any act or handled any transactions, in

pursuance of the power of attorney granted by the principal, he may be
examined as a witness to prove those acts or transactions. If the attorney-holder
alone has personal knowledge of such acts and transactions and not the
principal, the attorney-holder shall be examined, if those acts and transactions
have to be proved.
(c) The attorney-holder cannot depose or give evidence in place of his principal for

the acts done by the principal or transactions or dealings of the principal, of
which principal alone has personal knowledge.
(d) Where the principal at no point of time had personally handled or dealt with or

participated in the transaction and has no personal knowledge of the
transaction, and where the entire transaction has been handled by an attorneyholder, necessarily the attorney-holder alone can give evidence in regard to the
transaction. This frequently happens in case of principals carrying on business
through authorised managers/attorney-holders or persons residing abroad
managing their affairs through their attorney-holders.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(e) Where the entire transaction has been conducted through a particular attorney-

holder, the principal has to examine that attorney-holder to prove the transaction,
and not a different or subsequent attorney-holder.
(f) Where different attorney-holders had dealt with the matter at different stages of

the transaction, if evidence has to be led as to what transpired at those different
stages, all the attorney-holders will have to be examined.
(g) Where the law requires or contemplated the plaintiff or other party to a

proceeding, to establish or prove something with reference to his "state of mind"
or "conduct", normally the person concerned alone has to give evidence and not
an attorney-holder. A landlord who seeks eviction of his tenant, on the ground of
his "bona ﬁde" need and a purchaser seeking speciﬁc performance who has to
show his "readiness and willingness" fall under this category. There is however a
recognised exception to this requirement. Where all the affairs of a party are
completely managed, transacted and looked after by an attorney (who may
happen to be a close family member), it may be possible to accept the evidence
of such attorney even with reference to bona ﬁdes or "readiness and
willingness". Examples of such attorney-holders are a husband/wife exclusively
managing the affairs of his/her spouse, a son/daughter exclusively managing
the affairs of an old and inﬁrm parent, a father/mother exclusively managing the
affairs of a son/ daughter living abroad.

[s 118.1] Scope.—
This section does no more than enunciate the English rule with regard to the
competency of parties as witnesses without in any way making admissible all the
evidence, which might be given by them. In this connection the provisions of section
112 must not be overlooked.2.

[s 118.2] Oath.—
It has been held that an omission to administer oath under the Oaths Act, 1969 does
not affect the admissibility of evidence unless the judge considers the witness to be
otherwise incompetent.3. In a murder trial, the child witness who was below 12 years in
age, clearly deposed in terms of the prosecution case. His evidence was found reliable
and corroborated with the evidence of other witness. The Session Court was satisﬁed
that he was giving the truthful evidence. Mere absence of oath alone will not make his
evidence disbelievable.4.
Once the child-witness is found competent, his inability to take or understand oath or
omission in administering it, neither invalidates the proceedings nor renders his
evidence inadmissible.5. The testimony of a child witness must ﬁnd adequate
corroboration before it is relied on. However, it is more a rule of practical wisdom than
of law. It cannot be held that the evidence of a child witness would always stand
irretrievably stigmatised. It is not the law that if a witness is a child, his evidence shall
be rejected, even if it is found reliable. The law is that evidence of a child witness must
be evaluated more carefully and with greater circumspection because a child is
susceptible to be swayed by what others tell him and thus a child witness is an easy
prey to tutoring.6.

[s 118.3] "Competent to testify".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The competency of a person to testify as a witness is a condition precedent to the
administration to him of an oath or aﬃrmation, and is a question distinct from that of
his credibility when he has been sworn or has been aﬃrmed. In determining the
question of competency the court, under this section, has not to enter into inquiries as
to the witness's religious belief or as to his knowledge of the consequences of
falsehood in this world or the next.7. It has to ascertain, in the best way it can, whether,
from the extent of his intellectual capacity and understanding, he is able to give a
rational and intelligent account of what he has seen or heard or done on a particular
occasion. If a person of tender years or of very advanced age8. can satisfy these
requirements, his competency as a witness is established.9. If a boy in spite of his
young age can both understand questions and give rational answers to them he should
be examined.10.

[s 118.4] Role of Magistrates/Judges.—
The child has to be handled in a manner where he/she ﬁnds a friend in the judge.
Consultation with the child should be done in the language which the child
understands. The child should never be called to the court room but only to chamber.
The judge must make an effort to build up relationship with the child to ﬁnd out truth
from the child.11.

[s 118.5] Explanation.—Lunatic.—
The explanation applies to the case of a monomaniac or person aﬄicted with partial
insanity. Such a person will be an admissible witness if the judge ﬁnds him upon
investigation capable of understanding the subject in respect of which he is required to
testify.12. An insane or an idiot is not a competent witness if he is incapacitated to such
an extent that he is unable to understand the subject in reference to which he is called
as a witness. Where the witness was suffering from mental defect, her evidence was
recorded without any ﬁnding that she was competent to depose, the whole trial was
held to be vitiated. Re-trial was ordered.13.

[s 118.5.1] Disease of body.—
The word "disease" as used in section 118 refers to such a disease which affects the
sufferer mentally so as to prevent him from understanding the questions put to him
and giving rational answers. Mere restrictions on the movement of the plaintiff due to
diseases like "heart ailment" would be of no consequence because the plaintiff could
apply for her examination on commission.14.

[s 118.6] When accused competent witness.—
An accused person is competent to testify within this section, but before the
amendment of the Code of Criminal Procedure in 1956 he was incompetent to be a
witness, for an oath could not be administered to him, and without it no witness can be
lawfully examined, or give evidence, by or before a Court.15. Where there are two
accused a magistrate cannot convert one of them into a witness against the other
except when a pardon has been lawfully granted.16.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 118.7] Power of attorney holder.—
A power of attorney holder can testify as a witness. He is a competent witness. His
deposition would become part of the evidence on record.17. An earlier decision of the
same High Court was to the effect that a power of attorney holder was not entitled to
appear as witness for the party appointing him.18. An attorney has been held to be
competent to depose in respect of all matters except matters which are required to be
done personally by the principal. His statement can be taken as that of the party to the
list. It was a suit for eviction by an NRI landlord. The attorney holder testiﬁed to the
bona ﬁde personal need of the landlord. The order of eviction passed on that basis was
held to be not illegal.19.
The evidence of power of attorney was not allowed to be ignored only on the ground
that the parties to the suit did not appear in the witness box.20.
[See also Notes under section 3 under the heading "Appreciation of Evidence"]

1. Man Kaur v Hartar Singh Sangha, (2010) 10 SCC 512 . 607
2. Sweenney v Sweenney, (1935) 62 Cal 1080 ; Musunuri Anjaneyulu v Koona Lakshmi, AIR 1998

AP 204 , endorsement on a pronote, it is not a document which is required by law to be attested
or scribed. It was not necessary that the scribe should have been examined.
3. Bhagwania v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 3719 (Raj).
4. Mamachan v State of Kerala, 2008 CrLJ (NOC) 257 (Ker.) (DB).
5. Ghewar Ram v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 4460 (Raj).
6. Panchhi v State of UP, (1998) 7 SCC 177 (SCC p 181, para 11).
7. State of Kerala v Naduveetil Viswanathan, 1991 Cr LJ 1501 (Ker), the court was not concerned

with the profession of the witness as an illegal arrack dealer.
8. Prafulla Bora v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 428 (Gau), an aged lady of 80 years with weak

vision and hard hearing was not trusted as an eye-witness of a crime taking place in dark.
9. Queen-Empress v Lal Sahai, (1888) 11 All 183 ; Quasim Ali v State, (1952) Raj 435 ; Purna

Chandra v State, AIR 1959 Cal 306 .
10. Queen-Empress v Ram Sewak, (1900) 23 All 90 .
11. Sreeparna Banik (Saha) v Ankur Saha, AIR 2016 NOC 541 (Tri).
12. Hill's case, (1851) 2 Den CC 254; Spittle v Walton, (1871) LR 11 Eq 420. See also R v Spencer

and R v Smails, (1986) 2 All ER 928 (HL), where the House of Lords found that the judge had told
the jury in the clearest possible terms that they must approach the evidence of the patients
(mental condition and criminal connections) with great caution and since having given the
warning, he identiﬁed the very dangers which justiﬁed the exercise of great caution, it was held
that the judge's direction were fair and adequate. Approving, R v Beck, (1982) 1 All ER 807 and
overruling R v Bagshaw, (1984) 1 All ER 971 .
13. State of Karnataka v Shabuddin, 1995 Cr LJ 3237 (Kant).
14. Rajni Shukla v Special Judge, AIR 2008 NOC 474 (All).
15. King-Emperor v Nga Po Min, (1932) 10 Ran 511 (FB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
16. Reg v Hanmanta, (1877) 1 Bom 610. See Nabi Bakhsh v The Emperor of India, (1902) PR No.

12 of 1902 (Cr); Alladad v The King-Emperor of India, (1906) PR No. 9 of 1906 (Cr).
17. Raees Ad v Shrigopal Prakash, AIR 2002 NOC 178 (Raj) : 2002 AIHC 2152 .
18. Ram Prasad v Hari Narain, AIR 1998 Raj 185 .
19. Satnam Channan v Darshan Singh, AIR 2007 NOC 216 (P&H).
20. Bhimappa v Allisab, AIR 2006 Kant 231 : (2007() 6 Kar LJ 286 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
21.[[s 119] Witness unable to communicate verbally.—

A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in which
he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written
and the signs made in open Court, evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take
the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and
such statement shall be video graphed.]

COMMENT
When a deaf-mute is a witness the court will ascertain before he is examined that he
possesses the requisite amount of intelligence, and that he understands the nature of
an oath. A deaf-mute's evidence may be taken (a) by written questions to which he may
reply in writing or (b) by means of signs.
The object of enacting the provisions of section 119 of the Evidence Act reveals that
deaf and dumb persons were earlier contemplated in law as idiots. However, such a
view has subsequently been changed for the reason that modern science revealed that
persons affected with such calamities are generally found more intelligent, and to be
susceptible to far higher culture than one was once supposed. When a deaf and dumb
person is examined in the court, the court has to exercise due caution and take care to
ascertain before he is examined that he possesses the requisite amount of intelligence
and that he understands the nature of an oath. On being satisﬁed on this, the witness
may be administered oath by appropriate means and that also with the assistance of
an interpreter. However, in case a person can read and write, it is most desirable to
adopt that method being more satisfactory than any sign language. The law requires
that there must be a record of signs and not the interpretation of signs.
A dumb person need not be prevented from being a credible and reliable witness
merely due to his/her physical disability. Such a person though unable to speak may
convey himself through writing, if literate or through signs and gestures, if he is unable
to read and write. A case in point is the silent movies which were understood widely
because they were able to communicate ideas to people through novel signs and
gestures. Emphasised body language and facial expression enabled the audience to
comprehend the intended message. Therefore, a deaf and dumb person is a competent
witness. If in the opinion of the court, oath can be administered to him/her, it should be
so done. Such a witness, if able to read and write, it is desirable to record his statement
giving him questions in writing and seeking answers in writing. In case the witness is
not able to read and write, his statement can be recorded in sign language with the aid
of interpreter, if found necessary. In case the interpreter is provided, he should be a
person of the same surrounding but should not have any interest in the case and he
should be administered oath.22.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the witness had taken a religious vow of silence, and the magistrate took his
evidence in writing in open Court when he could not get it in any other way without
forcing the witness to break his religious vow, it was held that the witness should be
deemed unable to speak within the meaning of this section and the course adopted by
the magistrate was correct.23. Where a witness having become dumb was physically
incapable to give his statement, it was held that no adverse inference could be drawn
against the prosecution in not examining him.24.

[s 119.1] 2013 Amendment—
This section was amended vide the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 on the basis
of recommendations given by the Justice JS Verma Committee, constituted in the
aftermath of December 2012 Nirbhaya rape incident. The title of this section has been
changed by this amendment, so as to enable the courts to take resort to the modalities
during the course of recording of evidence, as prescribed in this section, to not merely
the dumb witnesses, but to all those witnesses who are unable to communicate
verbally.
The effect of this section is that all such victims of sexual offences or any other
offence, who are having problems in communicating verbally, can be a witness and the
court can record their statements during trial. A proviso has also been added to this
section whereby the court has been obligated to take the assistance of an interpreter or
a special educator in recording the statement, and get the recording of such statement
videographed, if the witness is unable to communicate verbally.

21. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, section 27 for section 119 (w.r.e.f. 3-2-2013). Section 119, before

subsitution, stood as under:
"119. Dumb witnesses.—A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other
manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be
written and the signs made in open Court. Evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence.".
22. State of Rajasthan v Darshan Singh, (2012) 5 SCC 789 .
23. Lakhan Singh v King-Emperor, (1941) 20 Pat 898.
24. Kishan Singh v State, 1995 Cr LJ 2027 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 120] Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband or wife of
person under criminal trial.—
In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party to
the suit, shall be competent witnesses. In criminal proceedings against any person,
the husband or wife of such person, respectively, shall be a competent witness.

COMMENT
[s 120.1] Principle.—
In civil proceedings parties to the suit are competent witnesses. Husbands and wives
are competent witnesses for or against each other in civil as well as criminal
proceedings.
Parties in civil proceedings are competent witnesses and therefore their testimony is to
be scrutinised in the same manner as that of any other witness. There is no inﬂexible
rule that if a party gives his testimony he must be disbelieved because he is a party to
the suit.25. In Aidan v State of Rajasthan,26. it was held that truthfulness of the
statement of wife could not be disbelieved merely because her emotional reaction was
different from what it should have been, in the opinion of the court.
The husband was his wife's power of attorney. In that capacity he had made a
statement on behalf of wife. The wife wanted to examine him as a witness. The court
said that in spite of the suit between them, they continued to be man and wife. Whether
the evidence of the husband was useful or not in deciding the matter between them
would be decided at the stage of judgment and not at the stage of recording
evidence.27.

[s 120.2] Privilege as to statements.—
The plaintiff brought proceedings against B in Watford country Court and against D in
Brentford country Court, alleging unlawful eviction in both cases. B, in support of his
application to strike out the proceedings, swore an aﬃdavit raising serious allegations
against the plaintiff concerning the proceedings. The aﬃdavit was made available to D
to assist her in her own application to strike out the plaintiffs claim against her. The
plaintiff subsequently sued B for damages for libel and slander, contending that
defamatory statements contained in the aﬃdavit, when used by D, were not protected
by privilege. The court said that the test for deciding if absolute privilege attracted to
defamatory remarks made in witness statements used in court proceedings is whether
the statements are made with reference to the subject matter of those proceedings.
There is no dispute that test was satisﬁed in respect of the use of the defamatory
statements in the Watford proceedings, for which B's aﬃdavit was originally prepared.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Equally, as the aﬃdavit included allegations referring to other cases involving the
plaintiff including his claim against D, the statements had direct reference to the
Brentford proceedings and thus absolute privilege applied, particularly as it was clear
that the material was published to D to assist in the ongoing proceedings against
her.28.

[s 120.2.1] Refusal to enter witness box.—
The failure as the part of the defendant to step into the witness box to make
statements on oath in support of pleadings set out in the written statement led to an
adverse inference. But the court refused to decree the suit of the plaintiff on the basis
of pleadings only. There was no independent evidence.29.

25. Bhanwar Lal Vaid v Bhanwar Lal Agarwal, (1951) Raj 1 .
26. Aidan v State of Rajasthan, 1993 Cr LJ 2413 (Raj).
27. Shaik Rafath Begum v TVR. Anjaneyulu, AIR 2007 AP 23 : (2006) 6 Andh LD 769.
28. Smeaton v Butcher (No. 1), (2000) EMLR 985 , CA. The court applied the principles laid down

in Seaman v Netherclift, (1876) LR 2 CPD 53 and Samuels v Coole & Haddock, (Unreported, May
22, 1997) : (1997) CLY 4860. The judge was therefore right to strike out S's libel claim.
29. Onkar Chand v Jagtamba Devi, AIR 2003 NOC 124 (HP) : 2002 AIHC 3501 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 121] Judges and Magistrates.—
No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some Court to which
he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any questions as to his own conduct in
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in
Court as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters
which occurred in his presence whilst he was so acting.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly

taken by B, the Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to
this, except upon the special order of a superior Court.
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before

B, a Magistrate. B cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of
the superior Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police-

oﬃcer whilst on his trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to
what occurred.

COMMENT
[s 121.1] Principle.—
Under this section a judge or magistrate shall not be compelled to answer questions as
to (a) his conduct in court as such judge or magistrate, or (b) anything which came to
his knowledge in court as such judge or magistrate, except upon the order of a Court to
which he is subordinate. He may be examined as to other matters which occurred in his
presence while he was so acting.
Sections 121–132 declare exceptions to the general rules that a witness is bound to
tell the whole truth, and to produce any document in his possession or power relevant
to the matter in issue.30. They deal with the privilege of certain classes of witnesses.
The privilege given by this section is the privilege of the witness, that is, of the judge or
magistrate of whom the question is asked. If he waives such privilege, or does not
object to answer such question, it does not lie in the mouth of any other person to
assert the privilege.31. The privilege of the judge or the magistrate, extends only "to his
own conduct in court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his
knowledge in court as such Judge or Magistrate".

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A distinction should be drawn between questions which a witness cannot be compelled
to answer (sections 121, 124 and 125) and those which he cannot be permitted to
answer (sections 123 and 126). The latter class of questions might properly be
forbidden but questions of the former class are in no way barred; a witness has merely
the right of refusing to answer such questions, without any hostile inference being
drawn from his refusal. The most that a Court can do, in the case of a witness who is
ignorant of his privilege, is to warn him that he need not answer. But if the witness
elects to waive his privilege of refusing to answer, his answer is admissible in
evidence.32.

[s 121.2] Judge or Magistrate as witness.—
"A Judge, before whom the cause is tried, must conceal any fact within his own
knowledge, unless he be ﬁrst sworn, and, consequently, if he be the sole Judge, it
seems that he cannot depose as a witness, though if he be sitting with others, he may
then be sworn and give evidence. In this last case, the proper course appears to be that
the Judge, who has thus become a witness, should leave the bench, and take no further
judicial part in the trial, because he can hardly be deemed capable of impartially
deciding on the admissibility of his own testimony, or of weighing it against that of
another."33.
A person having to exercise judicial functions may give evidence in a case pending
before him when such evidence can and must be submitted to the independent
judgment of other persons exercising similar judicial functions sitting with him at the
same time.34.
Where a judge is the sole judge of law and fact, he cannot give evidence before himself
or import matters into his judgment not stated on oath before the court in the presence
of the accused.35. The accused is entitled to have nothing stated against him in the
judgment which was not stated on oath in his presence, and which he had no
opportunity of testing by cross-examination and rebutting.36. If the judge knew any
facts concerning the case, he is bound to state to the accused, so far as he could, what
were the facts he himself observed, and to which he himself could bear testimony; and
the accused in such situation has a right, if he thought it desirable, to cross-examine
the judge, whose evidence should be recorded, and form part of the record in the
case.37. The privilege extends to arbitrators also. In no case an arbitrator can be
summoned to explain how he came at his award.38.

30. The Queen v Gopal Doss, (1881) 3 Mad 271, 277 (FB).
31. Empress of India v Chidda Khan, (1881) 3 All 573 (FB). See also Supreme Court Advocates-

on- Record Association v UOI, (2016) 5 SCC 1 .
32. Mahomed Ally v Emperor, (1909) 12 Cr LJ 277 .
33. TAYLOR, 12th Edn section 1379, p 870.
34. The Queen v Mookta Singh, (1870) 13 WR (Cr) 60.
35. Queen-Empress v Manikam, (1896) 19 Mad 263; Empress v Donnelly, (1877) 2 Cal 405 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
36. Girish Chunder Ghose v The Queen-Empress, (1893) 20 Cal 857 , 866; Hari Kishore Mitra v

Abdul Baki Miah, (1894) 21 Cal 920 .
37. Re Hurro Chunder Paul, (1873) 20 WR (Cr) 76.
38. UOI v Orient Engg. and Commrl Co, AIR 1977 SC 2445 : (1978) 1 Serv LR 632 : (1978) 2 SCJ

83 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 122] Communications during marriage.—
No person who is or has been married shall be compelled to disclose any
communication [s 122.2] made to him during marriage [s 122.3] by any person to whom
he is or has been married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such
communication, [s 122.4] unless the person who made it, or his representative in
interest, [s 122.5] consents, except in suits between married persons, or proceedings in
which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the other.

COMMENT
[s 122.1] Principle.—
This section "rests on the obvious ground that the admission of such testimony would
have a powerful tendency to disturb the peace of families to promote domestic broils,
and to weaken, if not to destroy, that feeling of mutual conﬁdence which is the most
endearing solace of married life. The protection is not conﬁned to cases where the
communication sought to be given in evidence is of a strictly conﬁdential character, but
the seal of the law is placed upon all communications of whatever nature which pass
between husband and wife. It extends also to cases in which the interests of strangers
are solely involved, as well as to those in which the husband or wife is party on the
record. It is, however, limited to such matters as have been communicated 'during the
marriage'."39. This section limits the rule enunciated in section 120.
Under this section a married person shall not be—
(1) compelled to disclose any communication made to him during marriage by any

person to whom he is married; and
(2) permitted to disclose any such communication, except—
(a) when the person who made it or his representative in interest consents,

or
(b) in suits between married persons, or
(c) in proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime

committed against the other.

[s 122.2] "Compelled to disclose any communication".—
This expression implies that the party concerned is made or allowed to say or do
something by way of disclosing a communication made during marriage.40. Thus a
wife was not allowed to tell what her husband told her about a murder with which he

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was charged.41. A document, even though it contains a communication from a
husband to a wife or vice versa, in the hands of third persons, is admissible in evidence;
for, in producing it, there is no compulsion on or permission to the wife or husband to
disclose any communication. The section protects the individuals, and not the
communications if it can be proved without putting into the box for that purpose the
husband or the wife to whom the communication was made.42.

Marital

communications can be proved by evidence of the over-hearers.43. Confession to wife
in the presence of others was allowed to be proved by others.44. Letters written by
husband to wife were held to be provable otherwise than through wife.45.

[s 122.3] "During marriage".—
The protection conferred by the section is limited to such matters as have been
communicated during marriage. A communication made to a woman before marriage
would not be protected. But the privilege continues even after the marriage has been
dissolved by death or divorce. The bar to the admissibility in evidence of
communications made during marriage attaches at the time when the communication
is made, and its admissibility will be adjudged in the light of the status at that date and
not the status at the date when evidence is sought to be given in court.46. So, where the
accused had made extra-judicial confession to his wife, it was held that the said extrajudicial confession cannot be taken into consideration as evidence.47.

[s 122.4] "Permitted to disclose any such communication."—
Even if one of the spouses is willing to disclose a communication, he or she will not be
permitted to disclose it unless the person who made it or his representative in interest
consents, except in suits or prosecutions between married persons. The consent
cannot be implied. It is incumbent upon the court to ask the party against whom the
evidence is to be given.
On a trial for the offence of breach of trust by a public servant, a letter was tendered in
evidence for the prosecution which has been sent by the accused to his wife at
Pondicherry and had been found on a search of her house made there by the police; it
was held that the letter was admissible in evidence against the accused.48.
The ban of the section is conﬁned to communications only. A wife can testify to the
deeds of her husband of which she was the eyewitness.49. This is so because section
120 declares her to be a competent witness against her husband. This approach
obviates the diﬃculties experienced by English law in this respect. One example is R v
Pitt.50. The accused was charged with two counts of assault occasioning actual bodily
harm on his eight-month-old daughter. On both the occasions the baby suffered
multiple injuries to her face and head. The wife implicated her husband. It was not
disputed that the accused was left at home with the baby and that the baby suffered
injuries. The accused tried to lay the blame upon the 2½ year old brother of the baby
but that was found to be factually false. Even so the court held that the wife was not a
compellable witness. She could choose to save her marriage by refusing to testify.
Where there was no evidence that the accused consented to disclosure of
communications allegedly made by him to his wife, it was held that evidence of the
wife of only such portions as were communications from her husband in connection
with the murder, were inadmissible under section 122.51.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 122.5] "Representative in interest".—
Where there is no "representative in interest" who can consent, under this section, to
the disclosure of communications made by a deceased husband to his wife during
marriage, the wife should not be permitted, even if willing, to disclose such
communications. The widow of a deceased husband is not his "representative in
interest," for the purpose of giving such consent.52.

[s 122.6] Evidence of mistress cohabitee.—
Where the accused confessed his offence to his mistress, it was held that section 122
did not in any manner come in the way of the evidence of a mistress and such evidence
could be relied upon.53. The same principle has been applied by the [English] Court of
Appeal to a cohabitee. In this case the accused appealed against his conviction for
murder. At his trial, his longstanding cohabitee had given evidence. Had she been
married to him she would have been, non-compellable witness. The accused
contended inter alia, that her evidence should have been treated in the same way as
that of a spouse. He maintained that the rationale for the rule in relation to spouses
was to protect family relationships and that the courts should assess the substance of
such relationships as well as the form in order to prevent a breach of the right to family
life under the Human Rights Act 1998 Sch I, Pt I, Article 8. It was held that it was not
possible to expand the provision so as to include partners. If the existing concession
were to be widened it would be diﬃcult to ﬁnd a logical end point and potentially cause
grave diﬃculties in the enforcement of the criminal law.54.

39. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 909-A, p 572; Emperor v Ramchandra, (1932) 35 Bom LR 174 .
40. Queen-Empress v Donaghue, (1898) Mad 1, 4.
41. Ram Chandra Shanker Shet v Emperor, AIR 1933 Bom 153 .
42. Queen-Empress v Donaghue, Ibid.
43. Appu v State, AIR 1971 Mad 194 .
44. Ibid
45. A Manibhushana Rao v A Surya Kantam, AIR 1981 AP 58 .
46. MC Verghese v TJ Ponnan, AIR 1970 SC 1876 : 1970 Cr LJ 1651 .
47. Vilas Raghunath Kurhade v The State of Maharashtra, 2011 Cr LJ 3300 (Bom).
48. Queen-Empress v Donaghue, (1898) 22 Mad 1, 4.
49. Ram Bharosey v UP, AIR 1954 SC 704 : 1954 Cr LJ 1755 .
50. R v Pitt, (1982) 3 All ER 63 , noted all ER Annual Rev. 1982 at 138 a direct consequence of

the rulings in Leach v R, (1912) AC 304 and R. v Hoskyn, 1978 2 All ER 136 to the effect that even
when she is competent she is not compellable.
51. Fateh Singh v State, 1995 Cr LJ 88 (All).
52. Nawab Howladar v Emperor, (1913) 40 Cal 891 .
53. Shankar v State of TN, 1994 Cr LJ 3071 : (1994) 4 SCC 478 : (1994) 2 Andh LT (Cri) 429 :

1994 Cr LJ 3071 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
54. R v Pearce, (2001) EWCA Crimes 2834.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 123] Evidence as to affairs of State.—
No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished oﬃcial
records relating to any affairs of State, [s 123.2] except with the permission of the
oﬃcer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such
permission as he thinks ﬁt. [s 123.3]

COMMENT
[s 123.1] Principle.—
This section involves two things: (1) That the document is an unpublished oﬃcial
record relating to any affairs of State and (2) that the oﬃcer at the head of the
department concerned may give or withhold the permission for giving the evidence
derived therefrom. On grounds of public policy, evidence derived from unpublished
oﬃcial records of State cannot be given, except with the permission of the head of the
department concerned. The court is bound to accept without question the decision of
the public oﬃcer.
Section 122 prevents communications between a man and his wife from being
disclosed. Marriage inspires conﬁdence and conﬁdence inspires openness of heart and
feeling. This enables a married person to make a clean breast of everything to his or
her spouse. Naturally, therefore, such matters should be free from the risk of being
disclosed.55. The policy of protection is thus stated by an American judge:
Communications and transactions between husband and wife were early recognised as
privileged and neither could be compelled to disclose what took place between them
and neither was a competent witness to testify to such transactions or
communications of a conﬁdential nature or induced by marital relations. From
experience it was found that far less evil would result from the exclusion of such
testimony than from its admission. It may in individual cases work hardship, but the
destruction of conﬁdence between a husband and wife would cause much misery and
affect the marriage relation. This rule is founded upon sound public policy. Those living
in the marriage relation should not be compelled or allowed to betray the mutual trust
and conﬁdence which such relation implies.56.
The only ground suﬃcient to justify non-production of an oﬃcial document marked
conﬁdential is that production would not be in the public interest, for example where
disclosures would be injurious to national defence or to good diplomatic relations or
where the practice of keeping a class of documents secret is necessary for the proper
functioning of the public service.57. Care has, however, to be taken to see that interests
other than the interest of the public do not masquerade in the garb of public interest
and take undue advantage of the provisions of this section. Subject to this reservation
the maxim salus populi est suprema lex, which means that regard for public welfare is
the highest law, is the basis of the provisions contained in this section.58. Referring to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the facts of case, the Supreme Court said:59. The court would not have rejected the
State's claim of privilege in regard to departmental nothings contained in oﬃcial ﬁles,
except for the fact that the aﬃdavit ﬁled on behalf of the Government did not
adequately bring out the involvement of public interest consequent upon the disclosure
of the nothings.
The term "evidence" refers to both oral and documentary evidence.60.

[s 123.2] "Unpublished oﬃcial records relating to any affairs of State".—
It is for the court to decide whether a document falls within the category "unpublished
oﬃcial records relating to any affairs of State." In doing so the court can have regard to
all the circumstances, barring the inspection of the document itself. Apart from this,
there is no fetter to the jurisdiction of the court looking at whatever materials are
available for the purpose of ascertaining whether the document is an unpublished
oﬃcial record relating to affairs of State. "Affairs of State" is a very wide expression.
Every communication which proceeds from one oﬃcer of State to another oﬃcer of the
State is not necessarily relating to the affairs of State. What are the "affairs of State"
has got to be determined by a reference to the grounds on which privilege can be
claimed in respect of a particular document. It is only such documents which relate to
the affairs of the State the disclosure of which would be detrimental to the public
interest that come within the category of unpublished oﬃcial records relating to affairs
of State entitled to protection under this section.61.
"Affairs of State" will include any matter of a public nature with which the Government
is concerned, i.e., all secrets of State, such as State papers and all communications
between Government and its oﬃcers—the privilege in such cases not being that of the
person who is in possession of the secret, but that of the public, as a trustee for whom
the secret has been entrusted to him.62. Under this section and section 162, the court
cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from
the disclosure of the document in respect of which privilege is claimed under this
section. That is a matter for the authority concerned to decide; but the court is
competent, and indeed is bound to hold a preliminary enquiry and determine the validity
of the objections to its production, and that necessarily involves an enquiry into the
question as to whether the evidence relates to an affair of the State under this section
or not. In this enquiry the court has to determine the character or class of the
document. Although in such an enquiry the court cannot permit any evidence about the
contents of the document, other collateral evidence can be produced which may assist
the court in determining the validity of the objection under this section. The question as
to whether any particular document answers the description of a document relating to
affairs of State must be determined in each case on the relevant fact and
circumstances adduced before the court.63.
Before any document is excluded in such a case on the ground that it relates to affairs
of State, the court must be satisﬁed that the mind of a responsible oﬃcer of
Government has been brought to bear upon the question whether it is expedient in the
public interest to give or withhold the information asked for, and that he has made his
decision solemnly and with a due sense of responsibility.64.
The orders made by the Chief Minister of which the result alone is communicated by
his Secretary to a public servant interested in knowing it, are still unpublished records
contemplated by this section. Every communication that passes between different
departments of the Government or between members of the same department inter se
and every order made by a Minister, departmental head or a responsible oﬃcer cannot
be deemed to relate to an affair of State unless it refers to a matter of vital importance

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the disclosure of which is likely to prejudice the interest of the State.65. A Government
supplier of chrome ore wanted to recover the price ﬁxed by the Department in their
ﬁles. The court held that the document concerning ﬁxation related to a commercial
transaction in respect of which no privilege could be claimed.66. As against it, in Durga
Pd v Parveen,67. it was held that the State was justiﬁed in claiming a privilege against
production of the relevant ﬁle concerning the grant of mining lease as it contained
letters written by the Head of the Department to the subordinate oﬃcers of the
Department and vice versa and between that Department and other Departments
which were unpublished and contained State secrets.
The approach to this question has now acquired new dimensions particularly since the
decision of a Bench of seven Supreme Court judges in SP Gupta v UOI.68. The case
arose out of the matter of the transfer of a High Court judge and the non-renewal of the
term of an additional judge. The correspondence between the Law Minister and the
Chief Justice of India and that between the Chief Justice of the High Court and the
State Government was required to be produced. It was held that though the "advice"
was protected from judicial scrutiny by virtue of Article 74 of the Constitution, the
material on the basis of which the advice was formulated was not protected.69.
The court also added that the common law protection known as the "Crown privilege"
or "public interest immunity" does not apply in India and observed as follows: "Meaning
and scope of section 123 cannot remain static. It must be interpreted keeping in view
our new democratic society wedded to the basic values enshrined in the Constitution."
"The concept of an open government is the direct emanation from the right to know
which seems to be implicit in the right of free speech and expression guaranteed under
Article 19(1)(a). Therefore, disclosure of information in regard to the functioning of
Government must be the rule and secrecy an exception justiﬁed only where the
strictest requirements of public interest so demands. The approach of the Court must
be to attenuate the area of secrecy as much as possible consistently with the
requirement of public interest, bearing in mind all the time that disclosure also serves
an important aspect of public interest."
"Though public interest lies at the foundation of the claim for protection against
disclosure enacted in section 123, Evidence Act, 1872, the claim which comes into
conﬂict with it is not private interest of the litigant in disclosure but the public interest
in fair administration of justice. Court has to balance these two public interests and
decide which aspect predominates in each particular case before it."70.
The mere fact that a document is marked conﬁdential will not afford suﬃcient
justiﬁcation for objecting to its production under this section, nor will it be a good
ground that the production may involve a department of the Government in a
discussion in the Legislative Assembly or in public criticism. Neither will it be a good
ground that production may tend to expose want of eﬃciency in administration or to
lay the department open to claim for compensation,71. or it is apprehended that the
document if produced would defeat the defence raised by the State. The impact of the
document on the head of the department or the Minister in charge of the department or
even the Government in power, has no relevance in making a claim for privilege under
this section.72. Where the contents of the Report of the Committee inquiring into the
allegations of sexual harassment by the oﬃcials were not related to the affairs of the
State, neither was there anything concerning the national security, nor were the
accompanying documents detrimental to the interest of the country, the Union of India
could not claim the privilege in respect of the said report.73.
The High Court in exercise of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
can call for scrutiny and perusal by it unpublished oﬃcial records. In so doing the court

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is not permitting anybody to give any evidence from these records relating to any
affairs of State within the meaning of this section.74.
Where the original records were produced by the Government for the court's perusal
and they contained secret documents, it was held by the Supreme Court that the High
Court had no jurisdiction under Articles 226 to wade through them for the purpose of
deciding controversial issues.75.
The Government claimed privilege in respect of records relating to action by the
Government for the formation of the State Human Rights Commission. The court
rejected the claim. All the documents could be looked into barring the advice tendered
by the cabinet to the Government.76.

[s 123.3] "Who shall give or withhold permission as he thinks ﬁt".—
These words clearly indicate that the Head of the Department, who is in possession of
the document is the exclusive judge of the fact whether the unpublished records are
protected from production on the ground of their being related to affairs of State, and,
therefore, the privilege claimed under the section by the Head of the Department that
the document relates to the affairs of State has got to be allowed although the decision
would be that of the court. The court simply gives effect to the decision of the Head of
the Department by adding its own command to it but the court has no power to
examine the document in order to verify the correctness of the allegations or the
grounds on which the privilege was claimed.77. The privilege should be claimed
generally by the Minister in charge who is the political head of the department
concerned, if not, the Secretary of the department who is the departmental head should
make the claim; and the claim should always be made in the form of an aﬃdavit. When
the aﬃdavit is made by the Secretary, the court may, in a proper case, require an
aﬃdavit of the Minister himself. The aﬃdavit should show that each document in
question has been carefully read and considered, and the person making the aﬃdavit is
satisﬁed that its disclosure would lead to public injury. The aﬃdavit should also
indicate brieﬂy within permissible limits the reason why it is apprehended that their
disclosure would lead to injury to public interest. In a proper case the person making
the aﬃdavit whether he is a Minister or the Secretary should be summoned to face
cross-examination on the relevant points.78.
Reports by police oﬃcers to the Government about the investigation of allegations of
the commission of an offence are privileged under this section and section 124 as they
are unpublished records and are submitted in oﬃcial conﬁdence. The privilege which
the Government can claim in respect of documents relating to matters of State is a
narrow one and must be sparingly used.79. Privilege under section 123 can be claimed
in respect of ministerial advice tendered to the President of India.80.
Where the document was not a conﬁdential correspondence, nor relating to the
transaction of business by the Council of Ministers in respect of affairs of State or
communication of policy decision taken at ministerial or secretariat level, immunity
from disclosure could not be claimed.81.
In claiming privilege under the section the head of the department should not conﬁne
himself to saying that the disclosure of the document would be against public interest
but should indicate the nature of the suggested injury to the interests of the public.82.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 123.4] Production without claim of privilege.—
It has been held that notwithstanding the bar contained in Article 163(3) of the
Constitution it shall be the sole discretion of the Governor concerned to produce the
proceedings of the Council of Ministers without any objection and without any claim of
privilege before any Court of law and then there is nothing to debar the court from
looking into the same. This proposition of law was aﬃrmed by the Apex Court in
Chaudhary v Governor of Bihar,83. overruling the judgment of Patna High Court in Ram
Nagina v Sohni.84.
The oath of secrecy does not absolve the Minister from ﬁling aﬃdavit stating grounds
or reasons in support of his claim for public interest immunity.85. The court said in this
case that immunity could not be claimed by way of mere administrative routine. It must
be shown that the documents relate to the affairs of the State and disclosure thereof
would be against interest of the State or public service and public interest must be so
strong as to outweigh the private or any other interest. Aﬃdavit should generally be
ﬁled by the Minister concerned precisely stating reasons or grounds for claim of
immunity. The court should normally be slow to question the opinion of the Minister
given in the aﬃdavit. However, the court may seek additional aﬃdavit or summon the
Minister concerned for cross-examination. The court may also examine the documents
in camera. Court should weigh the competing claims of public interest immunity from
disclosure of the documents and public interest of doing justice to the litigating parties
in the light of those documents and decide accordingly. The Government can claim
privilege from disclosure in respect of the relevant ﬁles on which the appointment of
the President of Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal was made.86.
Where an aﬃdavit was ﬁled claiming the case diaries to be unpublished oﬃcial records
and that the disclosure of their contents would be against public interest, the claim of
privilege from disclosure could be allowed.87. Merit alone should be the criterion of
admission of foreign students to professional (medical) colleges in India, the
Government should not claim privilege under sections 123 and 124 in such matters.88.
The Commission appointed to inquire into a caste war resulting in many deaths cannot
direct the Government and CBI to produce the documents for public inspection over
which privilege has been claimed.89. The records of an abortion clinic are subject to
public interest immunity. They were not ordered to be disclosed to a person who
wanted to prove as a part of his defence that illegal abortions were taking place at the
clinic.90.

55. See Dr Avtar Singh, Principles of the Law of Evidence, p 425 (13th Edn 2002).
56. Stillman v Stillman, 115 Mis C 106 : 187 NYS 383 See RICHARDSON ON EVIDENCE, p 453.
57. Tukaram v King-Emperor, (1946) Nag 385.
58. State of Punjab v Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 ; Overruled by

the Supreme Court on another point in SP Gupta v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 .
59. State of Orissa v Jagannath, AIR 1977 SC 2201 : (1977) 2 SCC 165 .
60. STOKES,Vol II, p 919, fn 2.
61. Chamarbaghwalla v Parpia, (1948) 52 Bom LR 231 . The Union Government can claim no

privilege or protection against the disclosure of any such information in its possession which

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
was made the basis of proclamation of the President's rule. Sunderlal Patwa v UOI (FB), AIR
1993 MP 214 . Sathyanarayana Bros. Pvt Ltd v TN Water Supply & Drainage Board, (2004) 5 SCC
314 : AIR 2004 SC 651 , a "handing over note" prepared by the chief engineer, held, the arbitrator
could not refuse to consider such a document on the ground of conﬁdentiality at a time when
there is a greater stress of transparency in state affairs. People's Union for Civil Liberties v UOI,
AIR 2004 SC 1442 : (2004) 2 SCC 476 , withholding of information by the State, claim of privilege
to be considered by the court in exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 136 of the
Constitution.
62. Best, 12th Edn, section 578, p 495.
63. State of Punjab v SS Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 .
64. Bhaiya Saheb v Pt Ramnath Rampratap Bhadupote, (1940) Nag 280.
65. Gursewak Singh v The State, (1953) Pat 626.
66. Ferroy Alloys Corp Ltd v Industrial Devp. Corporation of Orissa, AIR 1986 Ori 199 . The Court

relied upon State of Punjab v Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 (partly
overruled by the SC in SP Gupta v UP, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 and section 162
which requires documents to be produced. Followed in principle in Subhasini Jena v
Commandant, 1988 Cr LJ 1570 (Ori), documents connected with mobilisation etc. of armed
forces allowed to remain; even if disclosed they would have served no purpose in connection
with misconduct of army personnel.
67. Durga Pd v Parveen, AIR 1975 MP 196 .
68.

SP Gupta v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 . Followed in Sundaresan v

Ramchandran, 1987 Cr LJ 108 (Ker) where in a complaint against illegal immigration allowed by
oﬃcers, certain documents were demanded and the court held that greater harm would be done
to public interest by disclosure than by keeping them secret. State of Bihar v Kripalu Shankar,
1987 Cr LJ 1860 : AIR 1987 SC 1554 : (1987) 3 SCC 34 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 442 , notings in ﬁles
cannot be used for supporting a contempt petition.
69. Overruling its own earlier decision in State of Punjab v Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, AIR 1961 SC

493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 , to the effect that the underlying report on the basis of which the advice
was prepared was equally protected. For developments in this respect in English law see
Hasselblad (GB) Ltd v Orbinson, (1985) 1 All ER 173 and All ER Annual Rev. 1985 p 167.
70. Per Bhagwati J.
71. Tukaram v King-Emperor, (1946) Nag 385; Jaggannath Dwarkanath v State, (1971) 74 Bom

LR 320 .
72. State of Punjab v S..Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 ; Amar Chand Butail v UOI,

AIR 1964 SC 1658 : (1965) ISCJ 243.
73. Nisha Priya Bhatia v Ajit Seth, AIR 2016 SC 2319 , paras 12 and 13.
74. R. Ramanna v State, AIR 1971 AP 196 .
75. UOI v WN Chadha, AIR 1993 SC 1082 : 1993 Cr LJ 859 : (1993) 1 SCC 154 .
76. People's Union for Civil Liberties v State of UP, AIR 2000 All 103 .
77. Khawaja Nazir Ahmad v The Crown, (1944) 26 Lah 219.
78. State of Punjab v SS Singh, AIR 1961 SC 493 : (1961) 2 SCR 371 .
79. Rajul Raojee v Provincial Government, Central Provinces, (1950) Nag 690.
80. SR Bommai v UOI, AIR 1994 SC 1918 : (1994) 1 SCC 754 , dissenting from State of Rajasthan

v UOI, (1978) 1 SCR 1 : AIR 1977 SC 1361 : (1977) 3 SCC 592 .
81. Baburao Vishwanath Mathpati v State, AIR 1996 Bom 227 .
82. Chamarbaghwalla v Parpia, (1948) 52 Bom LR 231 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
83. Chaudhary v Governor of Bihar, AIR 1980 SC 383 : 1980 Supp SCC 374 , followed in Shree

Swami v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1995 Raj 69 .
84. Ram Nagina v Sohni, AIR 1976 Pat 36 .
85. RK Jain v UOI, AIR 1993 SC 1769 : (1993) 4 SCC 119 . On the facts of the case, the court

held that it was not necessary to disclose the contents of the records to the petitioner or his
counsel.
86. Ibid
87. CBI v Kumher Inquiry Commission, 1995 Cr LJ 3917 (Raj).
88. Sajitha G v Secy to Govt of India, Ministry of External Affairs, AIR 1994 Mad 204 .
89. CBI v Kher Inquiry Commission, 1996 AIHC 1971 (Raj).
90. DPP v Morrow, The Guardian, 5 April 1993 (DC).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 124] Oﬃcial communications.—
No public oﬃcer shall be compelled to disclose [s 124.3] communications ma barrister,
attorney, pleader de to him in oﬃcial conﬁdence, [s 124.4] when he considers that the
public interests would suffer by the disclosure. [s 124.5]

COMMENT
[s 124.1] Object.—
This section is designed to prevent the knowledge of oﬃcial papers, that is to say
papers in oﬃcial custody, beyond that circle which would obtain knowledge of them in
conﬁdence whether the conﬁdence was express or implied. It would normally include
all oﬃcers including clerks of superior oﬃcers and might also apply to non-oﬃcials to
whom such papers were disclosed on the understanding express or implied that the
knowledge should go no further.91. Public interests are paramount as compared with
the individual interests of a party in a Court of Justice. It is absolutely essential to the
welfare of the State that the names of parties who interpose in situations of this kind
should not be divulged, for otherwise—be it from fear or shame, or the dislike of being
publicly mixed up in inquiries of this nature—few men would choose to assume the
disagreeable part of giving or receiving information respecting offences, and the
consequence would be that many great crimes would pass unpunished.92.
There is a privilege which attaches, under certain circumstances, to communications
made to public oﬃcers. State secrets, or matters which govern the administration of
Government should not be disclosed, since to reveal them might be highly prejudicial to
public interest. Therefore, communications relating to affairs of State are generally held
to be privileged, and the oﬃcers may refuse to disclose them.93.

[s 124.2] Principle.—
A public oﬃcer cannot be compelled to disclose communications made to him in
conﬁdence if he considers that public interests would suffer by this disclosure.
This section is conﬁned to public oﬃcers; section 123 embraces everyone. Section 123
deals with unpublished records; this section deals with communications made in
oﬃcial conﬁdence.

[s 124.3] "No public oﬃcer shall be compelled to disclose".—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The term "public oﬃcer" means an oﬃcer with public, as opposed to private, duties
who receives communications made to him in oﬃcial conﬁdence of such a nature that
disclosure in certain cases would injure the public interests. The word "disclose" means
the ﬁrst disclosure of communications made in oﬃcial conﬁdence and does not apply
to a disclosure in a Court of law of what has already been disclosed outside it. The
object of the section is to prevent the disclosure of things not known outside that circle
which is in conﬁdence and the section has no application when once there has been
disclosure to a member of the public to whom the contents of such papers have not
been made known in conﬁdence.94.
The Vice-Chancellor of Punjab University is a "public oﬃcer" within the meaning of this
section.95. The privilege can only be claimed by the head of the department or by the
Secretary of that department on an aﬃdavit. Filing of a certiﬁcate only is not enough.96.
Where it is an unpublished oﬃcial record relating to an affair of the State, the question
whether the disclosure of its contents would be against public interest and whether
privilege could be claimed rested with the head of the department and if the head of
the department refused to disclose it, the court would not compel him to produce the
document or disclose its contents.97.

[s 124.4] "Communications made to him in oﬃcial conﬁdence".—
The question that arises under this section is whether the communication in question
was made to the public oﬃcer in oﬃcial conﬁdence. This is a condition precedent to
the claim, and the question is to be primarily decided by the court before whom the
privilege is claimed. There is no clear-cut rule of procedure as to when and how the
privilege should be claimed. It should be claimed at the earliest opportunity by the
public oﬃcer concerned when in reply to the summons he produces the document in
his control or charge.98. Communications in oﬃcial conﬁdence import no special
degree of secrecy and any pledge or direction for its maintenance, but include generally
all matters communicated by one oﬃcer to another in the performance of their duties.
The question whether such communication was made in the course of such
performance is for the court to decide.99. A demi-oﬃcial letter addressed by one oﬃcer
by name to another oﬃcer by name in view of the reasons for which demi-oﬃcial
letters are usually written is written in oﬃcial conﬁdence within the meaning of this
section.100. If communications are not made in oﬃcial conﬁdence, they cannot be
regarded as privileged, e.g., statements made to a station-master of a railway in the
course of an inquiry of a theft by some railway employees.101.
A Government Resolution, containing opinions of Government oﬃcers, including a legal
adviser, is a privileged document within the meaning of this section.102. A statement
made to the Collector by a person applying to have his estate taken under the court of
Wards setting forth his ﬁnancial position, that is to say, the details of his property and
liabilities, is a communication made to a public oﬃcer in oﬃcial conﬁdence within the
meaning of this section and cannot be used as acknowledgment of any liability
mentioned therein.103.

[s 124.5] "When he considers that the public interests would suffer by the
disclosure".—
The sole judge as to whether disclosure will harm the public interest is the public
oﬃcer concerned and it is not for the court to decide whether public interests would or
would not suffer.104. The public oﬃcer claiming privilege has to exercise his own

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
discretion in giving or refusing disclosure.105. His decision must not be arbitrary or
capricious. He should not claim privilege merely because such disclosure would either
advance the case of the adversary or damage his case. This section must in no event
be resorted to as a cloak to shield the truth from the court.106. Where the secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, claimed that production of documents
and video cassettes collected by CBI regarding newspaper report involving IGP in ISRO
espionage case was privileged from disclosure, it was held that the said documents
had no bearing to the security of the nation as well as friendly relations with various
countries, hence the privilege could not be claimed in respect of such documents.107.
In a case before the Bombay High Court,108. the society in question was put under
prohibition in public interest from accepting foreign contributions because of alleged
violations of Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act. The Authority under the Act claimed
privilege in respect of basic document on the basis of which the prohibition order was
issued. An aﬃdavit to that effect was ﬁled by a joint secretary in the Home Ministry.
The court examined the document and found that there was suﬃcient indication of a
possible injury to public in disclosure of the document. The court held that the claim as
to privilege was well-founded.

[s 124.6] Income tax return.—
A party in a civil suit sought production of the income-tax return of the opposite party.
The court refused to summon the document asked for considering it to be a privileged
document. This was held to be not justiﬁed. It was up to the Commissioner of Incometax to claim privilege when a document has been summoned. It is then for the court to
decide whether the privilege is to be granted or not.109.

[s 124.7] Document disclosed for taxation of costs.—
It has been held that documents disclosed for taxation of costs remained privileged for
any collateral purposes notwithstanding the US Law. The court said:110. Where
privilege in respect of conﬁdential documents was waived for speciﬁc purposes, for
example taxation of costs, there was no waiver for collateral purposes. Had the
documents been disclosed by order of the taxing master they would have retained
privilege pursuant to the Rules of the Supreme Court O LXII, rule 20(d) and the lack of
an order should make no difference to their status. The expert witness had denied that
the documents had affected his evidence and privilege could not be lost in that
manner.111. It was inappropriate to consider US law and practice in relation to such
matters in this jurisdiction. The implied undertaking was imposed on public interest
grounds and any relief from its obligations should be rare in case it deterred parties
from giving full discovery.

[s 124.8] Information in investigation by Foreign Authorities.—
The court was considering Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act 1985
(Canada) section 18, section 20. Authorities in the Russian Federation were
investigating allegations of theft and corruption involving Russian citizens and
government oﬃcials. The investigation led to Canada and the assistance of the
Canadian Authorities was sought. Documents were seized from the X's business
premises and three banks and detained by the Canadian Authorities under search

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
warrants issued in connection with the investigation. There was an appeal against the
direction that copies of the documents be turned over to a speciﬁed oﬃcial and an
order under section 20 for the documents be sent to the Russian Federation. The
appeal was dismissed. The court said that the Act did not require that a foreign state's
request for assistance should comply with section 18(1); the issue of "relevance" had
to be given a wide judicial interpretation at the investigative stage of criminal
proceedings, especially where commercial matters were concerned, as in the instant
case. The judge making an order under section 20 was not concerned, with the
ultimate admissibility of any of the documents in a Russian Court, and "relevance"
therefore meant information that would assist the foreign authorities in discovering
and proving the events underlying the allegations that formed the subject matter of the
Russian investigation.112.

[s 124.9] Information generated by investigation.—
The ﬂat occupied by the accused became the victim of burglary. A burglary search
discovered a unique mix of heroin and methaqualone. A similar mix was recovered
from the house of the burglar. The court okayed the use of this report in the heroin case
also.113.

[s 124.10] Conﬁdential Information between bank and customer.—
A conﬂict arose between the bank's duty of maintaining secrecy of the customer's
account and the duty to disclose the same because of court orders. The customer had
obtained an injunction under the English jurisdiction restraining disclosure of
documents and a subpoena was issued under the US jurisdiction for discovery of
documents. The court held as follows: The public interest in upholding the duty of
conﬁdentiality existing between banker and customer is subject to being overridden by
the greater public interest in making conﬁdential documents relating to the alleged
fraud of an international bank available to the parties to private foreign proceedings for
the purpose of uncovering that fraud. But such disclosure should be limited to what is
reasonably necessary to achieve the purpose of the public interest in disclosure. In the
instant case, the public interest in making the documents requested available in the US
proceedings, which, if successful, would result in signiﬁcant further recoveries for the
beneﬁt of the BCCI depositors, outweighed the public interest in preserving
conﬁdentiality as to those documents, notwithstanding that such disclosure could
result in breaches of conﬁdentiality and the terms of the injunction obtained by the
customer, as well as the risk that the documents would become available to the world
at large. Accordingly, liberty to disclose the documents would be granted, subject to the
proviso that disclosure should not be made without taking all reasonably practicable
steps to ensure that the documents were suitably redacted.114.

91. Pandit Chandra Dhar Tewari v The Deputy Commissioner, Lucknow, (1938) 14 Luck 351 .
92. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 941, p 597.
93. Richands on the Law of Evidence, 461 (7th Edn, 1948).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
94. Pandit Chandra Dhar Tewari v Deputy Commissioner, Lucknow, (1938) 14 Luck 351 .
95. The University of the Punjab, Lahore v Jaswant Rai, (1945) 27 Lah 561.
96. S Ajit Singh v Shri Ashwani Kumar, (1954) Pun 359.
97. Mutsadilal v UOI, (1955) Hyd 256; Public Prosecutor v Narasayya, (1957) AP 174 .
98. Bhalchandra v Chanbasappa, (1938) 41 Bom LR 391 .
99. Nagaraj Pillai v The Secretary of State, (1914) 39 Mad 304, 311.
100. Pandit Chandra Dhar Tewari v The Deputy Commissioner, Lucknow, (1938) 14 Luck 351 .
101. King-Emperor v Bhagwati Prasad, (1929) 5 Luck 297 .
102. Sursingji Dajiraj v Secretary of State, (1926) 28 Bom LR 1213 .
103. Collector of Jaunpur v Jaman Prasad, (1922) 44 All 360 .
104. Nagaraja Pillai v The Secretary of State, (1914) 39 Mad 304; Pandit Chandra Dhar Tewari v

The Deputy Commissioner, Lucknow, (1938) 14 Luck 351 .
105. Jehangir v Secretary of State, (1903) 6 Bom LR 131 ; King-Emperor v Bhagwati Prasad,

(1929) 5 Luck 297 .
106. Excelsior Film v UOI, (1966) 69 Bom LR 878 .
107. Niyamavedi v Raman Srivastawa, 1995 Cr LJ 1976 (Ker).
108. Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society of India v UOI, AIR 2002 Bom 83 . The Court followed

authorities like SP Gupta v President of India, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 ; Chamanlal v
State of Punjab, AIR 1970 SC 1372 : 1970 Cr LJ 1266 : (1970) 1 SCC 590 .
109. Debasis Sahu v Nabeen Chandra Sahu, AIR 2002 Ori 211 . The Court followed the Supreme

Court decision in Dagiram Pindilal v Trilok Chand Jain, AIR 1992 SC 990 : (1992) 2 SCC 13 : 1992
AIR SCW 913 : 1992 Tax LR 856 and also SP Gupta v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 .
110. Bourns Inc. v Raycham Corp., (No. 3), (1999) 3 All ER 154 (CA).
111. The court followed Marubeni Corp. v Alalouzos, 1988 CLY 2841.
112. Re Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, (2001) IL Pr 11, CA (Ont). Atlan v UK, (2002)

34 EHRR 33 (ECHR) the court considered the impact of the claim of public interest immunity on
the right to fair trial.
113. R v Jamil (Mohd. Ali), (2001) EWCA Crimes 1687.
114. Pharaon v Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA (in liquidation) (Price Waterhouse

(a ﬁrm) intervening) Price Waterhouse (a ﬁrm) v Bank of Credit and Commerce International SA (in
liquidation), (1998) 4 All ER 455 : (1998) 142 SZLR 251. The court applied the dictum of Sir
Richard Scott VC, in First American Croporation v Sheikh Zayed Al-Nahyan, Clifford v First
American Corporation, (1998) 4 All ER 439 at 448-449.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
115.[s 125] Information as to commission of offences.—

No Magistrate or Police-oﬃcer shall be compelled to say whence he got any
information as to the commission of any offence, and no Revenue-oﬃcer shall be
compelled to say whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence
against the public revenue.
Explanation .—"Revenue-oﬃcer" in this section means any oﬃcer employed in or
about the business of any branch of the public revenue.

COMMENT
[s 125.1] Principle.—
On grounds of public policy, a magistrate or a police-oﬃcer116. cannot be compelled to
give the source of information received by him as to the commission of an offence.117.
Similarly, a revenue-oﬃcer cannot be compelled to say whence he got information as to
any offence against the public revenue. Such oﬃcer may, if he likes, disclose the name
of the informant. It is of importance to the public for the detection of crimes that those
persons who are the channel by means of which the detection is made should not be
unnecessarily disclosed.
The accused is not entitled to elicit from individual prosecution witnesses whether he
was a spy or an informer, or discover from police oﬃcials the names of persons from
whom they had received information; but a detective cannot refuse, on grounds of
public policy, to answer a question as to where he was secreted.118.
Although this section does not in express terms prohibit a witness, if he be willing, from
saying whence he got his information, the protection afforded by this section does not
depend upon a claim of privilege being made, but it is the duty of the court, apart from
objection taken, to exclude such evidence. If objection is taken, it cannot, since the law
allows it, be made the ground of adverse inferences against the witness.119.
In the application of this privilege, the criminal procedure has to accommodate two
goals which are at times at odds with each other. On the one hand, it has to afford
accused persons an adequate opportunity to establish their innocence. An accused
must have an uninhibited right to challenge the evidence against him and establish his
innocence. On the other hand, the criminal procedure has to promote the detection of
crime. This accommodating process was in evidence in R v Johnson.120. The charge
against the accused was supplying controlled drugs. The evidence against him
consisted of the testimony of police oﬃcers who secretly observed the accused from
premises belonging to private residents, who agreed to provide the police with
observation posts. The prosecution was granted permission to withhold any
information which could lead to the identiﬁcation of these premises. As a result, the
counsel for the accused was not allowed to cross-examine the oﬃcers about the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
location of their observation posts and of the nature of any obstructions to their view.
The prosecution relied on public interest immunity as justifying the withholding of
information about the observation posts. It is well established that the police may
suppress the identity of informants in the interests of combating crime. It was,
therefore, held that within the scope of this principle the secrecy of observation posts
could be maintained.121. It was as important to secure public co-operation in providing
suitable observation posts as it is to encourage the public to come forward with
information. However, it is necessary for the claim for immunity to be entertained that
the owners of the premises should object to being identiﬁed.122.

[s 125.2] Informer's identity not allowed to be revealed even in camera.—
The court of Appeal in England held as follows: Where it was accepted by the judge in
an action for wrongful imprisonment and malicious prosecution that to admit evidence
as to the identity of an informer would hinder future police investigations and endanger
the informer, then it was not open to the court to devise a means for circumventing
that, such as requiring the evidence to be given in camera. The court is required to
balance the interests of someone seeking damages, with those of the public interest in
maintaining the anonymity of informers. Once it is accepted that the public interest in
concealing the identity of the informer is greater, and any beneﬁt to the claimant
minimal, then there is no residual discretion to order evidence to be given in
camera.123.

115. Subs. By Act 3 of 1887, sec 1, for section 125.
116. Emperor v Bilal Mahomed, (1940) 42 Bom LR 787 : (1940) Bom 768.
117. Assistant Collector of Central Excise v TK Prasad, 1989 Cr LJ (NOC) 28 Mad, recorded

information of prizes granted to informants, held privileged. See also Munna Singh v State of MP,
1989 Cr LJ 580 (MP), FIR is not a privileged document.
118. Amrita Lal Hazra v Emperor, (1915) 42 Cal 957 .
119. Weston v Peart v Mohan Dass, (1912) 40 Cal 898 , 920.
120. R v Johnson, (1989) 1 All ER 121 .
121. See also R v Rankine, (1986) 2 All ER 566 .
122. For criticism see, 1989 All ER Annual Review, p 154. Sunil Kumar v State, 1990 Cr LJ 414

(Del), secret information received under Narcotic Drugs etc. Act, 1985 not recorded before
search, not fatal.
123. Powell v Chief Constable of North Wales, The Times, February 11, 2000 (CA). The court

followed Marks v Beyfus, (1890) LR 25 QBD 494.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 126] Professional communications.—
No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall at any time [s 126.3] be permitted, unless
with his client's express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the
course and for the purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader, attorney or
vakil, [s 126.4] by or on behalf of his client, or to state the contents or condition of any
document with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of
his professional employment, [s 126.5] or to disclose any advice given by him to his
client in the course and for the purpose of such employment:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure—
(1) any such communication made in furtherance of any 124.[illegal] purpose;
(2) any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of

his employment as such, showing that any crime or fraud has been committed
since the commencement of his employment.
It is immaterial whether the attention of such barrister, 125.[pleader], attorney or vakil
was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation. —The obligation stated in this section continues after the employment
has ceased.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A, a client, says to B, an attorney—"I have committed forgery and I wish you to

defend me."
As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an attorney—"I wish to obtain possession of property by the

use of a forged deed on which I request you to sue."
This communication, being made in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not
protected from disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an attorney, to defend him. In the

course of the proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A's
account book, charging A with the sum said to have been embezzled, which
entry was not in the book at the commencement of his employment.
This being a fact observed by B in the course of his employment, showing that a
fraud has been committed since the commencement of the proceedings, it is
not protected from disclosure.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
[s 126.1] Principle.—
This section is based upon the principle that if communications to a legal adviser were
not privileged, a man would be deterred from fully disclosing his case, so as to obtain
proper professional aid in a matter in which he is likely to be thrown into litigation.
Under this section no barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall at any time be permitted
to—
(1) disclose (i) any communication made to him by or on behalf of his client or (ii)

any advice given by him to his client in the course and for the purpose of his
employment;
(2) to state the contents or conditions of any document with which he has become

acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his employment.
The privilege also extends to documents prepared in connection with the client's claim
for the dominant purpose of preparing for litigation.126.
The section does not protect from disclosure—
(1) any communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(2) any fact observed in the course of employment showing that any crime or fraud

has been committed since the commencement of the employment. Under
section 127 the above provisions apply to interpreters and the clerks or servants
of barristers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils.
The section not only protects the legal adviser from disclosing communications made
to him by his client when interrogated as a witness, but he is not permitted to do so
even if he is willing to give evidence unless with the express consent of his client.127.
The privilege under this section is not absolute. When defamatory questions are put by
a lawyer to a witness in cross-examination on client's instructions without any
reasonable basis for putting them, such a communication is not professional and its
disclosure is not protected under this section.128.

[s 126.2] Scope.—
Sections 126 to 129 deal with the privilege that is attached to professional
communications between the legal adviser and the client. Sections 126 and 128
mention the circumstances under which the legal adviser can give evidence of such
professional communications. Section 127 provides that interpreters, clerks or
servants of legal advisers are restrained similarly. Section 129 says when a legal
adviser can be compelled to disclose the conﬁdential communication which has taken
place between him and his client. Law oﬃcers have been held to be within the scope of
the section.129. Communications between an insurer and his counsel are also
privileged.130. Notes made by lawyers of statements of witnesses are within the range
of protection.131.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The protection afforded under this section cannot be availed of against an order to
produce documents under section 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The
documents must be produced, and then, under section 162 of this Act, it will be for the
court, after inspection of the documents, if it deems ﬁt, to consider and decide any
objections regarding their production or admissibility.132. Under this section an
advocate is not permitted to state the contents or condition of any document with
which he has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his professional
employment. The protection against production or disclosure does not extend to any
original document which might have come into the possession of the advocate from
his client e.g. a letter addressed to the client which was alleged to be in the brief of the
counsel.133.
No privilege can be claimed in respect of a document which came into the possession
of the opposite party and has been ﬁled in the court, though it might contain legal
advice.134.

[s 126.3] "At any time".—
These words indicate that the legal adviser is not to disclose the communication even
when the relation is ended or even after the client's death. The rule is "once privileged
always privileged." The explanation to the section clearly shows this.

[s 126.4] "To disclose any communication made to him in the course and for
the purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader, etc.".—
Communications protected by the section must be conﬁdential. The word "disclose"
shows that the privileged communication must be of a conﬁdential or private
nature.135. It is not every communication made by a person to his legal adviser that is
privileged from disclosure. The privilege extends only to communications made to him
conﬁdentially, and with a view to obtaining professional advice.136. Illustration (a)
exempliﬁes this. The section applies as much to what a witness has learned by
observation, e.g., by watching a manufacturing process being carried on, as to what is
communicated to him by word of mouth or writing.137. The privilege in respect of
professional communication is intended only to protect the interests of a client in
respect of any action or prosecution for any prior act or offence. The privilege is not
intended for committing any offence.138.
The section protects from publicity not merely the details of the business, but also its
general purport, unless it be known aliunde that such business falls within proviso 1 or
2. A solicitor is not at liberty to disclose the nature of his professional employment.139.
If an attorney discloses the facts which came to his knowledge while he was engaged
as an attorney, he will be guilty of professional misconduct.140.
There is no privilege to communications made before the creation of relationship of
pleader and client. Where two persons have a dispute about a claim made by one of
them upon the other, and both seek the help of a pleader, and one of them makes a
statement to the pleader, the statement so made to the pleader by one of the parties is
admissible in evidence. If the communication or admission be made by the plaintiff to
the witness in the character of his own exclusive pleader or legal adviser, the bond of
secrecy is upon the witness; if not, the communication is not privileged.141.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 126.5] "State the contents...of any document with which he has become
acquainted in the course...of his professional employment".—
A legal adviser is not bound to produce or to answer any questions concerning the
nature or contents of a document entrusted to him professionally by his client. The
court has no power to order production of such a document.142. A pleader is not bound
to disclose, at the instance of a third party, the contents of a will that came to his hands
in the course of his professional employment even if it is subsequently lost.143.

[s 126.6] Illegal Purpose [Proviso 1].—
This proviso differs from the English law. Under it any communication made in
furtherance of an "illegal purpose" is not privileged. Under the English law the purpose
must be "criminal" and not merely "illegal."
Disclosure was allowed where the client desired to obtain decree for money on the
basis of forged promissory notes.144.
Communications between solicitors and their clients are protected even if they contain
information from third parties.145. Communications between the solicitors and third
parties were disclosable unless they came into existence for the purpose of existing or
contemplated litigation.146.
Legal professional privilege would be overridden where the documents existed to
further a fraudulent or criminal purpose. There is no precise deﬁnition of the purpose
which invokes the exception, although a deliberate misrepresentation by a borrower to
a lender to secure a mortgage was within its scope. Privilege would be waived provided
that impropriety or bad faith was pleaded, the advice given by the solicitor was used to
further the wrongdoing and there was a suﬃcient factual basis to support the
allegation of impropriety.147.
The privilege of professional communication to the Advocate is not given relating to
the signed pleadings ﬁled in the court. A party can be permitted to examine an
Advocate of the other party as a witness for the purpose of proving pleadings ﬁled in
the court.148.

[s 126.6.1] Privilege not abrogated by Right to Information Act, 2005.—
This privilege has not been done away with by the RTI Act. It has to be given effect to
notwithstanding the RTI Act. Communications between a client and his lawyer remain
protected.149.

124. Subs. By Act 18 of 1872, sec. 10, for "criminal".
125. Ins. By Act 18 of 1872, sec. 10.
126. Silver Hill Duckling v Minister of Agriculture, Ireland, 1987 Irish Reports, 289; 1988 CLY 1593.

Communication with a lawyer is thus not a publication for the purposes of the law of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
defamation. PR. Ramakrishnan v Subramania, 1988 Cr LJ 124 : AIR 1988 Ker 18 ; Rev Fr Bernad
Thattil v Ramchandran Pillai, 1987 Cr LJ 739 (Ker).
127. Mandesan v State of Kerala, 1995 Cr LJ 61 (Ker).
128. Deepchand v Sampathraj, AIR 1970 Mys 34 .
129. MC of Greater Bombay v Vijay Metal Works, AIR 1982 Bom 6 .
130. R. Ramalingam v PR Thakar, AIR 1982 Del 486 .
131. Superintendent & LR. v S. Bhowmick, AIR 1981 SC 917 : 1981 Cr LJ 341 : (1981) 2 SCC 109 ,

a case under the Oﬃcial Secrets Act, 1923.
132. Ganga Ram v Habib Ullah, (1935) 58 All 364 .
133. Chandubhai v State, AIR 1962 Guj 290 .
134. Daya Shanker Dubey v Subhas Kumar, 1992 Cr LJ 319 (All); PG Anantasayanam v Miriyala

Sathiraju, AIR 1998 AP 335 , an advocate was sought to be summoned to prove sending of
notice to the defendant. The contents of the notice were in no way conﬁdential being already
communicated. Claim of privilege under the section was not allowed.
135. Framji Bhicaji v Mohansingh Dhansing, (1893) 18 Bom 263, 272; Memon Hajee Haroon

Mahomed v Molvi Abdul Karim and Moola Ahmed Moola Abdulla, (1878) 3 Bom 91; Emperor v
Rodrigues, (1903) 5 Bom LR 122 ; Kalikumar Pal v Rajkumar Pal, (1931) 58 Cal 1379 .
136. Framji Bhicaji v Mohansingh Dhansing, (1893) 18 Bom 263; Emperor v Bala, (1902) 4 Bom

LR 460 .
137. Gopi Lal v Lakhpat Rai, (1918) 41 All 125 .
138. Antony v GS Naidu, AIR 1967 Mad 395 .
139. Framji Bhicaji v Mohansingh Dhansing, (1893) 18 Bom 263.
140. Re an Attorney, (1924) 26 Bom LR 887 (FB).
141. Kalikumar Pal v Rajkumar Pal, (1931) 58 Cal 1379 ; Ditta v Duport Harper Foundries Ltd,

1998 CLY 96 (336), documentation and audiogram on worker's industrial deafness did not
attract legal professional as the dominant purpose of the report prepared by the Bangladeshi
Workers' Assn. was not for enabling the worker's solicitor to advice or act with regard to
litigation.
142. Vishnu v New York Ins. Co, (1905) 7 Bom LR 709 .
143. Bai Kanta v Bhailal, (1929) 31 Bom LR 1046 .
144. Gurunanak Provisions Stores v Dalhonumal Savanmal, AIR 1994 Guj 31 .
145. Balabel v Air India, (1988) Ch 317 : 1988 CLY 1594.
146. Birmingham Midshires Mortgage Services Ltd v Ansell, [1998] PNLR 237 (Ch. D). The court

followed Wheeler v Le Marchant, (1881) 17 Ch D. 675 .
147.

Nationwide Building Society v Various Solicitors, [1999] PNLR 52, (Ch. D). The court

considered the decision in Barclays Bank plc v Eustice, (1995) 1 WLR 1238 : 1999 CLY 3510.
148. Chaman Lal v Sunder Lal, AIR 2016 HP 83 , paras 11 and 13.
149. Karamjit Singh v Govindan Chettiyar, AIR 2010 NOC 699 (P&H).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 127] Section 126 to apply to interpreters, etc.—
The provisions of section 126 shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or servants of
barristers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils.

COMMENT
This section extends the privilege given by section 126 to interpreters, clerks, or
servants of lawyers. It extends to a communication made to a pleader's clerk the same
conﬁdential character that attaches to a communication to the pleader direct under
section 126.150.

150. Kameshwar Pershad v Amanutulla, (1898) 26 Cal 53 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 128] Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.—
If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he shall
not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in
section 126; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such barrister, 151.
[pleader], attorney or vakil as a witness, he shall be deemed to have consented to
such disclosure only if he questions such barrister, attorney or vakil on matters which,
but for such question, he would not be at liberty to disclose.

COMMENT
[s 128.1] Waiver of privilege.—
The privilege belongs to the client and therefore he alone can waive it. The privilege is
not lost by calling the legal adviser as a witness, unless the party having the privilege
questions him relating to conﬁdential matters.

151. Ins. by Act 18 of 1872, sec. 10.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 129] Conﬁdential communications with legal advisers.—
No one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any conﬁdential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal professional adviser, unless he
offers himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled [s 129.3] to disclose
any such communications as may appear to the Court necessary to be known in order
to explain any evidence which he has given, but no others.

COMMENT
[s 129.1] Scope.—
Sections 126, 127 and 128 prevent a legal adviser or his clerk, servant, etc. from
disclosing professional communications. This section applies where the client is
interrogated, whether he is a party to the suit or not. Documents prepared for litigation
or for the purpose of legal advice are privileged even if they are copies of documents
which may not be privileged. In the plaintiff's claim against the defendant in respect of
an accident, his solicitors obtained copies of hospital records concerned with the
plaintiff's treatment. The court of Appeal held that these copies were privileged
notwithstanding that the originals could be obtained by the defendant from the hospital
by means of a Court order. This is a part of the privilege that the advice given by a
lawyer to his client is not disclosable, the reason being that by revealing the lawyer's
copies, the lawyer's advice or strategy would emerge. Copies made by a lawyer are the
fruits of his expertise; "in so far as skill is involved it was part of his professional skill in
assisting his client to go to the hospital" and get copies.152.
"Legal professional privilege entitles lawyers and their clients to keep their
communication to themselves. They are immune from compulsory process. This
immunity may extend to third parties, such as consultants who are recruited to help
with the preparation of a case for trial. However, once the material has got out, it
should not be kept out of court on account of its conﬁdential nature any more than
would any other conﬁdential material. The exercise of the discretion in deciding
whether to restrain the use of conﬁdential material involves the striking of a balance
between the interests of the plaintiff who seeks to suppress conﬁdential information
and the interest of the defendant who seeks to use it."153.

[s 129.2] Documents pre-read and referred to in judgment.—
Where a document relating to a patent revocation was submitted in a Court from where
it happened to be read by a judge deciding another case and he referred to it in his
judgment, it was held that such a document was in public domain. The court said that it
was the effect of rules of the Supreme Court, O XXIV, rule 14A.154.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
If a party becomes a witness of his own accord he shall, if the court requires it, be
made to disclose everything necessary to the true comprehension of his testimony.155.

[s 129.3] "Compelled".—
This word does not mean subpoenaed. The section uses the words "compelled to
disclose" with reference to the case when a man has offered himself as a witness, and
must refer to some force put upon the witness after he is in the witness-box.156. Once
a client reveals in court part of the communication between himself and his legal
adviser regarding a transaction in issue, the client thereby waives his privilege with
respect to all communications connected with the same transaction. Where a solicitor
is employed by two clients in a conveyancing transaction, the communications
concerning the transaction between either of them and the solicitor are disclosable in
favour of the other.157. The legal privilege is overridden by the consideration that the
client acted in furtherance of crime.158.

[s 129.4] Chartered Accountant.—
A chartered accountant disclosed information which had come to him during the
statutory audit of a banking company. Communications were made to several persons
including the Prime Minister about the alleged irregularities by the bank. This was held
to be a grave professional misconduct.159.

[s 129.5] Medical report, psychiatrist's opinion obtained at request of
defendant's solicitors.—
It was held that the judge had erred in ordering disclosure of the report. Where, in
criminal proceedings, the opinion of an expert had been obtained at the request of the
solicitors to a party to the proceedings in circumstances where section 10(1)(b) of the
Act160. applied and that opinion was derived from privileged information from which it
could not be separated, it was itself privileged. In the instant case, the predominant
purpose of the psychiatrist's examination of the accused had been to report on his
mental state to his solicitors. The judge had been wrong, therefore, to conclude that the
psychiatrist's opinion resulted from a doctor/patient relationship. A verdict of
manslaughter by reason of diminished responsibility was substituted.161.

[s 129.5.1] Communications between DPP and Police.—
Communications between the Director of Public Prosecutions and the police are not
subject to the legal professional privilege. The public interest has to be balanced
against the need to do justice.162. The court said that it would examine the documents
itself. Legal professional privilege extends to communications with salaried legal
advisers, including internal legal departments.163. The statutory provisions governing
the relationship between the police and the DPP are such that where the police sought
the DPPs advice on certain matters both the request for advice and the advice given
would be protected by legal professional privilege. In the instant case, there was no
suggestion that C or W were seeking legal advice from the DPP. The reports were
information provided in connection with the investigation of M's murder, in accordance
with the statutory framework. Accordingly, they did not attract legal professional
privilege. In order to show that the inspection by a party of a particular document was

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
necessary for the fair disposal of a case that party had to show that he would suffer
litigious disadvantage if he failed to see the document.164. If that threshold test is
satisﬁed, an order for inspection would normally only be refused after the court had
itself examined the document in the context of material already held by the party.165. In
the instant case, given that the main issues concerned W's state of mind as regards,
inter alia, his belief in G's guilt, it was likely that the documents would further illuminate
the main questions in the case. Where, as in the instant case, the documents as a class
were subject to public interest immunity, the court should balance the need for proper
protection of the public interest with the need to do justice for the plaintiff in order to
determine whether discovery should be ordered. Since G had passed the threshold test,
the court would examine the documents and undertake the balancing exercise in order
to determine whether they should be disclosed.

152. Watson v Cammell Laird & Co (Shipbuilders and Engineers) Ltd, (1959) 2 All ER 757 ; R v

Board of Inland Revenue, ex p Goldberg, (1988) 3 All ER 248 , photocopy of a document made for
purpose of legal advice, held, privileged, though the original was not.
153. 1989 All ER Annual Review, 152.
154.

Smithkline Beecham Biologicals SA v Connaught Laboratories INC (Disclosure of

Documents), (1999) 4 All ER 498 (CA). The court applied the ruling in Derby & Co Ltd v Weldon
(Documents : Disclosure) The Times, October 20, 1988.
155. See Munchershav Bezanji v The New Dhurumsey S & W Co, (1880) 4 Bom 576, 581.
156. Moher Sheikh v Queen-Empress, (1893) 21 Cal 392 , 400.
157. Re Konigsberg (a bankrupt) ex parte the trustees v Konigsberg, (1989) 3 All ER 289 .
158. R v Governor of Pentonville, ex p Osman, (1989) 3 All ER 701 .
159. Council of the Institute of Chartered Accountants v Mani S. Abraham, AIR 2000 Ker 212 .
160. Police and Criminal Evidence Act, 1984 [English].
161. R v Davies, [2002] EWCA Crimes 85, The Times, March 4, 2002, LJ, CA (Crim Div).
162. Goodridge v Chief Constable of Hampshire, (1999) 1 WR 1558 (QBD).
163. Alfred Crompton Amusement Machines Ltd v Customs and Excise Commissioners (No. 2)

(1974) ACT 405, the court considered this case.
164. Taylor v Anderton, (1995) 1 WLR 447 followed.
165. Wallace Smith Trust Co Ltd v Deloitte Haskins & Sells, (1997) 1 WLR 257 , the principle of

this case was applied.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 130] Production of title-deeds of witness, not a party.—
No witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his title-deeds to
any property or any document in virtue of which he holds any property as pledgee or
mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate him, [s
130.2] unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the

production of such deeds or some person through whom he claims.

COMMENT
[s 130.1] Principle.—
This section is based on the principle that great inconvenience and mischief would
result to witnesses if they are compelled to disclose their titles by the production of
their title-deeds. The object of the privilege is that the title may not be disclosed and
examined.
The section protects a witness, who is not a party to the suit in which he is called, from
producing—
(1) title-deeds to any property,
(2) any document in virtue of which he holds any property as pledgee or mortgagee,

or
(3) any document the production of which might tend to criminate him, unless he

has agreed in writing to produce such document.
It would be entirely optional for the witness to produce his title-deeds, and to raise any
objection whatever.

[s 130.2] "Any document the production of which might tend to criminate him".
—
A book of accounts cannot be withheld on the ground that it tends to incriminate a
witness. The mere circumstance that the production of a document may render the
witness liable to a civil action does not come within this section.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
166.[[s 131] Production of documents or electronic records which another

person, having possession, could refuse to produce.—
No one shall be compelled [s 131.1] to produce documents in his possession or
electronic records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to
refuse to produce if they were in his possession or control, unless such lastmentioned person consents to their production.]

COMMENT
Persons in possession of documents on behalf of others are generally agents,
attorneys, mortgagees, trustees, etc. This section extends to these persons the same
protection which the preceding section provides for a witness who is not a party to a
suit.
It is not open to a litigant to refrain from producing a document which he considers to
be irrelevant and if the opposing litigant is dissatisﬁed he may apply for its production
and inspection. If he fails to do so, neither he nor the court at his suggestion is entitled
to draw any inference as to its contents.167.

[s 131.1] "Compelled".—
The use of this word indicates that the person in possession of the document will be
"allowed to produce documents which other persons would be entitled to refuse to
produce if such were in their possession. This is in accordance with English law. It
would seem to follow that, although a barrister, pleader, attorney, or vakil is forbidden
(by section 126) to state the contents of any documents with which he has become
acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his professional employment, he will
be permitted to produce the document itself if it happen to be in his possession and he
choose to do so."168.

[s 131.2] Information Technology Act, 2000.— Production of documents
[section 131].—
Section 131 has been substituted for the purpose of accommodating electronic
records along with documents. The new section says that no one shall be compelled to
produce documents in his possession or electronic records under his control which any
other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession or
control unless he consents to their production.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

166. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, section 92 and Sch. II–16, for section 131 (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).
167. Chandra Narayan Deo v Ramchandra, (1945) 24 Pat 541.
168. See Field, 8th Edn, p 803.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 132] Witness not excused from answering on ground that answer will
criminate.—
A witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant
to the matter in issue [s 132.2] in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon
the ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or
indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly
to expose, such witn and, in the absence of any ess to a penalty or forfeiture of any
kind:
Proviso.—
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall
subject him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal
proceeding, except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such answer.

COMMENT
[s 132.1] Principle.—
Under this section a witness is not excused from answering any question relevant to
the matter in issue on the ground that answer to such question may criminate him or
expose him to a penalty or forfeiture.

[s 132.2] "Any question as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue".—
The section does not in terms deal with all criminatory questions which may be
addressed to a witness, but only with questions as to matters relevant to the matter in
issue. Irrelevant questions should not be allowed, and it may be implied from the
limitation in this section that a witness should be excused from answering questions
tending to criminate as to matters which are irrelevant.169. A witness who answers a
questions or question put to him by counsel without seeking the protection of this
section is not entitled to that protection.170.

[s 132.3] Protection against prosecution [Proviso].—
The section makes a distinction between those cases in which a witness voluntarily
answers a question and those in which he is compelled to answer, and gives him a
protection in the latter of these cases only. Protection is afforded only to answers
which a witness has objected to give or which he has asked to be excused from giving,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
and which then he has been compelled by the court to give.171. The mere subpoenaing
of a witness or ordering him to go into the witness-box does not compel him to give
any particular answer or to answer any particular question. The words "shall be
compelled to give" in the proviso apply to pressure put upon a witness after he is in the
box, and when he asks to be excused from answering a question.172. Section 132
existed on the statute book from 1872, i.e., for 78 years prior to the advent of the
guarantee under Article 20 of the Constitution of India. The policy under this section
appears to be to secure the evidence from whatever sources it is available for doing
justice in a case brought before the court. In the process of securing such an evidence,
if a witness who is under obligation to state the truth because of the oath taken by him
makes any statement which criminate or tend to expose such a witness to a "penalty or
forfeiture of any kind etc.," the proviso grants immunity to such a witness by declaring
that "no such answer given by the witness shall subject him to any arrest or
prosecution or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding."173.
The proviso to section 132 is a facet of the rule against self-incrimination and the same
is statutory immunity against self-incrimination, which deserves the most liberal
construction. Therefore, no prosecution can be launched against the maker of a
statement falling within the sweep of section 132 on the basis of the "answer" given by
a person while deposing as a "witness" before a Court.174. Refusal to answer any
question put to the accused by the court in relation to any evidence that may have been
presented against him by the prosecution or the accused giving an evasive or
unsatisfactory answer, would not justify the court to return a ﬁnding of guilt on this
score.175.
The Allahabad High Court has held that this is too narrow an interpretation. A common
sense meaning should be given to the word "compelled". It is impossible to deny that in
the case of ordinary laymen unacquainted with the technical terms of this section, they
are compelled to answer on oath questions put either by the court or by the counsel,
especially when the question is relevant to the case. An answer given by a witness
under such circumstance is protected by this section. Whether or not a witness is
"compelled" within the meaning of this section to answer any particular question put to
him while in the witness-box is in each case a question of fact.176. The Kerala High
Court has similarly held that a witness who is summoned by the court feels the
compulsion not only in appearing but also that he is bound to answer questions put to
him and is, therefore, entitled to the protection of the proviso.177.
The Calcutta High Court has held that a witness who makes a voluntary and irrelevant
statement not elicited by any question put to him while under examination is not
protected by this section. It has, therefore, held that a witness making a voluntary and
irrelevant statement to injure the reputation of another is guilty of defamation.178.
According to an earlier decision of the Madras High Court a witness is not guilty of
defamation for any statements made in the witness-box.179. But subsequently it has
held that a witness who answers a question put to him by counsel without seeking the
protection of this section is not entitled to any protection as the statements made by
him are entitled not to an absolute but only to a qualiﬁed privilege.180.
The Bombay High Court has in a Full Bench case laid down that relevant statements
made by a witness on oath or solemn aﬃrmation in a judicial proceeding are not
protected by this proviso where the witness has not objected to answering the
questions put to him.181. A witness who makes defamatory statements in a witnessbox comes within the purview of section 499, Indian Penal Code.182.
The former Nagpur High Court has held that there is no essential difference between
this section and section 161(2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Section 161(2) does

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
not go further than this section.183.
Protection under the proviso to this section cannot be granted to an oﬃcer of a
company with regard to answers given by him in his public examination which might
tend to incriminate him and can be used in criminal as well as civil proceeding that
might ensue, even though he may be compelled to give the same by reason of the
provisions of section 478(5) of the Companies Act, 1956.184. Similarly section 171A of
the Sea Customs Act, 1878, does not limit the right of interrogation to questions the
answers whereto may not incriminate the person interrogated.185.
It has been held that the privilege against self-incrimination could rightly be claimed by
a defendant who had been ordered to be cross examined in contemplation of possible
contempt proceedings in the same action. The argument that privilege was unavailable
where the contempt arose out of statements made in the instant case was not borne
out by the authorities.186.
In a case, the Public Prosecutor realised that the approver who was appearing as
witness was not desirous of telling the court about the conspiracy. The Special Public
Prosecutor put a speciﬁc question to the approver as to whether he wanted to tell the
court about the conspiracy to which his answer was in the negative. Immediately, the
Special Public Prosecutor issued a certiﬁcate under section 308, CrPC that the
approver had not complied with the condition on which pardon was tendered to him
and, therefore, he may be tried separately. Upon this, when the defence requested to
cross-examine the approver, the request was opposed by the Special Public Prosecutor
on the ground that once the Public Prosecutor forfeits the pardon, the witness is
relegated back to the status of accused to be tried separately for the same offence and
as such, the approver loses his status as witness of the prosecution, and therefore, his
entire evidence though will be on record but cannot be used for any purpose and as
such the question of cross-examining such hostile witness by other accused does not
arise. Referring to section 132 of the Evidence Act, it was held by Supreme Court that
once the pardon forfeits, the approver becomes an accused and he cannot be
compelled to be a witness in view of the protection of Article 20(3) of the Constitution
of India. Accordingly, it was held that there is no question of such person being further
examined for the prosecution and, therefore, no occasion arises for the defence to
cross-examine him.187.
A witness is entitled to claim privilege in relation to any piece of information of
evidence on which the prosecution might wish to rely not only in establishing guilt but
also in making their decision whether to prosecute or not.188.

[s 132.3.1] Claim of privilege through solicitor.—
The privilege against self-incrimination cannot be claimed on an aﬃdavit by a solicitor
on behalf of his client. The authorities showed that the privilege had to be claimed on
oath by the witness who sought to rely on it, whether as a reason for refusing to answer
a question in the witness box, not disclosing a document on discovery or not answering
an interrogatory. It was not necessary that the witness seeking to rely on the privilege
describe in detail how he might be incriminated, as to do so could render him
vulnerable to the danger from which the privilege is designed to protect him. But that
does not remove the obligation on the witness to swear an oath in person, even where
support for the claim and its substantiation came from another source.189.

[s 132.3.2] Right of accused to maintain silence.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
There is no cavil over the proposition that an accused has the right to maintain silence
and not to disclose his defence before trial.190.

169. Queen v Gopal Doss, (1881) 3 Mad 271, 277, 278 (FB).
170. Peddabba Reddi v Varada Reddi, (1928) 52 Mad 432.
171. Queen-Empress v Ganu Sonba, (1888) 12 Bom 440; Queen v Gopal Doss, (1881) 3 Mad 271

(FB); Queen-Empress v Moss, (1893) 16 All 88 ; Kallu v Sital, (1918) 40 All 271 ; Emperor v
Pramatha Nath Bose, (1910) 37 Cal 878 ; Jagannath v King-Emperor, (1934) 10 Luck 169 ; Rasool
Bhai v Lall Khan, (1939) Ran 479.
172. Moher Sheikh v Queen-Empress, (1893) 21 Cal 392 .
173. R Dineshkumar v State, AIR 2015 SC 1816 (para 46).
174. R Dineshkumar v State, AIR 2015 SC 1816 (para 47). See also R. Dineshkumar v State Rep.

by Inspector of Police, 2015 Cr LJ 2362 (para 47) (SC).
175. Nagaraj v State, (2015) 4 SCC 739 (para 15).
176. Emperor v Banarsi, (1923) 46 All 254 ; Emperor v Chatur Singh, (1920) 43 All 92 ; Emperor v

Ganga Sahai, (1920) 42 All 257 .
177. MP Gangadharan v State SI of Police, 1989 Cr LJ 2455 (Ker), following Kunhappan v State of

Kerala, (1987) 2 Ker LT 222 . The court would not refuse summoning a witness only because he
would have to testify against himself. There is enough protection in the proviso. Usha Devi v
Jagdish Prasad, 1988 Cr LJ 1239 (All). Janardan Subrao Pal v Chandra Kamalaksha Pal, 2003 Cr
LJ 2909 (Bom), the accused deposed as a prosecution witness in another criminal case under
court's summons, it could not be regarded as a voluntary statement, not allowed to be used
against him in a pending prosecution, except if he were charged with giving false evidence.
178. Haidar Ali v Abru Mia, (1905) 32 Cal 756 .
179. Manjaya v Sesha Shetti, (1888) 11 Mad 477.
180. Peddabba Reddi v Varada Reddi, (1928) 52 Mad 432.
181. Bai Shanta v Umrao Amir, (1925) 28 Bom LR 1 : 50 Bom 162 (FB).
182. Ibid.
183. Hittu v Sheolal, (1947) Nag 899.
184. Gill & Co v Madhav Mills, (1969) 72 Bom LR 679 ; Odyssey Re (London) Ltd v OIC Run off Ltd,

The Times Mar 17, 2000 CA : 2000 CLY 106, a company is bound by the perjured evidence of a
director. In a previous proceeding the evidence given by the director and general manager of the
company was held to be credible and as a result judgment was given in favour of the company.
It emerged in a subsequent proceeding before a different judge that the evidence given in the
earlier case was perjured, the judgment was set aside. The court said that it was a common
ground that where fraud was that of a party to the action, or, where a corporation was a party
and the fraudulent evidence could be treated as that of the corporation, then the judgment could
be set aside, but it was necessary to determine whether S had possessed suﬃcient status to
make his fraudulent evidence that of OIC. Although the perjured evidence was that of a director
and managing director of a party and not that of a party to the action, nevertheless it would be
unjust not to treat it as being that of the company. The court followed Hunter v Chief Constable

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of the West Midlands, (1980) QB 283 : (1980) CLY 2609 and R v Andrews-Weatherfoil Ltd, (1972)
1 WLR 118 : (1972) CLY 594.
185. Hira H Advani v The State, (1969) 73 Bom LR 112 (SC). The section is not violative of

Article 20(3) of the Constitution which provides a protection to an accused person from being
compelled to be a witness against himself. See S Raghbir Singh Gill v Gurcharan Singh Tohra,
(1980) 2 SCJ 454 : AIR 1980 SC 1362 : 1980 Supp SCC 53 .
186. Memory Corp Plc v Sidhu (No. 2), (2000) Ch 645 , Ch D. The court followed Comer Products

(UK) Ltd v Hawtez Plastics Ltd, (1971) 2 QB 67 and distinguished Rice v Gonden, (1843) 13 Sim
580.
187. State of Maharashtra v Abu Salem Abdul Kayyum Ansari, (2010) 10 SCC 179 .
188. Den Norske Bank A/A v Antonatos, [1998] 3 WLR 711 (CA). The court applied Sociedade

Nacional de Combustiveis de Angola UEE v Lundqvist, [1990] 3 All ER 283 .
189. Downie v COE, The Times, November 28, 1997 (CA).
190. Yogendra Kumar Jaiswal v State of Bihar, (2016) 3 SCC 183 , para 161.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 133] Accomplice.—
An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a
conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice.

COMMENT
[s 133.1] Principle.—
The evidence of an accomplice, though it is uncorroborated, may form the basis for a
conviction.
This section is the only absolute rule of law as regards the evidence of an accomplice.
But illustration (b) to section 114 is a rule of guidance to which also the court should
have regard. It is, however, not a hard-and-fast presumption, incapable of rebuttal, a
presumptio juris et de jure.191. The combined effect of this section and section 114,
Illustration (b), is that though the conviction of an accused on the testimony of an
accomplice cannot be said to be illegal, yet the courts will, as a matter of practice, not
accept the evidence of such a witness without corroboration in material particulars.192.
A statement to this effect to be found in the judgment of Supreme Court in Dagdu v
State of Maharashtra:193.
There is no antithesis between S. 133 and illustration (b) to S. 114, because the illustration
only says that the court 'may' presume a certain state of affairs. It does not seek to raise a
conclusive and irrebuttable presumption. Reading the two together the position which
emerges is that though an accomplice is a competent witness and though a conviction may
lawfully rest on his uncorroborated testimony yet the court is entitled to presume and may
indeed be justiﬁed in presuming that no reliance can be placed on the evidence of an
accomplice unless that evidence is corroborated in material particulars, by which it meant
that there has to be some independent evidence tending to incriminate the particular
accused in the commission of the crime. It is hazardous, as a matter of prudence, to
proceed upon the evidence of a self-confessed criminal, who, in so far as an approver is
concerned has to testify in terms of the pardon tendered to him.

Reading section 133 and Illustration (b) to section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872
together, the courts in India have held that while it is not illegal to act upon the
uncorroborated testimony of the accomplice, the rule of prudence so universally
followed has to amount to the rule of law, that it is unsafe to act on the evidence of an
accomplice unless it is corroborated in material aspects, so as to implicate the
accused. The reasons for requiring corroboration of the testimony of an accomplice
are that an accomplice is likely to swear falsely in order to shift the guilt from himself
and that he is an immoral person being a participator in crime who may not have any
regard to any sanction of the oath and in the case of an approver, on his own
admission, he is a criminal who gives evidence under a promise of pardon and
supports the prosecution with the hope of getting his freedom.194.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The testimony of an accomplice cannot be used against another accused.195.
The court may consider, though it is not bound to consider, an accomplice unworthy of
credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars. The evidence of an accomplice
requires to be accepted with a great deal of caution and scrutiny because—
(a) he has a motive to shift guilt from himself;
(b) he is an immoral person likely to commit perjury on occasion;
(c) he hopes for pardon or has secured it, and so favours the prosecution.196.

However, if the statement of the accomplice/approver implicating the accused is
otherwise admissible and reliable, it can sustain conviction.197.

[s 133.2] Who is an accomplice.—
The word "accomplice" has not been deﬁned under the Evidence Act and therefore
presumed to have been used in the ordinary sense. A person concerned in the
commission of crime, a partner in crime and associate in guilt is an accomplice. He
takes part in the crime and is privy to the criminal intent. However, a witness forced to
pay on promise of doing or forbearing to do any oﬃcial act by a public servant, is not a
partner in crime and associate in guilt and therefore cannot be said to be an
accomplice. It has long been a rule of practice, which has become equivalent to the
rule of law, that the evidence of an accomplice is admissible but to be acted upon,
ordinarily requires corroboration. The contractor who gave bribe, therefore, cannot be
said to be an accomplice as the same was extorted from him.198. An accomplice by
becoming an approver becomes a prosecution witness. An approver's evidence has to
satisfy a double test: (1) his evidence must be reliable and (2) his evidence should be
suﬃciently corroborated.199.
An accomplice cannot corroborate himself; tainted evidence does not lose its taint by
repetition. "The danger of acting on accomplice evidence is not merely that the
accomplice is on his own admission a man of bad character who took part in the
offence and afterwards to save himself betrayed his former associates, and who has
placed himself in a position in which he can hardly fail to have a strong bias in favour of
the prosecution; the real danger is that he is telling a story which in its general outline is
true, and it is easy for him to work into the story matter which is untrue. He may
implicate ten people in an offence, and the story may be true in all its details as to eight
of them, but untrue as to the other two, whose names have been introduced because
they are enemies of the approver. This tendency to include the innocent with the guilty
is peculiarly prevalent in India, and it is very diﬃcult for the courts to guard against the
danger. The only real safeguard against the risk of condemning the innocent with the
guilty lies in insisting on independent evidence which in same measure implicates each
accused."200.
An accomplice is a person who participates in the commission of the actual crime
charged against an accused. He is to be a participes criminis. There are two cases,
however, in which a person has been held to be an accomplice even if he is not a
participes criminis. Receivers of stolen property are taken to be accomplices of the
thieves from whom they receive goods, on a trial for theft. Accomplices in previous
similar offences committed by the accused on trial are deemed to be accomplices in
the offence for which the accused is on trial when evidence of the accused having
committed crime of identical type on other occasions be admissible to prove the
system and intent of the accused in committing the offence charged.201. A witness,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
who assisted the criminals to the extent of keeping a look out to see whether the police
were approaching, is in the position of an accomplice.202. A witness who is not a guilty
associate in crime or who does not sustain such a relation to the criminal act that he
could be jointly indicted with the principal is not an accomplice as the element of mens
rea is entirely absent. A witness who only happens to be conversant with a crime or
who makes no attempt to prevent it or who does not disclose it, is not an accomplice
and the rule of practice as to corroboration does not apply to his evidence.203.
There is no warrant for the proposition that if a man sees the perpetration of a crime
and does not give information of it to anyone else, he might well be regarded as an
accomplice.204. A rustic villager acting according to the advice of his master and not
disclosing under the threat of death the commission of an offence by his master for
some time and thereafter disclosing the same to a police informant and before a
magistrate, such person could be called as an active participant in the crime. He could
be termed to be an accomplice.205. A pretended confederate such as a detective, spy
or decoy is not an accomplice. "If such a person has made himself an agent for the
prosecution before associating with the wrongdoers or before the actual perpetration
of the offence he is not an accomplice; but he may be an accomplice if he extends no
aid to the prosecution until after the offence has been committed."206.
The Supreme Court of India held that the rule laid down in Rex v Baskerville207. with
regard to the admissibility of the uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice is the law
in India also so far as accomplices are concerned and it is not any higher in the case of
sexual offences. The only clariﬁcation of the rule that is necessary for the purposes of
India is where this class of offence is tried by a judge without the aid of jury. In such
cases it is necessary that the judge should give some indication in his judgment that he
has had the rule of caution in his mind and should proceed to give reasons for
considering it unnecessary to require corroboration on the facts of the particular case
before him and show why he considers it safe to convict without corroboration in that
particular case. There is, however, no rule of law or practice that there must in every
case be corroboration before a conviction can be allowed to stand.208. The Supreme
Court has also held that a conviction can be based on the uncorroborated testimony of
an accomplice provided the judge has the rule of caution in mind.209. The evidence of
an accomplice being that of an interested witness or tainted one, caution requires that
there should be corroboration from an independent source in some material aspect of
not only of the commission of crime but also his involvement in it, before its
acceptance.210.
An accomplice is a competent witness and conviction can lawfully rest upon his
uncorroborated testimony, yet the court is entitled to presume and may indeed, be
justiﬁed in presuming in the generality of cases that no reliance can be placed on the
evidence of an accomplice unless the evidence is corroborated in material particulars,
which means that there has to be some independent witness tending to incriminate the
particular accused in the commission of the crime. Since he is an accomplice in a
crime who has not been made an accused/put to trial, his evidence is required to be
considered with care and caution. An accomplice who has not been put on trial is a
competent witness as he deposes in the court after taking oath and there is no
prohibition in any law not to act upon his deposition without corroboration.211.
Therefore, a deﬁnite rule has become crystallised to the effect that though a conviction
can be based on uncorroborated evidence of an accomplice, as a rule of prudence it is
unsafe to place reliance on the uncorroborated testimony of an approver as required by
Illustration (b) of section 114 of the Act.212.
According to the Supreme Court the four principles with regard to the nature and extent
of corroboration are: (1) that it is not necessary that there should be independent

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
conﬁrmation of every material circumstance in the sense that the independent
evidence in the case, apart from the testimony of the complainant or the accomplice,
should in itself be suﬃcient to sustain conviction; all that is required is that there must
be some additional evidence rendering it probable that the story of the accomplice (or
complainant) is true and that it is reasonably safe to act upon it, (2) that independent
evidence must not only make it safe to believe that the crime was committed, but must
in some way reasonably connect or tend to connect the accused, with it by conﬁrming
in some material particular the testimony of the accomplice or complainant that the
accused committed the crime, (3) that the corroboration must come from independent
sources and thus ordinarily the testimony of one accomplice would not be suﬃcient to
corroborate that of another, (4) that the corroboration need not be direct evidence that
the accused committed the crime—it is suﬃcient if it is merely circumstantial evidence
of his connection with the crime.213.
The Supreme Court also held that while approver's evidence has to be looked upon with
great suspicion, it could be decisive in securing conviction if it is found to be
trustworthy.214.

[s 133.3] Disclosure of accomplice's criminal record.—
It has been suggested that it ought to be a normal practice for the previous convictions
of an accomplice giving evidence to be disclosed to the crown at the outset. The court
said that if an accomplice witness with a heavy criminal record was protected against
disclosure of such record, then, as against the crown witnesses, such witnesses be
enjoying too much freedom.215.

[s 133.4] Partisan witness.—
In the case of evidence of an accomplice no conviction can be based on his evidence
unless it is corroborated in material particulars, but as regards the incidence of a
partisan witness it is open to a Court to convict an accused person solely on the basis
of that evidence if it is satisﬁed that that evidence is reliable. But it may in appropriate
cases look for corroboration.216. In a murder trial the evidence on behalf of the
prosecution of the son or daughter of the victim cannot be discarded on the mere
ground of their close interest in the deceased.217. Evidence of related witnesses has to
be scrutinized with caution.218. In cases of communal disturbances the evidence given
by witnesses should not be discarded only on the ground that the persons who gave
such evidence belong to one particular community and as such are partisan or
interested witnesses.219.

[s 133.5] Trap witness.—
It is not safe to rely upon the evidence of a trap witness without corroboration.220.
However, it is not necessary to have corroboration of all the circumstances of the case
or every detail of the crime. It will be suﬃcient if there is corroboration as to the
material circumstances of the crime and of the identity of the accused in relation to the
crime.221. The Supreme Court has, however, cautioned against a harsh approach which
would make things impossible to prove.222.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 133.6] Nature of corroboration required.—
Generally speaking the corroboration is of two kinds. Firstly, the court has to satisfy
itself that the statement of the approver is credible in itself and there is evidence other
than the statement of the approver that the approver himself had taken part in the
crime.223. In order to determine the creditworthiness of the testimony of the approver
and the nature and the extent of the corroboration the court must consider the question
as to how the approver came to be arrested and how did he become a participant in the
crime, the role played by him in the crime and the circumstances in which he decided to
become an approver.224. Secondly, the court seeks corroboration of the approver's
evidence with respect to the part of other accused persons in the crime, and this
evidence has to be of such a nature as to connect the other accused with the crime.225.
The corroboration need not be direct evidence of the commission of the offence by the
accused. If it is merely circumstantial evidence of his connection with the crime it will
be suﬃcient.226. The corroboration need not consist of evidence which, standing alone,
would be suﬃcient to justify the conviction of the accused. If that were the law, it would
be unnecessary to examine an approver. All that seems to be required is that the
corroboration should be suﬃcient to afford some sort of independent evidence to
show that the approver is speaking the truth with regard to the accused person whom
he seeks to implicate.227.
Some of these points have been restated by the Supreme Court in terms of the
following propositions. In reference to the requirement of corroboration, the word used
is "may" and not "must". No decision of a Court can make it "must". It ultimately
depends upon the court's view as to the credibility of the evidence tendered by an
accomplice. If it is found credible and cogent, the court may record a conviction on its
basis even if not corroborated. Corroboration in material particulars means that there
should be some additional or independent evidence (i) rendering it probable that the
story revealed by the accomplice is true and that it is reasonably safe to act upon it; (ii)
identifying the accused as one of those or among those, who committed the offence;
(iii) showing the circumstantial evidence of his connection with the crime, though it
may not be direct evidence, and (iv) ordinarily the testimony should not be suﬃcient to
corroborate that of the other.
In the words of the Supreme Court as uttered in State of TN v Suresh:228. "The law is
not that the evidence of an accomplice deserves outright rejection if there is no
corroboration. What is required is to adopt great circumspection and care when dealing
with the evidence of an accomplice. Though there is no legal necessity to seek
corroboration of accomplice's evidence, it is desirable that the court seeks reassuring
circumstances to satisfy the judicial conscience that the evidence is true." Applying it
to the facts of the case, the court said:
Where in a murder trial the evidence of the accomplice was not totally bereft of reassuring
circumstances, the accused could be convicted on the basis of such evidence.

The fact that the testimony of an accomplice was found to be not acceptable in
respect of one of the accused persons for want of independent corroboration should
not be taken to cast a doubt upon her reliability as a witness in respect of other
accused persons.229.
The testimony of an accomplice can be made the basis of conviction without
corroboration. The requirement of corroboration is a matter of prudence. The word
"may" in section 114(b) cannot be converted to mean "must".230.

[s 133.7] Bribery.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The rule requiring corroboration of the evidence of an accomplice applies with very
little force where the accused is charged with the offence of extorting a bribe, and the
accomplice is not a willing participant in the offence but a victim of that offence.231.
Persons coming technically within the category of accomplices cannot be treated as
on precisely the same footing.232. In a case of bribery where the person who pays the
bribe is not a willing participant in the offence but is really a victim of the offence,
conviction of the accused may be based on the evidence of the person paying the bribe
if there is a slight independent corroboration of his evidence.233. It is a rule of prudence
because on the whole a person giving bribe is technically in the category of an
accomplice.234. The person, who pays bribe so as to expose the conduct of public
servant and as directed by the police, is not an accomplice.235.
The Supreme Court in MO Shamshudin v State of Kerala,236. explained the position of
such a person as follows: The person offering bribe to a public oﬃcer is in the same
position as that of an accomplice but the nature of corroboration required in such a
case should not be subjected to the same rigorous tests which are generally applied to
a case of an approver in other crimes. Though bribe-givers are generally treated to be in
the nature of accomplices but among them there are various types and gradations. In
cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act the complainant is the person who gives
the bribe in a technical and legal sense because in every trap case wherever the
complaint is ﬁled there must be a person who has to give money to the accused which
in fact is the bribe money which is demanded and without such a giving the trap cannot
succeed. When there is such a demand by the public servant from a person who is
unwilling, and therefore, intending to do public good, he approaches the authorities and
lodges a complaint, then in order that the trap succeeds he has to offer the money.
There could be another type of bribe-giver who is always willing to give money in order
to get his work done and having got the work done he may send a complaint. Here he is
particeps criminis in respect of the crime committed and thus is an accomplice and
therefore a distinction could as well be drawn between cases where a person offers a
bribe to achieve his own purpose and where one is forced to offer bribe under a threat
of loss or harm, that is to say, under coercion. A person who falls in this category and
who becomes a party for laying a trap stands on a different footing because he is only
a victim of threat or coercion to which he was subjected to. Where such witnesses fall
under the category of "accomplices" by reason of their being bribe-givers, in the ﬁrst
instance, the court has to consider the degree of complicity and then look for
corroboration if necessary as a rule of prudence. The extent and nature of
corroboration that may be needed in a case may vary having regard to the facts and
circumstances.
The word "corroboration" means not mere evidence tending to conﬁrm other evidence.
In trap cases if any of the witnesses are accomplices who are particeps criminis in
respect of the actual crime charged, their testimony must be treated as that of an
accomplice; if they are not accomplices in that sense but are only partisan or
interested witnesses who are concerned in the success of the trap, their evidence must
be tested in the same way as that of any other interested witness, corroboration in
such cases may be of general nature. Where the bribe has already been demanded
from a man and if without giving the bribe he goes to the police or magistrate and
brings them to witness the payment it will be a legitimate trap and in such cases at the
most he can be treated as an interested witness. Whether corroboration is necessary
or not will be within the discretion of the court and will depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. However, as a rule of prudence, the court has to scrutinise
the evidence of such interested witnesses carefully.
It is well-settled that the corroborating evidence can be even by way of circumstantial
evidence. No general rule can be laid down with respect to quantum of evidence
corroborating the testimony of a trap witness. The court should weigh the evidence and
then see whether corroboration is necessary. Therefore, as a rule of law it cannot be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
laid down that the evidence of every complainant in a bribery case should be
corroborated in all material particulars and otherwise it cannot be acted upon. Whether
corroboration is necessary and if so to what extent and what should be its nature
depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In a case of bribe, the person
who pays the bribe and those who act as intermediaries are the only persons who can
ordinarily be expected to give evidence about the bribe and it is not possible to get
absolutely independent evidence about the payment of bribe. However, it is cautioned
that the evidence of a bribe-giver has to be scrutinised very carefully and it is for the
court to consider and appreciate the evidence in a proper manner and decide the
question whether a conviction can be based upon it in those given circumstances.

[s 133.8] Rape cases.—
The Supreme Court has laid down this principle that the testimony of a rape victim is
not to be treated as that of an accomplice. It should be treated as that of an injured
person.237.

[s 133.9] Identity.—
It is the invariable practice of the courts to require the corroboration by an independent
witness of so much of the evidence of an accomplice as goes to identify the accused
person as the offender.238. Such corroboration ought to be that which is derived from
unimpeachable or independent evidence.239.

[s 133.10] Retracted statement.—
It would be risky to base conviction on the sole retracted statement of the co-accused
but conviction is not barred.240.

[s 133.11] Abrogation of warning rule in England.—
Section 32(1) of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act, 1994 has abrogated the rule
requiring compulsory warning for corroboration of the evidence of accomplices and
complainant's in sexual cases. The Law Commission's proposals marked the
culmination of a growing dissatisfaction among judges, practitioners and academic
commentators at the complex and inﬂexible nature of the warning and its tendency to
confuse rather than assist the jury in its deliberations.241.

191. Emperor v Shrinivas, (1905) 7 Bom LR 969 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
192. Bhiva Doulu Patil, (1962) 65 Bom LR 347 ; Khokan Giri v State of West Bengal, AIR 2017 SC

668 : LNIND 2016 SC 639 , such corroboration must connect the accused with crime and also
the corroboration must be from an independent source, meaning thereby, one accomplice
cannot corroborate another; State of Kerala v Thomas, (1986) 2 SCC 411 , 413 : 1986 SCC (Cri)
176 , the testimony of particpas criminis requires some independent corroboration for
acceptance. Shankar v State of MP, 1997 Cr LJ 3876 (MP), the accomplice did not disclose the
ghastly incident for 7 days without any reason, nor there was any corroboration. The testimony
was held to be not reliable.
193. Dagdu v State of Maharashtra, (1977) 3 SCC 68 at pp 74-75 : AIR 1977 SC 1579 : 1977 Cr

LJ 1206 .
194. D Velayutham v State, AIR 2015 SC 2506 (para 6).
195. Krishnan v State of TN, AIR 2014 SC 2548 (para 20).
196. Barkat Ali v The Crown, (1916) PR No. 2 of 1917 Cr. The evidence of an approver has more

sanctity than a mere confession under section 164 CrPC because an approver deposes in open
court and is subject to cross-examination by the other accused, Re Deivendran, 1994 Cr LJ 2209
(Mad); Lal Chand v State of Haryana, AIR 1984 SC 226 : 1984 Cr LJ 164 : (1984) 1 SCC 686 ,
where the Supreme Court said : The evidence of a witness, who on his own admission, was a
person who had no compunction in betraying an illiterate woman who had engaged him to look
after her affairs and had placed implicit trust in him, deserved to be scrutinised closely and
carefully and in the absence of corroboration in regard to material aspects of the case, the court
would be reluctant to accept his testimony apart from the fact that he being an approver his
evidence calls for corroboration even otherwise.
197. Air Customs Oﬃcer v Pramod Kumar Dhamija, (2016) 4 SCC 153 , para 13.3.
198. CM Sharma v State of AP, (2010) 15 SCC 1 .
199. Shankar v State of TN, 1994 Cr LJ 3071 . MO Shamshudin v State of Kerala, (1995) 3 SCC

351 : (1995) 2 Andh LT 114 (Cri), the word "accomplice" is not deﬁned in the Act. The word has
been used in its ordinary sense which means guilty partner or associate in a crime.
200. Bhuboni Sahu v The King, AIR 1949 PC 257 at para 4 : (1949) 51 Bom LR 955 . There are

somewhat similar observations of the Supreme Court. See, for example, State of TN v Suresh,
AIR 1998 SC 1044 : (1998) 2 SCC 372 , the evidence of an accomplice is not totally bereft of
value, can be relied upon for recording conviction.
201. RK Dalmia v Delhi Administration, AIR 1962 SC 1821 : (1962) 2 Cr LJ 805 .
202. Dhanapati De v Emperor, (1944) 2 Cal 312 .
203. Ghudo v King-Emperor, (1945) Nag 315.
204. Vemi Reddy Sathyanarayan Reddy v The State of Hyderabad, (1956) Hyd 386.
205. Subash Chandra Pandia v State of Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 4108 (Ori).
206. Basheeruddin Ahamed v State of Mysore, (1951) Mys 464.
207. Rex v Baskerville, (1916) 2 KB 658 . After some difference of opinion with this decision in

Director of Public Prosecutions v Kilbourn, (1973) AC 729 ; (1973) 1 All ER 440 , the supremacy of
the rule in Baskerville was again restored in R v Beck, (1982) 1 All ER 807 (CA), that the
corroborative evidence should not only show that part of the accomplice testimony is true; but
should go further and also implicate the other accused. To the same effect, R v Donat, (1986) 2
Cr App R 1973.
208. Rameshwar v State of Rajasthan, (1952) SCR 377 : AIR 1952 SC 54 ; Jasbir Singh v Vippin

Kumar Jaggi, 2001 Cr LJ 3993 : AIR 2001 SC 2734 , approver's evidence is looked upon with
great suspicion. But if found trustworthy, it can be decisive in securing conviction. [at p 3998].
209. Kashmira Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh, (1952) SCR 526 : AIR 1952 SC 159 : 1952 Cr LJ

839 ; Bhairon Lal v The State, (1952) Raj 669 ; Autar Singh (1960) Pun 111.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
210. Vimit v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 1791 . Vasudevan v State, 1993 Cr LJ 3151 , there

must be additional evidence rendering it plausible.
211. Prithipal Singh v State of Punjab, (2012) 1 SCC 10 .
212. Suresh Chandra Bahri v State of Bihar, AIR 1994 SC 2420 : 1994 Cr LJ 3271 . Sevaka

Perumal v State of TN, AIR 1991 SC 1463 : 1991 Cr LJ 1845 : (1991) 3 SCC 1463 , approver's
evidence is acceptable if corroborated by independent evidence, ocular or circumstantial in
respect of general particulars. MO Shamshudin v State of Kerala, (1995) 3 SCC 351 : (1995) 2
Andh. LT 114 (Cri), whether in a particular case the evidence of accomplice should be accepted
without corroboration would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. UOI v JS
Brar, AIR 1993 SC 773 : (1993) 1 SCC 176 : 1993 All LJ 807, the accomplice completed his
deposition on behalf of the prosecution, the defence was afforded opportunity to cross-examine
him, his evidence became admissible. Joseph v State of Kerala, 1993 Supp 4 SCC 7 : 1993 Cr LJ
3538 , the testimony of the approver was amply corroborated by eye-witnesses and recovery of
weapons, etc., held, the prosecution established their case to that extent beyond a reasonable
doubt.
213. Rameshwar v State of Rajasthan, (1952) SCR 377 : AIR 1952 SC 54 : (1952) Cr LJ 547 . In

Ram Narayan v Rajasthan, AIR 1973 SC 1188 : 1973 Cr LJ 914 : (1973) 3 SCC 805 , the Supreme
Court reversed a High Court decision based on uncorroborated testimony. Abdul Sattar v UT
Chandigarh, AIR 1986 SC 1438 : (1985) Supp SCC 599 : 1985 SCC (Cri) 505 . Where the
participation of the alleged accomplice was itself a doubtful fact; Mukhtiar Kaur v State of
Punjab, AIR 1980 SC 1871 ; Kannan Singh v State of TN, AIR 1989 SC 396 : 1989 Cr LJ 825 : 1989
Supp (1) SCC 81 , where all the above tests were satisﬁed and, therefore, the testimony was
found to be acceptable without corroboration. See also State v Jagjit Singh, 1989 Cr LJ 986 : AIR
1989 SC 598 , approver resiling from his earlier statement, not material.
214. Jasbir Singh v Vipin Kumar Jaggi, AIR 2001 SC 2734 : 2001 Cr LJ 3993 .
215. R v Taylor; R v Goodman, 1998 CLY 302 (864) [CA (Crim. Div.)].
216. Bhanuprasad v State of Gujarat, (1968) 71 Bom LR 43 (SC). State of Bihar v Basawan Singh,

AIR 1958 SC 500 . A testimony cannot be rejected only on the ground that the witness was
interested and inimical. Babu v UP, AIR 1980 SC 443 : (1979) 4 SCC 465 : 1980 Cr LJ 392 ; See
further Ram Ashrit v Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 942 : 1981 Cr LJ 484 : (1981) 2 SCC 60 which explains
the situation where all witnesses are interested; State of UP v Manohar Lal, AIR 1981 SC 2073 :
1981 Supp SCC 35 : 1981 Cr LJ 1701 . For difference between interested and related witness
see State of Rajasthan v Kalki, AIR 1981 SC 1390 : 1981 Cr LJ 1012 . An interested witness is not
like approver, only more precaution is necessary. State of UP v Ballabh Das, AIR 1985 SC 1384 :
(1985) Cr LJ 2009 : (1985) 3 SCC 703 ; A son of the deceased cannot be disbelieved. Natthu v
UP, AIR 1977 SC 2096 : (1977) 4 SCC 293 : 1977 Cr LJ 1578 ; Guli Chand v Raj, AIR 1974 SC 775 :
1974 Cr LJ 510 .
217. Bhupender Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1968 SC 1438 : 1969 Cr LJ 6 ; Naﬁz Ad v State, 1989

Cr LJ 1296 (Bom), where the accomplice turned approver was a drug peddlar along with the
accused persons, testimony uncertain, no corroboration available, hence not relied upon.
218. Birender Poddar v State of Bihar, 2011 Cr LJ 3120 (SC).
219. Manilal v State, AIR 1969 Ori 176 ; Vinod Chaturvedi v State of MP, (1984) 2 SCC 350 : AIR

1984 SC 911 : 1984 Cr LJ 814 . Testimony of a co-occupant that letting was not on leave and
licence basis and that he would vacate whenever asked to do so was held to be not unnatural
and hence reliable even if he was an interested witness. Vishnudeo Kumar v State of Bihar, 1986
Supp SCC 656 : 1987 SCC (Cr) 180 Evidence regarding recovery of cash and gold from
accused's house which was not the subject-matter of the charge the evidence not suﬃcient to
connect accused with the crime. Ramprasad v State of Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 2889 : AIR 1999

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
SC 1969 conviction on sole basis is permissible if the accomplice passes the test of reliability
and corroboration in material particulars. His statement before the magistrate before pardon
can be used as former statement of the witness. He did not disclose the name of one of the
accomplices. This was held to be of no signiﬁcance because in his confessional statement he
mentioned the other accused persons also.
220. Ramnarayan Patnaik v State, 1989 Cr LJ 172 (Ori), where no independent corroboration was

available.
221. Major E G Barsay v State of Bombay, AIR 1961 SC 1762 : (1962) 2 SCR 195 . Raghubir Singh

v Haryana, AIR 1974 SC 1516 : 1974 Cr LJ 1062 : (1974) 4 SCC 560 . State of UP v Hakim Singh,
AIR 1980 SC 2128 : 1980 Cr LJ 1478 , mid-night murder, home people only naturally witnesses;
Maharaj Singh v Rajasthan, AIR 1981 SC 936 : 1981 Cr LJ 477 .
222. State of Maharashtra v Narsingrao, AIR 1984 SC 63 : 1984 Cr LJ 4 : (1984) 1 SCC 446 : 1984

SCC (Cri) 109 : 1984 Mad LJ (Cri) 207. Accused trapped with the use of phenolphathalein,
Darshan Kumar v State of Punjab, 1988 Cr LJ 1446 (P&H). Sadashiv Mahadeo v State of
Maharashtra, 1990 Cr LJ 600 : AIR 1990 SC 287 , unsuccessful evidence of trap and the
Supreme Court explains ingredients.
223. Chandan v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1988 SC 599 : 1988 Cr LJ 842 : (1988) 1 SCC 696 : 1988

SCC (Cri) 238 , the testimony of the approver seemed motivated in self-interest, hence rejected;
evidence of test identiﬁcation witnesses who were not examined, not good for corroboration.
224. Rampal Pithwa Rahidas v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 2320 : (1994) 1 Crimes 1017 .
225. Saravanbhavan v State of Madras, AIR 1966 Mad 1273 ; See also Lacchi Ram v State of

Punjab, AIR 1967 SC 792 : 1967 Cr LJ 671 . See also Balwant Kaur v UT Chandigarh, AIR 1988 SC
139 : (1988) 1 SCC 1 : 1988 Cr LJ 398 , where the corroborative evidence to connect the
accused with the crime was not there. The wife of the deceased, the appellant in this case, was
alleged to have exhorted the two killers to eliminate her husband. One of the killers became
approver. He testiﬁed that she was involved in sex affairs with both of them and promised to live
as the wife of one of them after the elimination of her husband. No corroboration of these
particulars was available. The Supreme Court extended the beneﬁt of doubt to the accused
young girl.
226. KK Jadav v State of Gujarat, AIR 1966 SC 821 : 1962 Supp (2) SCR 726 ; see also Ramanlal v

State of Bombay, AIR 1960 SC 961 : 1960 Cr LJ 1380 ; Major EG Barsay v State of Bombay, AIR
1961 SC 1762 .
227. Bishnu Pada Chatterji v Emperor, (1944) 2 Cal 327 ; Ranjeet Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR

1988 SC 672 : 1988 Cr LJ 845 : (1988) 1 SCC 633 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 229 , corroborating evidence
must be independent and reliable. Here the approver was related both ways and, therefore,
could not have been interested in one or the other and also gave a detailed account of his own
participation, testimony accepted. Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary v State of Maharashtra, 2000
Cr LJ 4640 (SC), the statement of the accomplice was vivid in explanations and inspired
conﬁdence of the court. Corroborative evidence left no doubt as to the involvement of the
accused in the crime. Conviction of accused was held not liable to be set aside.
228. State of TN v Suresh, AIR 1998 SC 1044 at 1048 : (1998) 2 SCC 372 .
229. Ramadhar Basu v State of WB, AIR 2000 SC 908 : 2000 Cr LJ 1417 : (2000) 3 SCC 161 ,

Mohan v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1179 : AIR 1997 SC 1704 , the approver stated that he
was a party to the conspiracy to murder. His statement was corroborated by prosecution
witnesses and medical evidence. Some discrepancies in his version of injuries caused by blunt
weapon did not make it as liable to be rejected. Perajmal Ballaji v State of TN, 1998 Cr LJ 1416
(SC), the evidence of accomplice in this was not bereft of reassuring circumstances. It could be
relied on for convicting the accused.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
230. Sitaram Sao v State of Jharkhand, AIR 2008 SC 391 : (2007) 12 SCC 630 , the court stated

the extent and nature of corroboration required.
231. Emperor v Papa Kamalkhan, (1935) 37 Bom LR 336 : 59 Bom 486; Deo Nandan Pershad v

Emperor, (1906) 33 Cal 649 . CM Sharma v State of AP, AIR 2011 SC 608 : 2010 (4) Crimes 347
(SC), a contractor gave bribe to a public servant was not regarded as a accomplice as the
money was extorted from him. It would lead to absurd results if were treated an accomplice
requiring corroboration.
232. King-Emp. v Malhar, (1901) 3 Bom LR 694 : 26 Bom 193; Kamala Prasad v Sital Prasad, sup;

Banu Singh v Emperor, (1906) 33 Cal 1353 .
233. Narayan Prashad v King-Emperor, (1948) Nag 276. The Supreme Court held in Raghubir v

Haryana, AIR 1974 SC 1516 : (1974) 4 SCC 560 : 1974 Cr LJ 1062 that the evidence of a bribe
payer carries little conviction in the absence of reassuring support; Gulam Mahmood v Gujarat,
AIR 1980 SC 1558 : 1980 Cr LJ 1096 : 1980 Supp SCC 684 .
234. Devan v State, 1988 Cr LJ 1005 (Ker). See Sheo Nandan Paswan v State of Bihar, 1987 Cr LJ

793 : AIR 1987 SC 877 , solitary accomplice witness found to be not reliable.
235. Rajasingh v State, 1995 Cr LJ 955 (Mad).
236. MO Shamshudin v State of Kerala, (1995) 3 SCC 351 : (1995) 2 Andh LT 114 (Cri).
237. State of Rajasthan v Narayan, AIR 1992 SC 2004 : (1992) 3 SCC 615 .
238. Emperor v Kostalkhan, (1902) 4 Bom LR 431 ; Queen-Empress v Krishnabhat, (1885) 10 Bom

319.
239. Emperor v Baji Krishna, (1904) 6 Bom LR 481 .
240. Haji Abdulla Haji Ibrahim Mandhra v Supdt. of Customs, Bhuj, 1992 Cr LJ 2800 (Guj).
241. 1995 All ER Annual Review at pp 230- 231. The courts had to give new guidelines to judges

in the area of suspect witnesses generally in the wake of the demise of the corroboration rules.
This opportunity came in R v Makanjuola and R v Easton, (1995) 3 All ER 730 (CA), signalling an
end to the ﬂow of technical appeals regarding corroboration rules.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER IX OF WITNESSES
[s 134] Number of witnesses.—
No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any
fact.

COMMENT
Under the Act no particular number of witnesses is required in any case. of course it is
open to a ﬁnal Court of fact to believe or disbelieve a statement, but simply because
the statement is of one witness that cannot by itself be a ground for not acting upon
that testimony.242. Neither the number of witnesses, nor the quantity of evidence is
material. It is the quality that matters.243. There is a general public reluctance in
appearing as witnesses. Hence there should be no insistence that there should be
more witnesses than one.244.
The court said: "The public are generally reluctant to come forward to depose before
the court. It is, therefore, not correct to reject the prosecution version only on the
ground that all witnesses to the occurrence have not been examined. Nor is it proper to
reject the case for want of corroboration by independent witnesses if the case made
out is otherwise true and acceptable."
In the matter of appreciation of evidence of witnesses, it is not the number of
witnesses but quality of their evidence which is important, as there is no requirement in
law of evidence that any particular number of witnesses is to be examined to
prove/disprove a fact. It is a time-honoured principle that evidence must be weighed
and not counted. The test is whether the evidence has a ring of truth, is cogent, credible
and trustworthy or otherwise. The legal system has laid emphasis on value provided by
each witness, rather than the multiplicity or plurality of witnesses. It is quality and not
quantity, which determines the adequacy of evidence as has been provided by section
134 of the Evidence Act. Where the law requires the examination of at least one
attesting witness, it has been held that the number of witnesses produced do not carry
any weight.245.
The Supreme Court has been sustaining convictions on the basis of the testimony of a
sole witness. In one of the cases,246. it remarked: "There is no computerised rule. Nor
are judges computers. It must always depend on the circumstances of each case and
the quality of the evidence of the single witness. In this case we ﬁnd there is abundant
evidence direct and circumstantial to prove the guilt of the appellants. The trial court
called the appellants 'dare-devils of the locality'. No one was willing to come forward to
depose against them. In such circumstances, as always, the court has to separate the
grain from the chaff."
The Supreme Court in Marwadi Kishore Parmanand v State of Gujarat247. explained the
reliability factor in the following words: Generally speaking oral testimony may be
classiﬁed into three categories, namely, (1) wholly reliable, (2) wholly unreliable and (3)

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. So far as the ﬁrst category of proof is
concerned, the courts have no diﬃculty in coming to its conclusion either way, that is to
say, it may convict or may acquit an accused on the testimony of the single witness, if
his testimony is found to be above approach or suspicion of interestedness,
incompetence or subordination. In the case of second category of the witness, the
court has equally no diﬃculty in coming to the conclusion. But in the third category of
cases, the court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material
particulars by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial. More often than not there are
situations where only a single person is available to give evidence in respect of a
disputed fact. Naturally in such a situation the court has to weigh carefully such a
testimony and if it is satisﬁed that the evidence is reliable and free from all taints which
tend to render oral testimony open to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such
testimony.

242. Ramnath v Extra Assistant Commissioner, Jabalpur, (1953) Nag 361.
243. Maqsoodan v State of UP, AIR 1983 SC 126 : 1983 Cr LJ 218 . Ramashish Rai v State of

Bihar, 1989 Cr LJ 336 (Pat), sole witness, value of evidence explained; Rameshwar v State of UP,
1987 Cr LJ 442 (All), a village woman, wife of deceased, mentioning only herself as an eyewitness, sole testimony, relied upon. See also Barkau v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 2954 (All),
evidence has to be weighed and not counted. Kedar Behera v State, 1993 Cr LJ 378 (Ori), it is the
acceptability of evidence which is material. State of MP v Dharkole, (2004) 13 SCC 308 : AIR
2005 SC 44 : 2005 Cr LJ 108 , non-examination of any particular witness does not affect the
prosecution case when the witness examined by the prosecution without the cross-examination
pointing to the guilt of the accused.
244. State of UP v Anil Singh, AIR 1988 SC 1998 : 1988 Supp SCC 686 : 1989 Cr LJ 88 : 1989

SCC (Cri) 48 . It is not necessary to multiply witnesses, State of UP v Hakim Singh, AIR 1980 SC
184 : 1980 All LJ 16 : 1980 Cr LJ 46 (SC). The fact that some witnesses are not produced does
not cast a reﬂection upon the probative value of the testimony of those who are actually
produced. Allaudin Mian v State of Bihar, AIR 1989 SC 1456 ; 1989 Cr LJ 1466 ; Appukuttan v
State, 1989 Cr LJ 2362 (Ker); Gaital v State, 1988 Cr LJ 960 (All), sole witness. Another case
depending on sole witness, Banshidhar Swain v State of Orissa, 1987 Cr LJ 1819 (Ori). Conviction
can be based upon the truthful testimony of a solitary witness, Kartik Malhar v State of Bihar,
1996 Cr LJ 889 : (1996) 1 SCC 614 . To the same effect, see SG Gundegowda v State, 1996 Cr LJ
852 (Kant). Munshi Prasad v State of Bihar, AIR 2001 SC 3031 at 3038, certain independent
witnesses to the fact of murder from the nearby residential area were not examined, the court
said that it was not something which could be regarded as material because the evidence on
record was of satisfactory and trustworthy nature. Increasing the number of witnesses only for
the sake of increase was not necessary. Gopal Mahadeo Tambada v State of Maharashtra, 1997
Cr LJ 2425 (Bom), sole eye- witness, wife of the deceased, testimony supported by medical
evidence, ballistic experts and witnesses of recoveries, conviction sustained on the basis of the
account.
245. Laxmibai v Bhagwantbuva, (2013) 4 SCC 97 .
246. Madan Lal v State, (1978) Cr LJ 1832 at 1835 (SC). Ramesh Bhagwan Manjrekar v State,

1997 Cr LJ 796 (Bom), a conviction on the basis of a sole eye-witness can be sustained if he is
reliable. In the present case, however, there were three witnesses. State v Datta Maruti Salagar,
1998 Cr LJ 3756 (Bom) sole reliable witness, but some contradiction, not a ground for rejecting

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
his evidence. Shyamrao Vishnu Patil v State, 1998 Cr LJ 3446 (Bom), conviction was based in
this case on the solitary statement of the victim. The court said that the conviction was not bad
in law because evidence has to be weighed not counted, Sheelam Ramesh v State of AP, 2000 Cr
LJ 51 (AP), the prosecution did not examine other nearby persons. The court said that the
evidence of eye-witnesses could not be minimised by that reason. The courts are concerned
with quality and not quantity of evidence. State of Maharashtra v Raju Dadaba Borge, 2001 Cr LJ
3638 (Bom), plurality of evidence is only a rule of caution and not an inﬂexible legal requirement.
Evidence has to be weighed, not counted. A conviction can be based on the testimony of a
solitary witness. Kewla Ram v State of Rajasthan, 2000 Cr LJ 3077 (Raj), the testimony of the
sole eye-witness to murder did not suffer from any inﬁrmity, hence accepted.
247. Marwadi Kishore Parmanand v State of Gujarat. (1994) 4 SCC 549 : 1994 SCC (Cr.) 1294.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 135] Order of production and statement to this effect to be found
examination of witnesses.—
The order in which witnesses are produced and examined shall be regulated by the
law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal procedure
respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court. [s
135.4]

COMMENT
This section deals with the order in which witnesses are to be examined; and not with
the quantity or quality of the proof.
In civil proceedings the order is to be regulated by the provisions of the Civil Procedure
Code; and in criminal proceedings, by those of the Criminal Procedure Code. Failing
these, the order is to be determined by the discretion of the court. In practice, however,
it is left largely to the option of the party calling witnesses to examine them in any order
he chooses.
Where there is delay in examination of a particular witness and a plausible explanation
has been offered for delayed examination of that witness, there is no ground to doubt
the veracity of prosecution case.1.
Merely because some of material witnesses were not examined by prosecution, a
criminal Court would not lean towards drawing the adverse inference that if they were
examined they would have given contrary version.2.
At the same time, non-examination of named witness and merely giving statement that
a particular witness is not ready to come and depose in support of prosecution
charges, without assigning any substantial reason, may not be suﬃcient and good
reasons for not examining witness, more so, when witnesses examined, appear deeply
interested with prosecution and inimical to accused persons.3.

[s 135.1] Civil proceedings.—
In civil suits, it is the plaintiff who generally has the right to begin (Civil Procedure Code,
O XVIII, rule 1). The other party has then to state his case (O XXVIII, rule 2). If the
defendant admits the facts alleged by plaintiff and relies on a defence, it is for him to
establish that defence. The plaintiff may then prove his case in rebuttal, if any (O XVIII,
rule 3). Where a party is taken by surprise by a point made against him at the hearing,
the judge may, if he thinks right, at any stage of the trial, allow him to produce rebutting
evidence.4. Such evidence must be that which goes to cut down the defence, without
being in conﬁrmation of the original case.5.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In civil appeals, the appellant is heard ﬁrst in support of his appeal. If the court does
not dismiss the appeal at once, the respondent is heard against the appeal; and in such
case the appellant is entitled to reply (O XLI, rule 16).
The Bombay High Court has upheld the court's power to direct witness to go out of
court when the evidence of other witness is being recorded. Courts can exercise this
power in civil cases also depending upon facts of each case. But at the same time, if a
witness is present in court at the time of examination of other witnesses, the court has
no power under Evidence Act or even under CPC to decline permission to examine
witness on ground that he was present in court while evidence of other witnesses was
being recorded. The issue as to whether the evidentiary value of evidence of such
witnesses would be affected by reason of that witness remaining present in court
during recording of evidence of other witnesses, will depend on facts of case.6.

[s 135.2] Criminal proceedings.—
In criminal proceedings, the complainant or the prosecutor, as the case may be, has the
right to begin; and, if necessary, the accused is asked to adduce his evidence in
defence. The trial before a magistrate may be (a) in summons cases (Criminal
Procedure Code, sections 251–258), or (b) in warrant cases instituted by the Police,
section 238; otherwise than on Police report (sections 244–249) or (c) summary
(section 260). Where a trial takes place before a Court of Session, or High Court, the
procedure as laid down in section 226, et seq. of the Criminal Procedure Code is
followed. In hearing appeals, the appellant begins and if necessary the other side is
heard next (section 385).
In a trial under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act for dishonour of cheque,
it was held that the procedure of ﬁlling aﬃdavit in lieu of examination-in-chief as
provided under section 145 of the Negotiable Instruments Act does not violate the right
of accused to fair trial and an opportunity to cross examine the witness.7.
However, where the accused was facing trial for possession of narcotic drugs, a prayer
was made by the accused for deferring the cross-examination of oﬃcial witness till the
recording of examination-in-chief of all the witnesses. This prayer was declined by
court on the ground that the same will delay the disposal of matter. Sections 231(2)
and 243(3) of CrPC may be invoked only to have speedy trial and not otherwise.8.

[s 135.3] Commission.—
In both civil and criminal proceedings witnesses may be examined on commission,
where evidently the same rules will apply respectively (see Civil Procedure Code, O
XXVI, rules 1–8; Criminal Procedure Code, sections 284–288). Evidence taken on
commission is later put on the record of the case.9.

[s 135.4] "Discretion of the Court".—
The court is very slow to interfere with the discretion of counsel as to the order in
which witnesses should be examined.10. While counsel has discretion, the court has
also the power to direct the order in which witnesses cited by the party shall be
examined.11.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

1. Abuthagir v State Rep. by Inspector of Police, Madurai, 2009 Cr LJ 3987 (SC).
2. Joginder v State, 2010 Cr LJ 1770 (Del).
3. Mrityunjay Mani Mishra v State of Bihar, 2011 Cr LJ 1966 (Pat).
4. Bigsby v Dickinson, (1876) 4 Ch D 24 .
5. Rex v Hilditch, (1832) 5 C&P 299.
6. Indur Kartar Chhugani v Ms Priya Sunil Dutt, 2011 Cr LJ 3571 (Bom).
7. Abdul Aziz Lokhandwala and etc etc v Nasir Ali, 2010 Cr LJ 1981 (Bom).
8.

Shamoon Ahmed Sayed v Intelligence Oﬃcer, Narcotic Central Bureau, South Zonal Unit,

Chennai, 2009 Cr L J 1215 (SC).
9.

Kusum Kumari Roy v Satya Ranjan Das, (1903) 30 Cal 999 ; Man Gobinda Choudhuri v

Shashindra Chandra Chowdhuri, (1907) 35 Cal 28 ; Dhanu Ram Mahto v Murli Mahto, (1909) 36
Cal 566 .
10. Per Stanley J, in Kedar Nath Ghose v Bhupendra Nath Bose, (1900) 5 Cal WN xv.
11. In the goods of Gopessur Dutt, (1911) 16 Cal WN 265. This discretion should be fairly

exercised. Ram Singh v State of MP, 1989 Cr LJ (NOC) 206 (MP).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 136] Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.—
When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the party
proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if proved, would be
relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the facts, if proved,
would be relevant, and not otherwise.
If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon
proof of some other fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is
given of the fact ﬁrst mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such
fact, and, the Court is satisﬁed with such undertaking.
If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being ﬁrst
proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the ﬁrst fact to be
given before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second
fact before evidence is given of the ﬁrst fact.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to

be dead, which statement is relevant under section 32.
The fact that the person is dead must be proved by the person proposing to
prove the statement, before evidence is given of the statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost.

The fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to
produce the copy, before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen. It is

proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property.
The relevancy of the denial depends on the identity of the property. The Court
may, in its discretion, either require the property to be identiﬁed before the denial
of the possession is proved, or permit the denial of the possession, to be proved
before the property is identiﬁed.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect

of a fact in issue. There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) which must
be shown to exist before the fact (A) can be regarded as the cause or effect of
the fact in issue. The Court may either permit A to be proved before B, C and D is
proved, or may require proof of B, C and D before permitting proof of A.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
This section embodies three cardinal rules as to the admissibility of evidence.
Though proper time for objecting to the admissibility of a document is when it is
tendered, mere omission to so object does not constitute an inadmissible document
evidence. Party seeking to put a document in evidence must show under which section
it is admissible. Improper admission or rejection of evidence will not by itself form
ground for a new trial or reversal of a decision if, in view of the other evidence in the
case, the decision would be the same even if there had been no such improper
admission or rejection.12.

[s 136.1] Evidence relating to facts in issue and also relevant facts.—
[Clause 1].—In order to focus the attention of the litigants to the points in dispute
between them, issues are raised on the pleadings. The parties are called upon to lead
evidence on them. Such evidence must primarily relate to facts in issue; but it may also
refer to relevant facts (section 5). In the latter case, the ﬁrst paragraph of this section
enables the presiding judge to ask the party to show the relevancy of the fact which is
sought to be proved. Questions of admissibility of evidence are to be determined by the
judge.
In dealing with the relevancy of facts as above, two sets of special circumstances may
arise; ﬁrst, where the evidence of one fact is admissible only upon proof of some other
fact, such last-mentioned fact must be proved ﬁrst, unless the court accepts the
undertaking by the party that it will be proved later on (clause 2); and, second, where
the relevancy of one fact depends upon the proof of another fact, the judge may in his
discretion permit either of them to be proved ﬁrst (clause 3).
It is the bounden duty of a party, personally knowing the whole circumstances of the
case, to give evidence on his own behalf and to submit to cross-examination. His nonappearance as a witness would be the strongest possible circumstance going to
discredit the truth of his case.13.

[s 136.2] Other Facts on assurance may be proved later.—
[Clause 2].—This clause should be read with section 104. Its purpose is to facilitate a
party in laying his case before the court. Where a witness in the box deposes to a story,
some portions of which would become admissible only on proof of certain other facts,
it is convenient as well as economical in time to permit him to complete his story, as
soon as the party calling him gives an assurance that such other facts will be proved by
him later on. Illustrations (a) and (b) demonstrate the application of the rule.

[s 136.3] Judge's discretion—Either fact proved ﬁrst.—
[Clause 3].—This clause is expressed in wider terms than clause 2. When the relevancy
of one fact depends upon the proof of another fact, the judge has full discretion to
allow either fact to be proved ﬁrst. The clause is illustrated by illustrations (c) and (d).
Questions as to the admissibility of evidence should be decided as they arise and
should not be reserved until judgment in the case is given.14. Where a judge is in doubt
as to the admissibility of a particular piece of evidence he should declare in favour of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
admissibility rather than of non-admissibility.15. The Supreme Court upheld the
rejection of the evidence of a living person by means of an aﬃdavit. The proper course
was for the signatory of the aﬃdavit to appear in person.16.

12. Dwijesh Chandra Ray Chaudhuri v Naresh Chandra Gupta, (1946) 1 Cal 149 .
13. Gurbaksh Singh v Gurdial Singh, (1927) 29 Bom LR 1392 (PC).
14.

Jadu Rai v Bhubotaran Nundy, (1889) 17 Cal 173 ; Ramjibun Serowgy v Oghore Nath

Chatterjee, (1897) 25 Cal 401 .
15. PER STRAIGHT, J, in The Collector of Gorakhpur v Palakdhari Singh, (1889) 12 All 1 , 26 (FB).
16. Munir Ad v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1989 SC 705 : 1989 Cr LJ 845 : 1989 Supp 119 SCC 377 :

1989 SCC (Cri) 455 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 137] Examination-in-chief.—
The examination of a witness by the party who calls him shall be called his
examination-in-chief.
Cross-examination.—
The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his crossexamination.
Re-examination.—
The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.

COMMENT
Evidence of witnesses examined in defence on behalf of one accused and crossexamined on behalf of another accused is admissible as against the latter. It may be
otherwise where that other accused had no opportunity of cross-examining them or
where he has not been given an opportunity by the magistrate or the judge to explain
the circumstances appearing in such evidence.17.
The third para, means "where a witness has been cross-examined, and is then
examined by the party who called him, such subsequent examination shall be called his
re-examination."18.
The evidence produced through the successive examinations has to be taken as a
whole and not that one portion can be taken in by ignoring the others.19.
A party must be given a fair chance to cross-examine the witness.20. Summary
procedure cannot take away the right of a party to cross-examine the other side.21. In
State of Karnataka v S Dhandapani Modaliar,22. it was held that some time should
intervene between framing of the charge and statement of the accused about his
desire of cross-examination because in a large number of cases they are ignorant of
the law and must need advice before they can make up mind whether to further crossexamine the witnesses already examined by the prosecution.

[s 137.1] Cross-examination without examination-in-chief.—
Where a witness was not examined in examination-in-chief, tendering him for crossexamination is not permissible.23. Section 138 envisages that a witness would ﬁrst be
examined-in-chief and then subjected to cross-examination and for seeking any
clariﬁcation, the witness may be re-examined by the prosecution. There is no purpose

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
in tendering a witness for cross-examination only. Tendering of a witness for crossexamination without examination-in-chief amounts to giving up of the witness by the
prosecution. However, the practice of tendering witnesses for cross-examination in a
sessions trial had been frequently resorted to since the enactment of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898. The reason behind taking recourse to such a practice, which
undoubtedly was inconsistent with section 138 of the Evidence Act, is not far to seek.
Under the old Code, as it stood prior to its amendment by Act 26 of 1955, a full-ﬂedged
magisterial enquiry was to be held in a case which was triable exclusively by the court
of session or the High Court in accordance with the procedure laid down in Chapter
XVIII thereof and in that enquiry prosecution was required to examine all its witnesses.
Under section 288 of that Code the evidence of the witnesses so recorded by the
committing magistrate could be treated, at the discretion of the sessions judge, as
substantive evidence at the trial. The prosecution taking advantage of the above
provision, used to ask for and obtain leave of the sessions Court to treat the
depositions of those witness whom they did not intend to examine afresh, recorded in
the committal enquiry as its evidence in the trial and then tender them for crossexamination.
The Jaggo case24. (decided under old Code) cannot be read to lay down, as a matter of
legal proposition, that a witness can be "tendered" for cross-examination even without
there being any examination-in-chief. If there is some earlier statement of the witness
recorded by a competent Court or an aﬃdavit ﬁled in the trial Court and the witness
testiﬁes to the correctness of that earlier statement at the trial, it may (in certain cases
of witnesses of a formal nature) be permissible to tender a witness for crossexamination after he has sworn to the correctness of the earlier statement, because in
that event that earlier statement is treated as the examination-in-chief of the witness,
but that is not the same thing as tendering a witness for cross-examination only,
without there being any examination-in-chief on the record. After the coming into force
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, which replaced the Code of 1898, recording of
evidence in committal proceedings has been totally dispensed with and section 288 of
the old Code has been omitted. Consequently, the recourse to practice of tendering a
witness for cross-examination, who had been examined in the committal Court, is no
more relevant or available.25.
The Evidence Act gives the right of cross-examination only to the adverse party. So, a
defendant can cross-examine a co-defendant only when the interest of co-defendant is
adverse to the interest of defendant.26. A defendant having no conﬂicting interest with
plaintiff cannot be permitted to cross-examine the plaintiff. The right of crossexamination is available only to an adverse party.27.
The Supreme Court observed in light of its previous decision28. that the object of
section 311 is to bring on record evidence not only from the point of view of the
accused and the prosecution but also from the point of view of the orderly society. If a
witness called by the court gives evidence against the complainant, he should be
allowed an opportunity to cross-examine. The right to cross-examine a witness who is
called by a Court arises not under the provisions of section 311, but under the Evidence
Act which gives a party the right to cross-examine a witness who is not his own
witness. Since a witness summoned by the court could not be termed a witness of any
particular party, the court should give the right of cross-examination to the
complainant.
Where an application was moved by prosecution to cross-examine its witness in midst
of cross examination and the same was allowed by trail Court without giving a
reasoned order, it was held that the prayer was of exceptional nature which was likely
to have a crucial bearing upon trial against accused. Hence, the order being nonspeaking, was quashed.29.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 137.1.1] Cross-examination in case of Evidence on Aﬃdavit.—
A witness deposed by an aﬃdavit. On the application of the accused he was
summoned for cross-examination. The court said that he could be subjected to crossexamination only as to facts stated in his aﬃdavit. It was not open to the accused to
insist that before cross-examination he must ﬁrst depose in examination-in-chief.30.

[s 137.2] Witness not presenting himself for cross-examination.—
Where a witness was examined-in-chief but he did not make himself available for
cross-examination, the court said that his evidence had lost all credibility.31.
A defence witness who was being cross-examined could not appear the next day for
continuation because of illness for which medical certiﬁcate was ﬁled. Other defence
witnesses were present and could have been cross-examined but for the court's
refusal. Such refusal was held to be improper. The court said that it is the bounden duty
of the court to record statements of witnesses present for cross-examination.32. The
right of the land acquiring body to cross-examine its oﬃcers who made promises
against its interest could not be refused merely on the ground of common defence.33.

[s 137.3] Keeping identity of witness secret.—
The court may in exceptional circumstances order that the identity, names and
addresses of certain witnesses be kept secret. The Court said that this may not affect
fair trial.34.

[s 137.4] Questions by Court.—
Where the witness became confused in the course of his cross-examination, it was
held that the court could put questions to him to elicit the truth.35.

17. Nandgopal v State, (1951) Nag 172. Chandan v State of Rajasthan, (1988) 1 SCC 696 : AIR

1988 SC 599 : 1988 Cr LJ 842 , where the son of the deceased identiﬁed certain articles, but
was not examined and, therefore, his evidence was rejected as hearsay.
18. Stokes,Vol II, p 925, f.n. 1.
19. Badhna Kharia v State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 1412 (Gau).
20. Pyarelal Sakseria v Devishankar Parashar, AIR 1994 MP 115 ; Modula India v Ramakshya

Singh Deo, AIR 1989 SC 162 : (1988) 4 SCC 619 , a tenant defendant has a limited right of crossexamining the landlord where his defence has been struck out.
21. Kalpanaben M Shah v Navinchandra Jeevanlal Acharya, AIR 1995 Guj 176 .
22. 1992 Cr LJ 24 (Karn).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
23. Tej Prakash v State of Haryana, 1996 Cr LJ 394 : (1996) 7 SCC 322 , relying on Sukhwant

Singh v State of Punjab, 1995 (2) Scale 482 : 1995 AIR SCW 2521 : (1995) 3 SCC 367 : AIR 1995
SC 1601 .
24. State of UP v Jaggo, AIR 1971 SC 1586 : (1971) 2 SCC 42 .
25. Sukhwant Singh v State of Punjab, (1995) 3 SCC 367 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 524 : AIR 1995 SC

1601 : (1995) 2 Andh LT (Cri) 201 .
26. Smt. Annapurn Devi v Administrator General, UP, 2010 (1) CCC 501 (All.) (DB).
27. Vijaya v Saraswathi 2008 (3) CCC 535 (Mad.).
28. Jamatraj Kewalji Govani v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1968 SC 178 , (1967) 3 SCR 415 , 1968

Cr LJ 231 (SC).
29. Sudhakar Tukaram Dhatrak v State of Maharastra, 2010 Cr LJ (NOC) 217 (Bom).
30. Mandvi Co-op Bank Ltd v Nimesh B Thakore, AIR 2010 SC 1402 : (2010) 3 SCC 83 .
31. Paritosh Ghosh v Ashim Kumar Gupta, AIR 2003 NOC 141 (Cal) : 2003 AIHC 291 .
32. Kailash Chandra Sharma v Siraj Krishna Das, AIR 2009 Gau 73 .
33. Vidharbha Irrigation Development Corp v 3rd Ad hoc Addl. Distt. Judge., AIR 2008 NOC 1326

(Bom).
34. Kartar Singh v State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569 : 1994 Cr LJ 3139 .
35. State of Rajasthan v Ani, AIR 1997 SC 1023 : 1997 Cr LJ 1529 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 138] Order of examination.—
Witnesses shall be ﬁrst examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse party so desires)
cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
The examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but the crossexamination need not be conﬁned to the fact to which the witness testiﬁed on his
examination-in-chief.
Direction of re-examination.—
The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in
cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced
in re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.

COMMENT
The examination of witnesses is viva voce (O XVIII, rule 4). It is always in the form of
questions and answers. The deposition is usually taken down in the form of a narrative
formed out of the answers (O XVIII, rule 5). Where a question is objected to and yet
allowed by the court to be put, the question and its answer are taken down verbatim (O
XVIII, rule 10). At the end of the deposition, it is read out to the witness and signed by
the presiding oﬃcer (O XVIII, rule 5).
The viva voce examination consists generally of three stages: ﬁrst of all, the witness is
examined by the party who calls him; this is called examination-in-chief (section 137).
He is next examined by the adverse party; this is called cross-examination (section
137). Finally he is examined again by the party who called him; this is called reexamination (section 137).
Section 246 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 giving the accused a right in a
warrant case to cross-examine the witnesses for the prosecution after a charge has
been framed, is an exception to the general rule. In the exercise of the inherent power
of the court, the magistrate in an inquiry under Chapter XIX of the Code of Criminal
Procedure may allow the accused to reserve cross-examination for a future occasion in
the special circumstances of a case.36.

[s 138.1] Examination-in-chief.—
This will ordinarily be in the form of a connected narrative, brought out by questions put
to the witness by the party calling him. It must relate to relevant facts [section 138(2)].
No leading questions can be asked (section 142).
"Unless evidence of reputation be admissible, witnesses, must, in general merely speak
to facts within their own knowledge, and they will not be permitted...to express their

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
own belief or opinion...Though a witness, in general, must depose to such facts only as
are within his own knowledge, the law does not require him to speak with such
expression of certainty as to exclude all doubt. For, whatever may be the nature of the
subject, if the witness has any personal recollection of the fact under investigation, he
may state what he remembers concerning it, and leave the jury to judge of the weight
of his testimony. If the impression on his mind be so slight as to justify the belief that it
may have been derived from others, or may be some unwarrantable deduction of his
own dull understanding or lively imagination, it will be rejected."37.
On some particular subjects, positive and direct testimony may often be unattainable,
and, in such cases, a witness is allowed to testify to his belief or opinion, or even to
draw inferences respecting the fact in question from other facts, provided these last
facts be within his personal knowledge.38. This mode of examination, however, chieﬂy
prevails on questions of science or trade, where, from the diﬃculty, and occasional
impossibility, of obtaining more direct and positive evidence, persons of skill,
sometimes called experts, are allowed, not only to testify to facts, but to give their
opinions in evidence.39.
It is the duty of counsel to bring out clearly and in proper chronological order every
relevant fact in support of his client's case to which the witness can depose. This task
is more diﬃcult than may at ﬁrst sight appear. The timid witness must be encouraged;
the talkative witness repressed; the witness who is too strong a partisan must be kept
in check. And yet counsel must not suggest to the witness what he is to say. An honest
witness, however, should be left to tell his tale in his own way with as little interruption
from counsel as possible.40.
Once examination-in-chief is conducted, the statement becomes part of the record. It is
evidence as per law and in the true sense, for at best, it may be rebuttable. An evidence
being rebutted or controverted becomes a matter of consideration, relevance and
belief, which is the stage of judgment by the court. Yet it is evidence and it is material
on the basis whereof the court can come to a prime facie opinion as to complicity of
some other person who may be connected with the offence. On the basis of
examination-in-chief, the court or the magistrate can proceed against a person as long
as the court is satisﬁed that the evidence appearing against such person is such that it
prima facie necessitates bringing such person to face trial. In fact, an examination-inchief untested by cross-examination, undoubtedly in itself, is an evidence.41.
However, the statements made in examination-in-chief, lose much of their credibility
and weight unless they are put into the crucible of cross-examination and emerge
unscathed from the test.42.
No witness can be cross-examined unless he has been ﬁrst examined-in-chief. This
section provides that cross-examination follows examination-in-chief but it cannot be
so without examination-in-chief.43.

[s 138.2] Cross-examination.—
The testimony of a witness is not legal evidence unless it is subject to crossexamination; and where no opportunity has been given to the appellant's counsel to
test the veracity of the principal prosecution witness or where owing to the refractory
attitude of the witness the court is constrained to terminate all of a sudden and
prematurely the cross-examination of the witness, the evidence of such a witness is
not legal testimony and cannot be the basis of a judicial pronouncement.44. No
evidence affecting a party is admissible against that party unless the latter has had an

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
opportunity of testing its truthfulness by cross-examination.45. "The exercise of this
right [cross-examination] is justly regarded as one of the most eﬃcacious tests which
the law has devised for the discovery of truth. By means of it, the situation of the
witness with respect to the parties and to the subject of litigation, his interest, his
motives, his inclination and prejudices, his character, his means of obtaining a correct
and certain knowledge of the facts to which he bears testimony, the manner in which
he has used those means, his powers of discernment, memory, and description, are all
fully investigated, ascertained, and submitted to the consideration of the jury, who have
an opportunity of observing his demeanour, and of determining the just value of his
testimony. It is not easy for a witness, subjected to this test, to impose on a Court or
jury, for however artful the fabrication of falsehood may be, it cannot embrace all the
circumstances to which cross-examination may be extended."46.
In the instant case, the Supreme Court observed that it is not at all appreciable to call a
witness for cross-examination after a long span of time (here after one year and eight
months). It is imperative if the examination-in-chief is over, the cross-examination
should be completed on the same day. If the examination-in-chief continues till late
hours, the trial can be adjourned to the next day for cross-examination. It is
inconceivable in law that the cross-examination should be deferred for such a long
time. It is an anathema to the concept of proper and fair trial.47. However, in the instant
case cross-examination was conducted nearly eight months later but the defence was
unable to make any serious dent in the kernel of the evidence of the witness. The court
accepted his evidence.48.
In the case of uncross-examined testimony of a witness, the provision of section 32
clause (7) is not applicable. Such an uncross-examined testimony of a witness is not to
be read into evidence with the aid of section 32 of the Evidence Act. In this case, the
witness remained uncross-examined and subsequently could not be cross-examined
as he became incapable of giving evidence due to inﬁrmities of old age.49.
A question arose before the Calcutta High Court as to the admissibility of the evidence
of a person where cross-examination could not be ﬁnished. The evidence of the
defendant witness was being recorded on commission. His cross-examination could
only be partly held because of his death. The court was of the view that his evidence
would not be inadmissible. The court said that there is no provision in the Act saying
that if the cross-examination could not be held in part or in full, his testimony would be
rendered absolutely inadmissible. How much weight is to be attached to such
testimony should be decided by considering surrounding facts and circumstances.50.
The court found a line of authorities in favour of its opinion. There is the decision of the
Madras High Court in Maharaja of Kolhapur v S Sunderam Ayyar.51. The court held that
where a witness was examined-in-chief and there was hardly any cross-examination
and before it could be concluded, the witness died and the unﬁnished testimony of the
deceased witness was not rejected or held to be inadmissible. Another decision was
that of the Allahabad High Court in Ahmad Ali v Joti Pd,52. hinting to the absence of any
provisions in the Act against the inadmissibility of such evidence only because of the
fact that the other party could not cross-examine him. The court pointed out that the
distinction between the admissibility of evidence and the fact that the court would not
put any belief upon it is very ﬁne but it is important because if the evidence is
inadmissible, the court cannot take it on record, but, if it is admissible, it has to be
taken and considered with the rest of the evidence. The Patna High Court in Horli
Kumar v Rajab Ali,53. also regarded such evidence to be admissible but to be examined
carefully to see whether, if cross-examination, it would have stood or not. An earlier
decision of the Calcutta High Court54. was to the same effect. The court also cited two
Lahore decisions.55.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The objects of cross-examination are to impeach the accuracy, credibility, and general
value of the evidence given in chief; to sift the facts already stated by the witness, to
detect and expose discrepancies, or to elicit suppressed facts which will support the
case of the cross-examining party.56.
"Where the facts are in dispute, such cases, generally speaking, are proved by human
testimony. The value of that testimony depends on the honesty of the witness, his
means of knowledge, his memory, his intelligence and his impartiality. Every question is
relevant which goes to indicate the presence or absence of these qualities or any of
them. The object of cross-examination may be described as three-fold. First, to elicit
from an adverse witness something in your favour; second, to destroy or weaken the
force of what the witness has said against you, and third, to show from the present
attitude of the witness or from his past experience that he is unworthy of belief in
whole or in part."57.
When the examination-in-chief has resulted in clear, conclusive, or unimpeachable
evidence, it may be prudent for the adverse party not to cross-examine; for, in such a
case, he may by so doing, instead of weakening the evidence, merely strengthen and
conﬁrm it. So, too, he will generally not cross-examine a witness, whose evidence he
admits, or which cannot possibly injure his case. Reckless cross-examination,
moreover, often lets in evidence which before was not admissible.58.
The trend of the cross-examination is in most cases determined by the line of narrative
unfolded in the examination-in-chief. It is usual to take each important item so deposed
to and to cross-examine the witness upon it. Its purpose is two-fold. First of all, the
cross-examiner tries to discover if the story told by the witness in examination-in-chief
is tainted by exaggerations or falsehoods. Second, the adverse party can in some
cases, construct his line of defence from out of the mouth of the witness.
The essence of cross-examination is that it is the interrogation by the advocate of one
party of a witness called by his adversary with the object either to obtain from such
witness admissions favourable to his cause, or to discredit him. Cross-examination is
the most effective of all means for extracting truth and exposing falsehood.59.
In a criminal trial,60. leading questions were permitted to be asked to a prosecution
witness in examination-in-chief in the absence of defence counsel. It was held that
asking of leading questions is not only against the tenor of section 142 of the Evidence
Act but also violates the right of an accused to a fair trial when such leading questions
are permitted to be asked in the absence of defence counsel. Such conduct of trial
gives accused persons, a reasonable cause for their apprehension that justice is not
being done to them.
A skilful cross-examination is the highest attainment of an advocate's art. It is, diﬃcult
to frame any rules governing it; its technique can be acquired only by natural instinct or
by long practice. The Act has, however, laid down some rules of guidance.
Like examination-in-chief, cross-examination must "relate to relevant facts": but unlike
re-examination, it need not be conﬁned to facts deposed to in the preceding
examination (section 138). Further, it differs from both of them, inasmuch as leading
questions can be asked (sections 142, 143).
No cross-examination can be allowed of a witness who is "summoned to produce a
document," (section 139), but it is competent of a witness to character (section 140).
Similarly, a witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question without such writing
being shown to him or being proved (section 145).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The range of cross-examination is unlimited, the only circumscribing limits being that it
must "relate to relevant facts" (section 138).
By sections 146–150 the Legislature has tried to give very wide powers to the crossexaminer to help him in ﬁnding out the truth in oral depositions laid out before the
court. But the Legislature protects the witness (i) from consequences which he might
incur from speaking the truth and (ii) from needless questions, for the cross-examiner
has to see that the imputations he makes against the witness are well-founded.
In the course of cross-examination, a witness may be asked questions—
(1) to test his veracity;
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life;
(3) to shake his credit by injuring his character, although his answer might criminate

him or expose him to penalty or forfeiture (section 146).
The cross-examiner is treading on safe ground so far as (1) and (2) are concerned. As
regards (3), complex set of considerations present themselves.
If the questions refer to a relevant matter the provisions of section 132 are applicable
(section 147). If, however, the questions refer to an irrelevant matter, they are proper—
(1) if the truth or imputation conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the
court as to the credibility of the witness.
They are improper—
(1) if the imputation conveyed by them relates to matters so remote in time or of

such a character that they would not affect the credibility of the witness;
(2) if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the imputation made

against the witness's character and the importance of his evidence (section
148).
Before such questions are asked, the person putting them must have reasonable
grounds for thinking that the imputation was well-founded (section 149). If any lawyer
asks such questions without reasonable grounds, the court may report the case to the
High Court or other authority to which he is subject (section 148).
All questions or inquiries which are indecent or scandalous, unless they relate to facts
in issue, are to be avoided (section 151); so also all questions which are calculated to
insult or annoy or couched in a needlessly offensive form (section 152).
Cross-examination is in almost all cases undertaken by the adverse party; but the court
may permit a party to cross-examine his own witness if he proves to be a hostile
witness (section 154).
In criminal cases (warrant cases) tried by magistrates, the accused person can, after
the charge has been framed and he has given his plea, re-call and cross-examine any
witness for the prosecution (Criminal Procedure Code, section 246).61.
An accused is entitled in law to put further questions to a prosecution witness by way
of cross-examination in respect of what he had stated in reply to questions put to him
in cross-examination by the other co-accused.62. An accused person may crossexamine a witness called by a co-accused for his defence when the case of the second
accused is adverse to that of the ﬁrst.63.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where the prosecution declines to call in the court of Session a witness for the Crown
who has been examined in the magistrate's Court, and such witness is thereupon
placed in the witness-box by counsel for the defence, the counsel for the defence is not
entitled to commence his examination of the witness by questioning him as to what he
had deposed in the magistrate's Court. Questions as to his previous deposition are,
under the circumstances, only admissible by way of cross-examination, with the
permission of the court, if the witness proves himself a hostile witness.64.
Where the defences of a co-respondent or a co-defendant and the respondent or the
defendant are identical, neither is entitled to cross-examine the other. It is only where
the evidence of a co-defendant or a co-respondent is adverse to the defendant or the
respondent that the defendant or respondent has the right to cross-examine.65. Where
one of the partners of a ﬁrm borrowed money on behalf of the ﬁrm in his capacity as
managing partner allegedly without the consent of the other partner, it was held that
the latter had the right to cross-examine the former and the order denying the same
was illegal and was set aside.66.
Cross-examination is the right of the adverse party. The party itself cannot call his
witness for cross-examination.67.
It is a settled principle of law that a witness should be cross-examined on each and
every point and failure to cross-examine him/her on a particular point would entail a
presumption that the party, not cross-examining the witness, had accepted the
evidence.68. Any fact asserted by a witness, if not challenged in his cross-examination
by the adverse party, will certainly amount to acceptance of that fact. If the relevant
facts in the examination-in-chief are not challenged in the cross-examination, they shall
be deemed to be admitted.69. Where the accused had an opportunity to cross-examine
the witnesses but failed to avail himself of this opportunity and adopted the crossexamination done by other accused on the witnesses. He subsequently cannot be
permitted to ﬁnd fault in the evidence of the witnesses and rely upon some
contradictions which otherwise do not show any contradiction much less major one
affecting their testimony.70.

[s 138.3] "Relevant facts".—
"Relevant facts" in cross-examination must necessarily have a wider meaning than the
term when applied to examination-in-chief. For instance, the facts though otherwise
irrelevant may involve questions affecting the credibility of the witness and such
questions are permissible in cross-examination. Cross-examination is not limited to
matters upon which the witness has already been examined in chief but extends to the
whole case.71.

[s 138.4] Proforma party.—
It has been held that a proforma defendant has no right to examine or cross-examine
witnesses. He does not have the right to bring in his own witnesses and cross-examine
the adverse party's witnesses. This will be particularly so when he has not ﬁled any
written statement.72. The court relied upon the decision of the Gujarat High Court in
Hussens Hasanali v Sabbhirbhai Hasanali Pulavwala73. "in order to cross-examination a
witness it must be shown that the party seeking cross-examination is an "adverse
party". Merely because a party is shown as a defendant in the cause title of the plaintiff,
that party cannot be styled as an adverse party, unless it is further shown that the party

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
is a contesting party in the sense that he disputes the case put up by the plaintiff in the
plaint. If a party accepts the plaintiff's case, there is no contest between the plaintiff
and that party and such a defendant cannot be styled as an "adverse party" and would
therefore, not be entitled to cross examine the plaintiff."74.

[s 138.5] Cross-examination through questions handed over in advance.—
The court did not consider it proper that a counsel should have been allowed to furnish
a copy of questions proposed to be asked to the defendant in his cross-examination,
the intention being to conclude the cross-examination expeditiously.75. The court said:
"However statutory that objective may be, it appears to be legally unchartered and
destructive of the very purpose of cross-examination. This purpose has been succinctly
stated in Meer Sujad Ali v Kashee Nath76. that "a skilful interrogation may produce by
Article that which usually happens accidentally." In Sarkar on Evidence77. it is stated
that: "Cross-examination is directed to (1) credibility of the witness; (2) the facts to
which he had deposed in examination-in-chief including the cross-examiner's version
thereof and (3) the facts to which the witness has not deposed but about which the
cross-examiner thinks that he is able to depose. The object of cross-examination is
two-fold: to weaken quality or destroy the case of the opponent and to establish the
party's own case by means of his opponent's witnesses. The objects are to impeach
the accuracy, credibility and general value of the evidence given in chief, to sift the facts
already stated by the witness, to detect and expose discrepancies or to elicit
suppressed facts which will support the case of the cross-examining party." If a
questionnaire is to be prepared and forwarded to the witness in advance, its essential
purpose would be lost since truth is usually extracted from the witness by dexterous
surprise."

[s 138.5.1] Filing of Aﬃdavit of Witness in Advance.—
The court deprecated the practice of getting the aﬃdavits of witnesses in advance. The
court said that it amounts to an attempt to dissuade witnesses from speaking the truth
before the court. This type of interference in criminal justice should not be encouraged
and is to be viewed seriously.78.

[s 138.5.2] Cross-examination of co-defendant by another co-defendant.—
An order allowing such cross-examination to the extent of clash of interest between the
co-defendants was held to be permissible.79. The parties arrayed as co-defendants in
the suit took contradictory stand or relevant and material issues. It was held that the
defendant could cross-examine his co-defendant and his witnesses.80.
The Evidence Act gives the right of cross-examination only to the adverse party. So, a
defendant can cross-examine a co-defendant only when the interest of that codefendant is adverse to the interest of defendant.81. A defendant having no conﬂicting
interest with plaintiff cannot be permitted to cross-examine the plaintiff. The right of
cross-examination is available only to an adverse party.82.

[s 138.5.3] Re-cross-examination.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A witness can be recalled for his further cross-examination (re-cross-examination). The
court can exercise this power on an application by the defendant. The power is not
conﬁned for its exercise to the self-motion of the court.83. The power under the section
is the exclusive power of the court. It is to be exercised in exceptional
circumstances.84. It has been held by the Supreme Court that once a witness has been
examined-in-chief and cross-examined fully, such a witness should not have been
recalled and re-examined to deny the evidence he had already given before the court
even though he had given an inconsistent statement before any other forum or Court
subsequently. A witness can be confronted only with a previous statement made by
him.85.
However, merely with the change of counsel, a witness cannot be recalled for further
cross-examination, when the prosecutrix is thoroughly cross-examined and otherwise,
no case for recalling the witness is made out. Hence, the order of trial Court resummoning the prosecutrix for further cross-examination at belated stage was held to
be illegal.86.

[s 138.5.4] Cross-examination of co-respondent (Recall for further crossexamination).—
The right of cross-examination can be exercised by co-respondents when their
interests are in direct conﬂict with each other.87.
The only ground on which the witness was sought to be recalled for further crossexamination was that the earlier counsel representing the petitioner did not crossexamine the witness effectively due to inadvertence on the point of adverse
possession. There was nothing in the application to show that new facts had come to
knowledge which required recalling. Effective cross-examination was a very vague
term. A witness cannot be allowed to be recalled merely on the change of counsel and
that too for ﬁlling up the lacuna left in the case.88.

[s 138.6] Re-examination.—
The object of re-examination is to afford the party calling a witness an opportunity of
ﬁlling in the lacuna or explaining the inconsistencies which the cross-examination has
discovered in the examination-in-chief of the witness. It is accordingly limited to the
explanation of matters referred to in cross-examination (section 138). It partakes of the
nature of examination-in-chief inasmuch as no leading questions can be asked (section
142).
The party who calls a witness has the right to re-examine him on all matters arising out
of the cross-examination for the purpose of reconciling any discrepancies that may
exist between the evidence on the examination-in-chief and that which has been given
in cross-examination; or for the purpose of removing or diminishing any suspicion that
the cross-examination may have cast on the evidence-in-chief; or to enable the witness
to state the whole truth as to matters which have only been partially dealt with in crossexamination.89.
In re-examination the party has a right to ask all questions which may be proper to
draw forth an explanation of the meaning of the expressions used by the witness on
cross-examination, if they be in themselves doubtful, and also of the motive, or
provocation, which induced the witness to those expressions, but he has not right to go
further, and to introduce matter new in itself and not suited to explain either the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
expressions or the motives of the witness.90. If the counsel chooses to cross-examine
the witness as to facts which were not admissible in evidence, the other party has a right
to re-examine him as to the evidence so given.91. If a question has been omitted in the
examination-in-chief, and cannot, in strictness, be asked on re-examination as not
arising out of the cross-examination, it is usual for counsel to request the judge to
make inquiry and such a request is generally granted.92. If the cross-examination is
ineffective, no re-examination is, as a rule, made.
Questions in re-examination cannot be conﬁned to ambiguities alone which became
exposed in cross-examination. Questions can be put to seek explanation of any matter
referred to in cross-examination.93.
However, totally new facts which have no concern with the cross-examination cannot
be introduced in re-examination.94.
The court proceeded to explain the position as follows:95. "There is an erroneous
impression that re-examination should be conﬁned to clariﬁcation of ambiguities which
have been brought down in cross-examination. No doubt, ambiguities can be resolved
through re-examination. But that is not the only function of the re-examiner. If the party
who called the witness feels the explanation is required for any matter referred to in
cross-examination he has the liberty to put any question in re-examination to get the
explanation. The Public Prosecutor should formulate his questions for that purpose.
Explanation may be required either when ambiguity remains regarding any answer
elicited during cross-examination or even otherwise. If the Public Prosecutor feels that
certain answers require more elucidation from the witness he has the freedom and the
right to put such questions as he deems necessary for that purpose, subject of course
to the control of the court in accordance with the other provisions. But the court cannot
direct him to conﬁne his questions to ambiguities alone which arose in crossexamination. Even if the Public Prosecutor feels that new matters should be elicited
from the witness he can do so, in which case the only requirement is that he must
secure permission of the court. if the court thinks that such new matters are necessary
for proving any material fact, Courts must be liberal in granting permission to put
necessary question. A Public prosecutor who is attentive during cross-examination
cannot but be sensitive to discern which answer in cross-examination requires
explanation. An eﬃcient Public Prosecutor would gather up such answers falling from
the mouth of a witness during cross-examination and formulate necessary questions
to be put in re-examination. There is no warrant that re-examination should be limited
to one or two questions. If the exigency requires any number of questions can be asked
in re-examination."
The examination-in-chief cannot be supplemented by way of re-examination. Totally
new facts cannot be introduced which have no concern with cross-examination.96.
During the cross-examination of a prosecution witness, doubts arose about
interpretation of certain parts of his evidence. The prosecution failed to clarify the
same by calling the witness for re-examination. The court said that the beneﬁt of doubt
had to go to the defence.97.

[s 138.7] Tendering witness for cross-examination.—
The practice of tendering witnesses for cross-examination is inconsistent with this
section. It ought never to be employed in the case of a witness whose evidence is not
merely formal. The practice leads only to confusion and does not induce to the
discovery of the truth.98.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 138.8] Recall of a witness.—
The object of the provision for recall of witness, is to reserve the power with the court
to prevent any injustice in the conduct of trial at any stage. The power available with
the court to prevent injustice has to be exercised only if the court, for valid reasons,
feels that injustice is caused to a party. Such a ﬁnding with reasons must be
speciﬁcally recorded by the court before this power is exercised. It is not possible to lay
down precise situations when such power can be exercised. The legislature in its
wisdom has left the power undeﬁned. Thus, the scope of the power has to be
considered from case to case.99.

[s 138.9] Examination by Court.—
It is not the province of the court to examine the witnesses, unless the pleaders on
either side have omitted to put some material question or questions; and the court
should, as a general rule, leave the witnesses to the pleaders to be dealt with as laid
down in this section.100. The judge's right to question is circumscribed by the adversary
system. Where the judge rebuked a witness and threatened him with prosecution for
perjury, the whole trial was held to be vitiated.101.

[s 138.10] Enquiry into perjury.—
Certain witnesses were examined for the purpose of an inquiry into a complaint of
perjury. It was held that persons against whom there were allegations of perjury could
take part in the enquiry and cross-examine the witness examined by the court.102.

36. GV Raman v Emperor, (1929) 57 Cal 44 .
37. Taylor, 12th Edn, sections 1414-15, pp 898-99.
38. Ibid, section 1416, p 899.
39. Ibid, section 1417, p 900.
40. Powell, 10th Edn, p 458.
41. Hardeep Singh v State of Punjab, (2014) 3 SCC 92 (paras 89 and 90).
42. See Gopal Saran v Satyanarayna, AIR 1989 SC 1785 : 1989 Cr LJ 2070 , where the testimony

of a witness who did not submit himself to cross-examination was held to be not reliable.
Ganesh Jadav v State of Assam, 1995 Cr LJ 3748 (Gau), examination and cross-examination
must relate to relevant facts and on failure of the defence to challenge the relevant facts
brought in examination- in-chief, the court has discretion to accept that part of evidence.
43. Sharadamama v Kenchamma, AIR 2007 Kar 17 .
44. Ram Kumar v King-Emperor, (1936) 12 Luck 552 ; Food Inspector v James NT, 1998 Cr LJ

3494 (Ker) the value of the evidence of a witness who died before cross-examination.
45. Maganlal v King-Emperor, (1946) Nag 126; R. v Gokal (Abbas), (1997) 2 Cr App R 266 (CA

(Crim Div)], statements of witnesses who were not cross-examined abroad were held to be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
unsafe evidence.
46. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1428, p 910.
47. Vinod Kumar v State of Punjab, (2015) 3 SCC 220 (para 57.4).
48. K Ramajayam v Inspector of Police, Chennai, 2016 Cr LJ 1542 , para 16 (Mad-DB).
49. Ghasitibai v Ram Gopal Singh, 2009 (4) CCC 578 (MP).
50. Dever Park Builders Pvt Ltd v Madhuri Jalan, AIR 2002 Cal 281 .
51. Maharaja of Kolhapur v S Sunderam Ayyar, AIR 1925 Mad 497 at 538. The court did not

attach any probative value to the evidence in the circumstances.
52. Ahmad Ali v Joti Pd, AIR 1944 All 188 .
53. Horli Kumar v Rajab Ali, AIR 1936 Pat 34 .
54. W Stewart v Newzeland Ins. Co Ltd, 16 Cal WN 991. The plaintiff did not use his opportunity

to cross-examine the witness.
55. Mangal Sen v Emperor, AIR 1929 Lah. 840 , weight to be attached to such testimony would

depend upon circumstances. Diwan Singh v Emperor, AIR 1933 Lah 561 , the evidence of the
witness who left before his cross-examination could be complied was admissible.
56.

Powell, 10th Edn, p 463. Cross-examination is not the only method of demolishing a

witness. The court may discard a testimony if it is not believable even if the witness has not
been cross-examined. Juwar Singh v State of MP, AIR 1981 SC 373 : 1980 Cr LJ 1418 : 1980 CLR
605 .
57. Juwar Singh v State of MP, AIR 1981 SC 373 : 1980 Supp SCC 417 : 1980 Cr LJ 1418 .
58. Powell, 10th Edn, p 463.
59. Meer Sujad Ali Khan Nawab Zoolfukar Dowla Bahadoor v Lalla Kasheenath Doss, (1866) 6 WR

(Civil) 181, 182. See P v P, AIR 1982 Bom 498 which explains the range of cross-examination.
The Court permitted questions as to the social conditions of family life and the degree to which
mixing with other people would give rise to inference of adultery.
60. Madan Lal v State of Rajasthan, 2012 Cr LJ 1430 (Raj.).
61. GH Iyar v State, 1998 Cr LJ 1821 . In respect of examination of witnesses, the provisions of

section 138 of the Evidence Act and those of section 311 of CrPC are complementary of each
other and not conﬂicting.
62. Muniappan v State of Madras, AIR 1961 SC 175 : (1961) 1 Cr LJ 315 .
63. Ram Chand Chatterjee v Hanif Sheikh, (1893) 21 Cal 401 .
64. Queen-Empress v Zawar Husen, (1897) 20 All 155 .
65. Ghadiali v Ghadiali, (1946) 48 Bom LR 36 .
66. BS Balaji v T Govindaraju, 1996 AIHC 2484 (Kant).
67. Sudam Sahoo v District Judge, Cuttack, AIR 2016 Ori 38 (para 6).
68. Gujua Manjhi v State of Jharkhand, 2015 Cr LJ 4303 , para 22 (Jhar) (DB).
69. Mariamma Itty v KJ Abraham, AIR 2017 CC 5 , para 12 (Ker-DB).
70. Bilal Hajar v State, AIR 2018 SC 4780 : 2018 (4) Crimes 103 : JT 2018 (10) SC 251 : 2018

(14) Scale 11 .
71. Prashant Maheshbhai Pandya v State of Gujarat, 2016 Cr LJ 303 , para 15 (Guj).
72. State of WB v Rama Devi, AIR 2002 Cal 235 .
73. Hussens Hasanali v Sabbhirbhai Hasanali Pulavwala, AIR 1981 Guj 190 .
74. AP p 237, AIR 2002 Cal 235 .
75. Khairati Lal and Sons v Hari Singh, AIR 2002 Delhi 335 , at p 336.
76. 6 WR 181. The court found the decision in Regina N Da Silva, (1990) 1 WLR 31 since it dealt

with the right of the witness to refresh memory.
77. 19th Edn 2016, Vol 2.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
78. Bachapalli Abbulu v State of AP, 2002 Cr LJ 2527 : AIR 2003 SC 1805 .
79. Kartar Singh v Thakur Singh, AIR 2003 NOC 130 (P&H) : 2002 AIHC 3683 .
80. Saroj Bala v Dhanpati Devi, AIR 2007 Del 105 .
81. Smt. Annapurn Devi v Administrator General, UP., 2010 (1) CCC 501 (All.) (DB).
82. Vijaya v Saraswathi., 2008 (3) CCC 535 (Mad.).
83. SSS Durian pandian v SA Samuthra Pandian, AIR 1998 Mad 323 ; State of Rajasthan v Teja

Ram, AIR 1999 SC 1776 : (1999) 3 SCC 507 : 1999 Cr LJ 2588 .
84. V Shanmugam v S Umamaheswaran, AIR 2008 NOC 646 (Mad), petitioner failed to elicit

certain facts, applied for recall of witness, six months time had already been given, that was
suﬃcient time, application not allowed.
85. Mishri Lal v State of MP, (2005) 10 SCC 701 : 2005 (2) Crimes 216 (SC).
86. Baldev Singh v State of Punjab,., 2007 Cr LJ (NOC) 251 (P&H).
87. Ennen Castings Pvt Ltd v MM Sundaresh, AIR 2003 Kant 293 .
88. Akash v Gian Singh, AIR 2010 HP 93 : LNIND 2010 HP 235 .
89. Powell, 10 Edn, p 469.
90. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1474, p 939.
91. Ibid, section 1475, p 940.
92. Ibid, section 1477, p 942. Where no such request was made by the prosecution and the

evidence on both sides was closed, the Supreme Court held that re-examination should not have
been allowed, Mir Mohd Omar v State of WB, AIR 1989 SC 1785 : 1989 Cr LJ 2070 : (1989) 4 SCC
436 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 750 ; Jugroo v State of MP, 2002 Cr LJ 1050 (MP), order of examination
found to be proper.
93. Rammi v State of MP, AIR 1999 SC 3544 : (1999) 8 SCC 649 : 1999 Cr LJ 4561 .
94. Pannayar v State of Tamil Nadu by Inspector of Police, 2009 Cr LJ 4454 (SC).
95. Ibid, pp 3547-48.
96. Pannayar v State of TN, AIR 2010 SC 85 : (2009) 9 SCC 152 .
97. Ramsewak v State of MP, (2004) 11 SCC 259 : 2004 Cr LJ 3043 .
98. Emperor v Kasamalli Mirzalli, (1941) 44 Bom LR 27 : (1942) Bom 384 (FB); Emperor v

Sadeppa Gireppa Mutgi, (1941) 43 Bom LR 946 : (1942) Bom 115; Re Veera Koravan, (1929) 53
Mad 69.
99. State (NCT of Delhi) v Shiv Kumar, (2016) 2 SCC 402 , para 11.
100. Per Garth CJ, in Noor Bux Kazi v The Empress, (1880) 6 Cal 279 , 283.
101. Ram Chander v State of Haryana, AIR 1981 SC 1036 : 1981 Cr LJ 609 : (1981) 3 SCR 12 :

(1981) 3 SCC 191 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 683 .
102. Kishorilal v State of Rajasthan, 1999 Cri lJ 840 (Raj).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 139] Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.—
A person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness by the mere
fact that he produces it and cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is called as
a witness.

COMMENT
[s 139.1] Principle.—
A witness summoned merely to produce a document does not become a witness for
purposes of cross-examination, since he may either attend the court personally or may
depute any person to produce the document in court (Civil Procedure Code, O XVI, rule
6; Criminal Procedure Code, section 91). If he intentionally omits to produce the
document, he commits the offence punishable under section 175 of the Indian Penal
Code, or section 345 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973. This section must be read
with section 162.
The wife of a partner was called upon to produce the deed of dissolution of the ﬁrm.
She was not permitted to be examined as a witness.103.
Where a witness denies, on oath, that he has the possession or means of producing a
particular document, he can, if he has been guilty of falsehood, be prosecuted for
giving false evidence in a judicial proceeding.104. The summons to produce a
document is in English law called a subpoena duces tecum.

103. Parmeshwari Devi v State, AIR 1977 SC 403 : 1977 Cr LJ 245 : (1977) 1 SCC 169 .
104. Per West J, in Re Premchand Dowlatram, (1887) 12 Bom 63, 65.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 140] Witnesses to character.—
Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.

COMMENT
This section must be read with section 53. In most cases, witnesses to character not
only may but must be cross-examined. The use of character evidence is to assist the
court in estimating the value of the evidence brought against the accused. Holt CJ,
observed in a case that "a man is not born a knave; there must be time to make him so;
nor is he presently discovered after he becomes one. A man may be reputed an able
man this year, and yet be a beggar the next; it is a misfortune that happens to many
men, and his former reputation will signify nothing to him upon this occasion."105.

105. Haagen Swendsen, (1902) How St Tr 559, 596.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 141] Leading questions.—
Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or expects to
receive is called a leading question.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 142] When they must not be asked.—
Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an
examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court.
The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or
undisputed, or which have, in its opinion, been already suﬃciently proved.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 143] When they may be asked.—
Leading question may be asked in cross-examination.

COMMENT
A "leading question" is one which suggests to the witness the answer which it is
desired he should give. But if it merely suggests a subject, without suggesting an
answer or a speciﬁc thing, it is not leading. Leading questions cannot ordinarily be
asked in examination-in-chief or re-examination. The witness is presumed to be biased
in favour of the party examining him and might thus be prompted. The reason for
excluding leading questions is quite obvious: it would enable a party to prepare his
story and evolve it in his very words from the mouth of his witnesses in court. It would
tend to diminish chances of detection of a concocted story. If a witness is allowed to
give his narrative in his own words, he is likely, if the story is made up, to leave some
loopholes, to which the cross-examiner will scarcely fail to direct his attack.
Leading questions can only be asked in examination-in-chief when they refer to matters
which are (1) introductory; (2) undisputed or (3) suﬃciently proved. For, if it were not
allowed to approach the points at issue by such questions, the examination would be
most inconveniently protracted. To abridge the proceedings, and bring the witness as
soon as possible to the material points on which he is to speak, counsel may lead him
on to that length, and may recapitulate to him the acknowledged facts of the case
which have been already established.106.
The reason why leading questions are allowed to be put to an adverse witness in crossexamination is that the purpose of a cross-examination being to test the accuracy,
credibility and general value of the evidence given, and to sift the facts already stated
by the witness, it sometimes becomes necessary for a party to put leading questions in
order to elicit facts in support of his case, even though the facts so elicited may be
entirely unconnected with facts testiﬁed to in an examination-in-chief. Where a general
order is made that no leading questions shall be allowed in cross-examination, the
order is illegal and vitiates the trial.107.
It is the court, and not counsel for the State, who can determine whether leading
questions should be permitted, and the responsibility for that permission rests on the
court.108.
In a criminal trial,109. leading questions were permitted to be asked to a prosecution
witness in examination-in-chief in the absence of defence counsel. It was held that
asking of leading questions is not only against the tenor of section 142 of the Evidence
Act but also violates the right of an accused to a fair trial when such leading questions
are permitted to be asked in the absence of defence counsel. Such conduct of trial
gives a reasonable cause to the accused persons for their apprehension that justice is
not being done to them.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Leading questions can be freely asked in cross-examination: "First, and principally, on
the supposition that the witness has a bias in favour of the party bringing him forward,
and hostile to his opponent. Secondly, that the party calling a witness has an advantage
over his adversary, in knowing beforehand what the witness will prove, or at least is
expected to prove; and that, consequently, if he were allowed to lead, he might
interrogate in such a manner as to extract only so much of the knowledge of the
witness as would be favourable to his side, or even put a false gloss upon the
whole."110.
With respect to the mode of conducting a cross-examination, it is admitted on all hands
that leading questions may in general be asked, but this does not mean that the
counsel may go to the length of putting the very words into the mouth of the witness
which he is to echo back again. Neither does it sanction the putting of a question
assuming that facts have been proved which have not been proved, nor that particular
answers have been given contrary to the fact. The rule ought also to receive some
further qualiﬁcation where the witness is evidently hostile to the party calling him, for
although it appears in one case to have been laid down that leading questions may
always be put in cross-examination, whether a witness be unwilling or not, some
restriction should surely be imposed where the witness betrays a vehement desire to
serve the cross-examining party. It is no answer to say that the party, who originally
called the witness, has brought the evil on his own head, for a fraudulent witness might
purposely conceal his bias in favour of one party, and thus induce the other to call him,
or he might be an attesting witness, or other person whom it was necessary to examine
to establish some technical part of the case. To allow such a witness to have the most
favourable answers suggested to him through the medium of leading questions would
be obviously unjust.111.
The prosecution cannot put leading questions on the material part of the evidence
which the witness intends to give against the accused. It would be a method of eliciting
evidence from the witness which is desired by the prosecutor. Such leading questions
offend the right of the accused to fair trial enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. It
is not a curable irregularity.112. The court explained the effect of the provisions as
follows: The criminal trial was unfair to the appellant and the procedure adopted in the
trial was obviously illegal and unconstitutional. The Sessions Court in fairness recorded
the evidence in the form of questions put by the prosecutor and defence counsel and
answers given by each witness. The material part of the prosecution case to connect
the appellant with the crime was from certain witnesses. The Sessions Court permitted
even without objection by the defence to put leading questions in the chief examination
itself suggesting all the answers which the prosecutor intended to get from the
witnesses to connect the appellant with the crime. The attention of the witness cannot
be directed in chief examination to the subject of the enquiry/trial. The court may
permit leading question to draw the attention of the witness which cannot otherwise be
called to the matter under enquiry, trial or investigation. The discretion of the court
must only be controlled towards that end but a question which suggests to the witness
the answer the prosecutor expects must not be allowed unless the witness, with the
permission of the court, is declared hostile and cross-examination is directed
thereafter in that behalf. Therefore, as soon as the witness has been conducted to the
material portion of his examination, it is generally the duty of the prosecutor to ask the
witness to state the facts or to give his own account of the matter making him speak
as to what he had seen. The prosecutor will not be allowed to frame his questions in
such a manner that the witness by answering merely "yes" or "no" will give the evidence
which the prosecutor wishes to elicit. The witness must account for what he himself
had seen. Section 142 does not empower the prosecutor to put leading questions on
the material part of the evidence which the witness intends to speak against the
accused and the prosecutor shall not be allowed to frame questions in such a manner
to which the witness answer merely "yes" or "no"; but he shall be directed to give
evidence of the facts which he witnessed. The question shall not be put to enable the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
witness to give evidence which the prosecutor wishes to elicit from the witness nor
shall the prosecutor put into witness's mouth the words which he hoped that the
witness will utter nor in any other way suggest to him the answer which it is desired
that the witness would give. The counsel must leave the witness to tell unvarnished
tale of this own account. In the instant case, the prosecutor led the witnesses to what
he intended that they should say on the material part of the prosecution case to prove
against the appellant. This was illegal and obviously unfair to the appellant offending
his right to fair trial enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution. It is not a curable
irregularity.
The impact of a leading question has to be assessed on the facts of each case. It
simply cannot be that every single leading question would invalidate the trial.113.

106. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1404, pp 890, 891. Abdul Aziz Lokhandwala v Nasir Ali, AIR 2010

NOC 613 (Bom), leading questions in examination-in-chief with the permission of the court.
107. Sri LP v Inspector General of Police, (1954) All LJ 316.
108. Per Jenkins CJ, in Barindra, Kumar Ghose v Emperor, (1909) 37 Cal 467 , 509.
109. Madan Lal v State of Rajasthan, 2012 Cr LJ 1430 (Raj.).
110. Best, 12th Edn, section 641, p 561.
111. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1431, pp 912-913.
112. Varkey Joseph v State of Kerala, AIR 1993 SC 1892 : 1993 Cr LJ 2010 : AIR 1994 SC 1892 :

(1993) 3 Punj LR 643 : (1992) 2 Ker LJ 617 .
113. Sidharth Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6 SCC

1.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 144] Evidence as to matters in writing.—
Any witness may be asked, whilst under examination, whether any contract, grant or
other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained in a
document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced,
the adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document is
produced, or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the
witness to give secondary evidence of it.
Explanation .—A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons
about the contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
ILLUSTRATION
The question is, whether A assaulted B.
C deposes that he heard A say to D—"B wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be
revenged on him." This statement is relevant as showing A's motive for the assault, and
evidence may be given of it, though no other evidence is given about the letter.

COMMENT
This section is meant to enable parties to carry out the provisions of sections 91 and
92. It should be read along with those sections. It refers both to the examination-inchief and cross-examination. A party can compel the opposite party to produce a
document (or to make out a case for letting in its secondary evidence)—
(1) when a witness is about to give evidence as to any (a) contract, (b) grant, or (c)
other disposition of property, which is contained in a document; or
(2) when he is about to make any statement as to the contents of any document.
This rule does not forbid a witness to give oral evidence of statements as to relevant
facts, made by other persons, about the contents of documents.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
114.[s 145] Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.—

A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in writing
or reduced into writing and relevant to matters in question, without such writing being
shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it
which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.

COMMENT
In a way this section is an exception to the general rule forbidding all use of the
contents of a written document until the document itself be produced.

[s 145.1] Principle.—
A witness may be cross-examined as to any statements as to relevant facts made by
him on a former occasion, in writing or reduced into writing, without showing the
writing to him or proving the same. But if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must be called to the writing. The object of this provision is either to test
the memory of a witness or to contradict him by previous statements in writing. Such
writing may be documents, letters, depositions, police diaries, etc. It must be noted that
the previous record should be in writing.115. The witness may also be contradicted by
his previous verbal statements (section 153, Exception 2).
Statements which are not fully recorded or statements which are recorded in the form
of memorandum are statements falling within the ambit of this section. The statement
may be either written by the witness himself or which was reduced into writing by
someone else.116. Unsigned statements cannot be used as previous statements to
contradict the witness.117. The ﬁrst information report (FIR) is not substantive
evidence. It is information of a cognizable offence given under section 154, CrPC.
Statements made in it can be used for contradicting and discrediting a witness under
section 143.118. Evidence recorded in criminal proceeding was transferred to the
Sessions trial for the purpose of contradicting a witness. That becomes substantive
evidence.119. Admissions should be tested by cross-examination.120.
A witness may be questioned as to his previous written statements for two purposes: it
may be to test his memory; and the very object would be defeated if the writing were
placed in his hand before the questions were asked, or it may be to contradict him; and
here it would be obviously unfair not to give him every opportunity of seeing how the
matter really stands.
If you intend to impeach a witness you are bound, whilst he is in the box, to give him an
opportunity of making any explanation which is open to him, and that is not only a rule
of professional practice in the conduct of a case, but is essential to fair play and fair
dealing with witnesses.121.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The expression "previous statements made" used in section 145 cannot be extended to
include statements made by a witness, after the ﬁling of the charge sheet. The
expression must, therefore, be conﬁned to statements made by a witness before the
police during investigation and not thereafter.122.

[s 145.2] Contradiction of witness.—
As regards the contradiction of a witness by a previous statement, section 162 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 sanctions a very extraordinary procedure. This
section in its ordinary application is intended for the purpose of such contradiction by a
written previous statement for which the witness is responsible. This cannot in terms
apply to a statement recorded under section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for
the record of which he cannot be held to be directly responsible and which he does not
sign. The Legislature, however, intended that the principle of this section should apply
and that attention of the witness should be called to those parts of diary entries by
which it is intended to contradict him by proving that they represent the actual
statement of the witness to the police. In many cases the investigating oﬃcer may be
able to prove that the writing is an accurate record or at any rate, a correct summary of
the statements made to him by the witness during the course of the investigation. In
that event, the writing comes on the record as proof of the statement of the
witness.123. The section is attracted only when two contradictory statements are made
by the same witness and not when the statement of one witness is contradicted by
another witness.124. The court would not be permitted to accept the version of the
defence witnesses as correct merely because the defence witnesses have not been
contradicted by reference to their previous statements.125. A witness can be
contradicted only when he denies his statement and not when he admits it.126.

[s 145.3] Prosecutrix.—
A statement made by the prosecutrix to the doctor who examined her which was put
before her during her cross-examination was not allowed to be used to contradict
her.127.

[s 145.4] Documents.—
A witness can be confronted with the statements made in writing in his account-books:
but a clerk who writes the accounts at the mere dictation of his employer cannot be so
confronted. In a case, A was employed by B, at intervals of a week or fortnight, to write
up B's account-books, B furnishing him with the necessary information either orally or
from loose memoranda. It was held that the entries so made could not be given in
evidence to contradict A under this section, as previous statements made by him in
writing. The statements were really made, not by A but B, under whose instructions A
had written them.128.
Documents were produced without any objection as to admissibility. Objections cannot
be raised for the ﬁrst time in appeal. The Counsel endorsed the document with remark:
"formal proof dispensed with." The party relying upon the document was absolved from
proving.129.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 145.5] Depositions.—
This section, which has to be read with section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
quite clearly indicates that the attention of a witness is to be called to the previous
statement before the writing can be proved. If the witness admits the previous
statement, or explains any discrepancy or contradiction, it becomes unnecessary for
the statement thereafter to be proved. On the other hand, if the statement still requires
to be proved that can be done by calling the person before whom the statement was
made.130. A statement made by a witness to a police-oﬃcer in the course of an
investigation can be used only to contradict him in the manner provided by this section
and for no other purpose.131.
In a trial before a Court of Sessions, counsel for the accused is not entitled to refer to
the depositions given before the committing magistrate for the purpose of
contradicting the witnesses before the Sessions Court, without drawing their attention
to the alleged contradictions in their previous depositions and giving them an
opportunity of explaining the same.132.
A ﬁrst information report is not ordinarily substantive evidence. It is merely a previous
statement, which may be proved by the prosecution for the purpose of corroborating
the ﬁrst informant, and may be used by the defence for the purpose of contradicting
him.133. For the latter purpose it is essential that the attention of the witness should be
drawn to those parts of the document, which it is intended to use for the purpose of
contradicting him, in order that he may be given an opportunity to furnish a suitable
explanation with regard to the alleged contradictions. Statements in the ﬁrst
information report cannot be used for the purpose of discrediting any witness, other
than the ﬁrst informant, for such use is in effect to treat the ﬁrst information report as
substantive evidence in the case.134.

[s 145.6] Police diaries.—
"It is the absolute duty of Judges and Magistrates to entirely disregard all statements
and entries in special diaries as being in any sense legal evidence for any purpose,
except for one solitary purpose of contradicting the Police-oﬃcer who made the
special diary when they do afford such a contradiction; and even in that case they are
not evidence of anything except that such Police-oﬃcer made the particular entry
which is at variance with his subsequently given evidence; they are not evidence that
what is stated in the entry was true or correctly represents what was said or done."135.
"Where the Police-oﬃcer who made the special diary is allowed to refresh his memory
and does look at an entry in the Diary for the purpose of refreshing his memory, the
provisions of section 161 of the Indian Evidence Act...apply, and the accused or his
agent is entitled to see such entry in the special diary and to cross-examine such
Police-oﬃcer thereupon. There is no provision in section 172 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 enabling any person other than the Police-oﬃcer who made the
special diary to refresh his memory by looking at the special diary and the necessary
implication is that a special diary cannot be used to enable any witness other than the
Police-oﬃcer who made the special diary to refresh his memory by looking at it.136.
This is in truth a general principle of law. The Criminal Court, but not an accused person
or his agent unless the Police-oﬃcer has been allowed to look at the diary in order to
refresh his memory, can use the special diary for the purpose of contradicting the
Police-oﬃcer who made it, but before doing so the court must comply with the speciﬁc
enactment of section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act...and call the attention of the
Police-oﬃcer to such parts of the special diary as are to be used for the purpose of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
contradicting him, otherwise such a use of the special diary would be illegal. There is
no provision in section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure enabling the court, the
prosecution or the accused to use the special diary for the purpose of contradicting
any witness other than the Police-oﬃcer who made it, and the necessary implication is
that the special diary cannot be used to contradict any witness other than the Policeoﬃcer who made it. Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act does not either extend or
control the provisions of section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is only if the
court uses the special diary for the purpose of contradicting the Police-oﬃcer who
made it that section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act. applies, and in such case it applies
for that purpose only, and not for the purpose of enabling the court or a party to
contradict any other witness in the case, or to show it or any part of its contents to any
other witness. No reading of section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure consistent
with the rules of construction and a knowledge of the English language is possible by
which the special diary is to be used to contradict any person except the Police-oﬃcer
who made it. It is not enacted in section 172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure by
reference to section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, or otherwise that if the special
diary is used by the court to contradict the Police-oﬃcer who made it, it may thereupon
or thereafter be used to contradict any other witness in the case."137.
A certiﬁed copy of the statements recorded under section 176 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 does not constitute an evidence in itself. It can be used as an
evidence under this section to contract the present statements of the witness. This
would require the witness to be produced, cross-examined and an opportunity given to
him either to admit the statement or to deny it.138.
A statement of witness made before the investigating oﬃcer was not allowed to be
used for the purpose of cross-examining the witness to establish contradiction
between one statement and another.139.
The statement made by the accused to the police during investigation is admissible in
evidence in a civil suit. The fact that the signature of the maker was not obtained
thereon does not make it inadmissible. The court will, however, consider such
statement keeping in mind the rule of caution.140.
The Supreme Court stated the position in this regard as follows:141. "Section 162 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure imposes a bar on the use of any statement made by any
person to a police oﬃcer in the course of investigation at any inquiry or trial, except for
the purpose of contradicting the witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the
Evidence Act. Where any part of such statement is so used any other part may also be
used in the re-examination of the witness for the limited purpose of explaining any
matter referred to in the cross-examination. The only other exception to this embargo
relates to the statements falling within the provisions of sec. 32(1) or permitted to be
proved under section 27. Section 145 provides that a witness may be cross-examined
as to previous statements made by him in writing and relevant to maters in question,
without such statement being shown to him or being proved, but that if it is intended to
contradict him by the writing, the attention must, before the writing can be proved, be
called to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
The courts below were clearly wrong in using as substantive evidence statements
made by the witness in the course of investigation. The deﬁnition of the word "proved"
in sec. 3 does not enable the court to take into consideration matters, including
statements whose use is statutorily barred."
Statements of witnesses recorded during inquest cannot be used as evidence.142. An
FIR is not a substantive piece of evidence. It can be used only to contradict or
corroborate the version in the court of the person who ﬁled the report. Where the
inconsistent statements in the FIR are not shown to the witness during his
examination, they cannot be used as evidence.143.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Entries in a case diary cannot be relied upon by the prosecution as a substantive
evidence. It can only be used for contradicting the prosecution witnesses.144.
Statements of a witness in a case diary of some other case can also be used.145.

[s 145.6.1] Person not examined-in-chief, cannot be cross-examined as to
previous statements.—
A person who was not examined-in-chief was not allowed to be cross-examined as to
previous statements in writing. The Court said: By its very nomenclature section 145
deals with the aspect of cross-examination. The question of cross examination would
arise if only a particular witness was examined-in-chief. Admittedly third party
purchaser, in this case, was not examined-in-chief. Therefore, invoking section 145 in
the context of the application made by her does not arise.146.

[s 145.7] Supply of copy to accused.—
Where the statement of the prosecutrix was recorded by the investigating oﬃcer in the
course of investigation, it was held that not furnishing a copy of it to the accused was
illegal. It violated the statutory right of the accused to test the veracity of the evidence
of the proecutrix.147.

114. As to the application of section 145 to police-diaries, see the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973 (2 of 1974), section 172.
115. Majid v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 382 , the son of the deceased deposed that he saw

his mother being killed by the accused. He was sought to be contradicted by his earlier
statement that his father had killed his mother. This was not allowed because the earlier
statement was not in writing; Balakram v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2017 SC 2375 : 2017 (5)
Scale 220 : (2017) 7 SCC 668 , a witness may be cross-examined as to his previous statements
if such previous statements are brought on record in accordance with law, and if the
contingencies as contemplated under section 172(3) of CrPC are fulﬁlled.
116. President, SVV Mandal v Yellaiah, AIR 1969 AP 148 .
117. State of Haryana v Harpal Singh, AIR 1978 SC 1530 : 1978 Cr LJ 1603 .
118. Nankhu Singh v Bihar, AIR 1973 SC 491 : 1972 Cr LJ 1204 .
119. Ashok Kumar v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1977 SC 1304 : 1977 Cr LJ 814 : (1977) 2 SCC 233

. Where such statements have not been transferred to the Sessions Judge they cannot be used
as substantive evidence. Jit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1976 SC 1421 : 1976 Cr LJ 1162 :
(1976) 2 SCC 836 .
120. Sitaram v Ram Chandra, AIR 1977 SC 1712 : (1977) 2 SCC 49 ; Public Prosecutor, HC of AP v

Vendala Semaiah, 2000 Cr LJ (NOC) 29 (AP), witnesses not standing the test of crossexamination.
121. Per Lord Herschell,LC in Browne v Dunn; (1893) 6 R 57—HL Md. Badaruddin Ad v State of

Assam, 1989 Cr LJ 1876 (Gau), the requirement of the section is of compulsory nature.
Ganakanta Das v State of Assam, 1990 Cr LJ 219 (Gau), that part of the statement which is to be

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
used must be pin-pointed by marking it. Also on the same point, Ghanshyam v State of MP, 1990
Cr LJ 1017 (MP).
122. State (NCT of Delhi) v Mukesh, (2014) 15 SCC 661 , para 10.
123. Heramba Lal Ghosh v Emperor, (1945) 1 Cal 326 : AIR (32) 1945 Cal; Santosh v State of

Chhatisgarh, 2002 Cr LJ 1180 : 2001 (4) MPHT 63 CG (Chha), documents needed for
contradiction can be ordered to be produced.
124. Mohanlal v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1982 SC 839 : 1982 Cr LJ 630 (2) : (1982) 1 SCC 700 :

1982 SCC (Cri) 334 .
125. Balakrishnan v State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2018 SC 1153 .
126. Dhanbal v State of TN, AIR 1980 SC 628 ; State of Rajasthan v Kartar Singh, (1971) 1 SCR 56

. Minor contradictions not to rule out the witness. Dharamvir v State, 1990 Cr LJ 839 : 1989 All
LJ 454; Shaik Subhani v State of AP, 2000 Cr LJ 321 (AP), putting suggestions to a witness
which he goes on denying was held as not amounting to contradicting the witness. Rajendra
Singh v State of Bihar, 2000 Cr LJ 2199 : AIR 2000 SC 1779 : (2000) 4 SCC 298 , the former
statement of the witness which was exhibited to him did not carry any signature or seal of
oﬃce. Hence, it could not be said to be the proved statement of the witness, the witness was
also not confronted with that part of the statement with which the defence wanted to contradict
him. The provisions of section 145 were not attracted. Tahir v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 1342 (All),
a witness was sought to be recalled after he had concluded his evidence. The basis of the
application was that he subsequently ﬁled an aﬃdavit which contradicted his previous
statements made in the court. The court said that this was not allowable under section 145.
Shyam Singh Hada v State, 2002 Cr LJ 1437 (Raj), contradiction must be of material nature
otherwise the prosecution case cannot be jettisoned. Bishna v State of WB, (2005) 12 SCC 657 :
AIR 2006 SC 302 , cross-examination as to previous contradictory statements in writing. In
certain cases omissions are also considered as contradictions. Karan Singh v State of MP,
(2003) 12 SCC 587 : 2003 (4) Crimes 180 (SC), the previous statement of the witness was put to
him, nor he was given an opportunity to explain it the statement could not be used to contradict
the present statement of the witness. Chaudhary Ramjibhai Narsangbhai v State of Gujarat, AIR
2004 SC 313 : (2004) 1 SCC 184 , the section comes into play when a witness makes
contradictory statements.
127. Narayanamma v State of Karnataka, (1994) 5 SCC 728 at p 732 : 1994 SCC (Cr) 1573.
128. Munchershaw Bezonji v The New Dhurumsey S & W Co, (1880) 4 Bom 576.
129. Daya Shankar v Bachi, AIR 1982 All 376 .
130. Muzaffar Khan v The Crown, (1939) 20 Lah 509.
131.

Prakash Chandra v State (Delhi Admn.) AIR 1979 SC 400 : 1979 Cr LJ 329 ;

Guggiliasanthosh Reddy v State of AP, 2001 Cr LJ (NOC) 110 (AP) : (2001) 1 Andh LJ (Cri) 76, the
statement of a witness under section 164, CrPC is only a previous statement. It cannot be taken
as a substantive evidence. It can be used for contradicting the witness. Convicting the accused
on the basis of such a statement is not proper. An inquest report is also not a substantive piece
of evidence. It can be used for corroborating the evidence of other witnesses.
132. Emperor v Zawar Rahman, (1902) 31 Cal 142 (FB); Queen-Empress v Dan Sahai, (1885) 7 All

862 ; Reg. v Arjun Megha, (1874) 11 BHC 281; Emperor v Lakshman, (1915) 17 Bom LR 590 ; Bal
Gangadhar Tilak v Shri Shriniwas Pandit, (1915) 17 Bom LR 527 : 42 IA 135 : 39 Bom 441.
133. Nankhu Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1973 SC 491 : 1972 Cr LJ 1204 .
134. Emperor v Rahenuddin Mandal, (1943) 2 Cal 381 ; Nisar Ali, (1957) 1 All 361 SC. Also see,

Kirender Sarkar v State of Assam, (2009) 12 SCC 342 at para 11 and 12; Asharam v State of MP,
(2007) 11 SCC 164 at para 18.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
135. Per EDGE, C.J, in Queen-Empress v Mannu, (1897) 19 All 390 , 412 (FB); Dadan Gazi v

Emperor, (1906) 33 Cal 1023 , 1026, 1027.
136. These provisions are not discriminatory Subhash Chandra v UOI, 1988 Cr LJ 1077 Raj.
137. Per Edge CJ, in Queen-Empress v Mannu, (1897) 19 All 390 , 393, 394 (FB); Balakram v State

of Uttarakhand, AIR 2017 SC 2375 : 2017(5) Scale 220 : (2017) 7 SCC 668 , unless the
investigating oﬃcer or the court uses the case diary either to refresh the memory or
contradicting the investigating oﬃcer as previous statement that too after drawing his attention
thereto as is enjoined under section 145, the entries cannot be used by the accused as
evidence.
138. Gauri Shanker Sharma v State of UP, AIR 1990 SC 709 : 1990 Supp SCC 656 : (1990) 1

Crimes 196 .
139. Kemparaju v State, 2000 Cr LJ 4734 (Kant).
140. Khair Mohamed Reas Mohamed v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 568 (Bom). The court

referred to Zahiruddin v Emperor, AIR 1947 PC 75 : (1947) 48 Cr LJ 679 .
141. Hazarilal v State (Delhi Admn.), AIR 1986 SC 1883 : 1999 Cr LJ 18 .
142. Malkiat Singh v State of Punjab, (1991) 4 SCC 341 : 1991 SCC (Cr) 976.
143. State of UP v Babul Nath, (1994) 6 SCC 29 : 1994 SCC (Cr) 1585; Surjit Singh v State of

Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 1389 , an acquittal based on discrepancies in the FIR was held to be
improper Ibrahimkhan Prikhan v State of Maharashtra, 2003 Cr LJ 1802 (Bom), the eye-witness
was not confronted with the FIR and with additional police statements. This omission was held
to be not fatal to the prosecution case. The accused could not claim any beneﬁt from it as the
FIR has never been regarded as substantive evidence.
144. Bandhu v State, 1997 Cr Lj 3010 : 1997 All LJ 136.
145. State of Kerala v Babu, 1999 Cr LJ 3491 : AIR 1999 SC 2161 .
146. Grandhi Narayanachetty v Vissannagasi, AIR 2003 NOC 131 : 2003 AIHC 25 .
147. Dharamarajan v State, 2002 Cr LJ 2751 (Ker).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 146] Questions lawful in cross-examination.—
When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions hereinbefore
referred to, [s 146.2] be asked any questions which tend—
(1) to test his veracity, [s 146.3]
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life, [s 146.4] or
(3) to shake his credit by injuring his character, [s 146.5] although the answer to

such questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him or might
expose or tend directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture:
148.[Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 376, 149.

[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D,
section 376DA, section 376DB] or section 376-E of the Indian Penal Code (45
of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of
consent is an issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put
questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to the general immoral
character, or previous sexual experience, of such victim with any person for
proving such consent or the quality of consent.]

COMMENT
Sections 146–152 deal with questions which can be put to a witness with a view to
shake his credit by damaging his character. These sections along with section 132
embrace the entire range of questions which can possibly be put to a witness.

[s 146.1] Scope.—
This section gives very wide powers to the cross-examiner in addition to those given by
section 138; and is more extensive in scope. As long as the cross-examiner conﬁnes
his questions to the points of testing the veracity of a witness or discovering his status
in life, there seem to be no limits to his power of putting questions. But when he
undertakes the diﬃcult yet delicate task of impeaching the character of witness, the
following sections (sections 147–150) give ample protection to a witness in speaking
the truth and impose wholesome restraints upon groundless assertions levelled
against him. "If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding,
the provisions of section 132 are by section 147 declared applicable to it. If the
question is as to a matter relevant only so far as affects the credit of the witness by
injuring his character, the court is by section 148 directed to decide whether or not the
witness is to be compelled to answer, and may...warn the witness that he is not obliged
to answer it When there is a question asked to which the answer may tend to criminate

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
a witness, he may object that it is not as to a matter relevant to a matter in issue, or
that, if relevant, it is relevant only as affecting his credit by injuring his character."150.
This section extends the power of cross-examination far beyond the limits of s.138,
paragraph 2, which conﬁnes the cross-examination to relevant facts, including of
course the facts in issue.151.
Cross-examination to credit is necessarily irrelevant to any issue in an action, its
relevancy consists in being addressed to the credit or discredit of the witness in the
box so as to show that his evidence for or against the relevant issue is untrustworthy; it
is most relevant in a case where everything depends on the judge's belief or disbelief in
the witness's story.152.
Where the cross-examination of a witness before a committing magistrate was
deferred to the next date as the court time was over at the conclusion of the
examination-in-chief of the witness but the witness breathed his last before the date
ﬁxed in the case and could not be cross-examined, it was held that it could not be said
that the accused was given the opportunity to cross-examine the witness and had
failed to avail of the opportunity, therefore the statement of such a witness could not
be received in evidence at the trial.153.

[s 146.2] "Hereinbefore referred to",
that is, referred to in section 138, para 2.

[s 146.3] "To test his veracity".—
A witness may be examined not only as to the relevant facts but also as to all facts
which reasonably tend to affect the credibility of his testimony. This is generally spoken
of as cross-examination to credit, inasmuch as a large part at any rate of the facts
which are relied on for the purpose are facts which touch the credit and good name of
the witness. But no such cross-examination can be legitimate unless it has some
reasonable bearing on his credibility.
When a witness is contradicted by his previous statement in the manner laid down in
section 145, then that part of the statement which has been put to the witness will be
considered along with the evidence to assess the worth of the witness in determining
his veracity. The whole of the previous statement however cannot be treated as
substantive evidence.154.

[s 146.4] "To discover who is he," etc.—
As preliminary to the cross-examination of a witness as to facts in the case, it is
common practice to make inquiry into his relations with the party on whose behalf he
was called—business, social and family; also to enquire as to his feelings towards the
party against whom his testimony has been given. This is permissible in order to place
his testimony in a proper light with reference to bias in favour of the one party or
prejudice against the other.155.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 146.5] "Credit… character".—
The word "credit" is of a wide and varied connotation and has to be distinguished from
the word "character", though the latter may include the former. "Credit" would take in
belief, estimate of reputation, however, good character, and "creditable" so construed
would mean honourable or trustworthy. The term "character" envisages a moral or
ethical qualities of a person as a social being.156.

[s 146.6] "Proviso" prior to the amendment of 2013.—
Prior to the amendment of 2013, the proviso which was inserted by the Indian Evidence
(Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act 4 of 2003), section 2 (w.e.f. 31 December 2002) read as
under:
"Provided that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape, it shall not be
permissible to put questions in the cross-examination of the prosecutrix as to her
general immoral character."

[s 146.7] 2013 Amendment.—
This section was amended vide Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013157. on the basis
of recommendations given by the Justice JS Verma Committee, constituted in the
aftermath of the December 2012, Nirbhaya rape incident. By way of necessary
amendment in this section, the earlier proviso has been substituted by a new proviso
so as to complete the entire legal scheme under which the questioning of a woman's
character by way of an accused's defence has been completely ousted in the cases of
rape falling under various species of the offence.
The effect of this amendment is that in a trial for the offence under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) of section 376, section 376-A, section 376-B, section 376-C, section
376-D or section 376-E of Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such
offence, it is no longer permissible for the accused to adduce evidence or to put
questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to her general immoral character, or
her previous sexual experience, with any person for proving either her consensual
participation in the offence consent or the quality of her consent.
Now, this newly amended section read with section 53-A, totally bars the leading of
evidence about the character of the victim or her previous sexual experience with any
person on the issue of consent given by her or the quality of consent, by making it not
relevant as also inadmissible during the course of recording of evidence in a trial for
the prescribed offences. However, a difference between these two newly inserted
provisions is that while section 53-A includes within its fold, the various offences
deﬁned under section 354, section 354-A, section 354-B, section 354-C and 354-D also,
the present section is conﬁned only to the offence of rape and its various species made
punishable differently.
In order to make the justice delivery system "gender-neutral", the Supreme Court,158.
entertained and allowed an appeal by a lady witness against an order of High Court
transferring trial from a Fast Track Court presided over by a lady judge to another Fast
Track Court presided over by a male judge in a case relating to making pornographic
photos and videos in various acts of sexual intercourse and thereafter selling them to
foreign websites. The Supreme Court was of the view that the recording of evidence as
to the subject-matter of such an offence could cause embarrassment not only to the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Presiding Oﬃcer, both male and female, but also to the lady witnesses/accused as well
as to any decent person.

[s 146.8] 2018 Amendment.—
Section 146 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 has been further amended vide the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018. In section 146 of the Evidence Act, in the
proviso, for the words, ﬁgures and letters "section 376A, section 376B, section 376C,
section 376D", the words, ﬁgures and letters "section 376A, section 376AB, section
376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB" have been
substituted. The section required amendment to bring sections 376AB, 376DA and
376DB of the Indian Penal Code within its purview.

148. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, section 28, for the Proviso (w.r.e.f. 3-2-2013). Earlier the proviso

was inserted by Act 4 of 2003, section 2 (w.e.f. 31-12-2002). The proviso, before substitution by
Act 13 of 2013, stood as under:
"Provided that in a prosecution for rape or attempt to commit rape, it shall not be permissible to
put questions in the cross-examination of the prosecutrix as to her general immoral character.".
149. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, sec. 9, for "section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section

376D" (w.r.e.f. 21-4-2018).
150. Per Turner, CJ, in The Queen v Gopal Doss, (1881) 3 Mad 271, 278 (FB).
151. Markby, p 107.
152. Bombay Cotton Co v Raja Bahadur Shivlal Motilal, (1915) 17 Bom LR 455 : 42 IA 110 : 39

Bom 386.
153. State v Hazura Singh, (1952) Pat 48.
154. Som Nath v UOI, AIR 1971 SC 1910 : 1971 Cr LJ 1422 : (1971) 2 SCC 387 .
155. MaKelvey, section 259.
156. Prashant Maheshbhai Pandya v State of Gujarat, 2016 Cr LJ 303 , para 20 (Guj).
157. Act 13 of 2013, vide section 26, (w.e.f. 3- 2-2013).
158. Fatima Riswana v State, (2005) 1 SCC 582 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 147] When witness to be compelled to answer.—
If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding, the
provisions of section 132 shall apply thereto.

COMMENT
This section only applies to question referred to in clause (3) of the preceding section.
If refers to "matters relevant to the suit or proceeding." The following section (i.e.,
section 148) refers to "matters not relevant to the suit for proceeding."

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 148] Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness
compelled to answer.—
If any such question [s 148.2] relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding,
except in so far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the
Court shall decide whether or not the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and
may, if it thinks ﬁt, warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it. In exercising
its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following considerations:—
(1) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the

imputation conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court
as to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testiﬁes;
(2) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to

matters so remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the
imputation would not affect, or would affect in a slight degree, the opinion of
the Court as to the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testiﬁes;
(3) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the

importance of the imputation made against the witness's character and the
importance of his evidence;
(4) the Court may, if it sees ﬁt, draw, from the witness's refusal to answer, the

inference that the answer if given would be unfavourable.

COMMENT
[s 148.1] Object.—
Sections 148–152 are intended to protect a witness against improper crossexamination—a protection which is often very much required. But the protection offered
by section 148 is neither very effectual because an innocent man will be eager to
answer the question, and one who is guilty will by a claim for protection merely confess
his guilt, nor does the threat contained in section 149 and this section carry the matter
much further.159.
The object of this section is to prevent the unnecessary raking up of the past history of
a witness, when it throws no light whatsoever on the questions at issue in a case. It
protects a witness from the evils of a reckless and unjustiﬁable cross-examination
under the guise of impeaching his credit. In the course of cross-examination, the
temptation is always too great to run down a witness's character; the Legislature has,
therefore, wisely provided ample safeguards for the unfortunate witness and placed
wholesome checks on the wily cross-examiner. It would seem that under this section a

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
witness cannot be compelled to answer irrelevant questions; but if he chooses to
answer them, he cannot be contradicted by other evidence (section 153).

[s 148.2] "Any such question".—
When any such question, that is, the question referred to in section 146, is not relevant
to the suit or proceeding, the court must decide whether or not the witness should be
compelled to answer it and may warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it.
Such questions are proper—
(1) if they are of such a nature that the truth of the imputation made touches the
credibility of the witness.
They are improper—
(1) if the imputation refers to matters (a) so remote in time, or (b) of such a character,
that its truth does not affect the credibility of the witness; or
(2) if there is a great disproportion between the importance of the imputation and the
importance of the evidence.
If the witness refuses to answer any question it is open to the court to draw the
inference that the answer if given would be unfavourable [cf. section 114, Illustration
(b)].

[s 148.2.1] CASES
[s 148.2.1.1] Prior consideration whether such questions proper or improper.—
[Clauses (1), (2)].—On an indictment for rape, or attempt at rape, or for an indecent
assault, the prosecutrix cannot be asked in cross-examination whether she had
connection with another person not the accused; and if she denies it, evidence cannot
be called to contradict her.160. But she can be asked whether she had on previous
occasions connection with the accused,161. or whether she was a common
prostitute.162.

[s 148.3] Remote imputation
[Clause (2)].—The following statement of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab v Gurmit
Singh,163. highlights the duty of the court in this respect: "There has been lately a lot of
criticism of the treatment of the victim of sexual assault in the court during their crossexamination some defence counsel adopt the strategy of continual questioning of the
prosecutrix as to details of the incident. The court should not sit as a silent spectator.
While every latitude should be given to the accused to test the veracity of the
prosecutrix and credibility of her version through cross-examination, the court must
also ensure that cross-examination is not made a means of harassment or causing
humiliation to the victim. A victim of rape has already undergone a traumatic
experience and if she is made to repeat again and again, in unfamiliar surroundings
what she had been subjected to, she may be too ashamed and even nervous or
confused to speak and her silence or a confused stray sentence may be wrongly
interpreted as discrepancies and contradictions in her evidence."

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The Supreme Court164. entertained and allowed an appeal by a lady witness against an
order of High Court transferring trial from a Fast Track Court presided over by lady
judge to another Fast Track Court presided over by male judge in a case relating to
making pornographic photos and videos in various acts of sexual intercourse and
thereafter selling them to foreign websites. Supreme Court, in order to make the justice
delivery system "gender-neutral", held that recording of evidence in a case of
pornographic materials under section 67 of the Information Technology Act, 2000
could cause embarrassment not only to the Presiding Oﬃcer, both male and female,
but also to lady witnesses/accused as well as to any decent person.

159. Markby, 107.
160. Per Kelley CB, in Queen v Holmes, (1871) LR 1 CC R 334, 336; Hodgson's Case, (1812) R & R

CC 211; Rex v Clarke, (1817) 2 Stark 41.
161. Rex v Martin, (1834) 6 C&P 562; Reg v Cockcroft, (1870) 11 Cox 410.
162. Rex v Barker, (1829) 3 C&P 589.
163. State of Punjab v Gurmit Singh, (1996) 2 SCC 384 , at 403 : AIR 1996 SC 1393 : 1996 Cr LJ

1728 .
164. Fatima Riswana v State, (2005) 1 SCC 582 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 149] Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.—
No such question as is referred to in section 148 ought to be asked, unless the person
asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys is
well-founded.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A barrister is instructed by an attorney or vakil that an important witness is a

dakait. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a
dakait.
(b) A pleader is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dakait.

The informant, on being questioned by the pleader, gives satisfactory reasons
for his statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he
is a dakait.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he

is a dakait. There are here no reasonable grounds for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his

mode of life and means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a
reasonable ground for asking him if he is a dakait.

COMMENT
The cross-examiner must have reasonable grounds to believe that the imputation made
against the witness is well-founded. As for what are reasonable grounds which justify
such question, see the illustrations.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 150] Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable
grounds.—
If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable
grounds, it may, if it was asked by any barrister, pleader, vakil or attorney, report the
circumstances of the case to the High Court or other authority to which such barrister,
pleader, vakil or attorney is subject in the exercise of his profession.

COMMENT
[s 150.1] Object.—
"The object of these sections [sections 149, 150, 151, 152] is to lay down, in the most
distinct manner, the duty of counsel of all grades in examining witnesses with a view to
shaking their credit by damaging their character. I trust that this explicit statement of
the principles, according to which such questions ought or ought not to be asked, will
be found suﬃcient to prevent the growth, in this country, of that which in England has
on many occasions been a grave scandal. I think that the sections, as far as their
substance is concerned, speak for themselves, and that they will be admitted to be
sound by all honourable advocates and by the public..."165.
"In order to protect witnesses against needless questions of this kind, we enact that
any advocate who asks such questions without written instructions (which the court
may call upon him to produce, and may impound when produced) shall be guilty of
contempt of court, and that the court may record any such question, if asked by a party
to the proceedings. The records of the question in the written instructions are to be
admissible as evidence of the publication of an imputation intended to harm the
reputation of the person affected, and such imputations are not to be regarded as
privileged communications, or as falling under any of the exceptions to section 499 of
the Indian Penal Code, merely because they were made in the manner stated. Upon a
trial for defamation, it would, of course, be open to the person accused to show, either
that the imputation was true, and that it was for the public good that the imputation
should be made (Exception 1, section 499, Indian Penal Code), or that it was made in
good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it or of any other
person (Exception 9). This is the only method which occurs to us of providing at once
for the interests of a bona ﬁde questioner and an innocent witness."166.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
165. Abstract of Proceedings of the Council of the Governor General of India,Vol XI (1872) p

133.
166. Proceedings of the Supreme Legislative Council, Gazette of India, pp 237, 238, of the

Supplement, dated March 30, 1872.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 151] Indecent and scandalous questions.—
The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or
scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the
questions before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters
necessary to be known in order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.

COMMENT
This section forbids the putting of any question which is indecent or scandalous,
unless it relates to facts in issue or is necessarily connected with them.

[s 151.1] CASE.—
In a proceeding to recover maintenance by a married woman for her illegitimate
children, under section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, she "can be examined to
prove non-access of her husband during their married life, without independent
evidence being ﬁrst offered to prove the illegitimacy of the children."167.

167. Rozario v Ingles, (1893) 18 Bom 468, 472.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 152] Questions intended to insult or annoy.—
The Court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult or
annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly offensive in
form.

COMMENT
The court has the power to forbid any question which is intended to insult or annoy, or
which is couched in a needlessly offensive form.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 153] Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing
veracity.—
When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant to
the inquiry only in so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he answers falsely, he may
afterwards be charged with giving false evidence. [s 153.3]
Exception 1 .—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any
crime and denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2 .—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality
and answers it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.

The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a
fraudulent claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is
inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for

dishonesty. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for
dishonesty.
The evidence is not admissible.
(c) A aﬃrms that on a certain day he saw B at Lahore.

A is asked whether he himself was not on that day at Calcutta. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day at Calcutta.
The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his
credit, but as contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in
question in Lahore.
In each of these cases the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with
giving false evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B

against whom he gives evidence.
He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the question tends to
impeach his impartiality.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
COMMENT
[s 153.1] Object.—
The object of the section is to prevent trials being spun out to an unreasonable length.
If every answer given by a witness upon the additional facts mentioned in section 146
could be made the subject of fresh inquiry, a trial might never end. These matters are
after all not of the ﬁrst importance, beyond what is comprised in the exceptions.168.

[s 153.2] Principle.—
When a witness deposes to facts which are relevant, evidence may be given in
contradiction of what he has stated. But when what he deposes to affects only his
credit, no evidence to contradict him can be led for the sole purpose of shaking his
credit by injuring his character. However, a witness answering falsely can be proceeded
against for giving false evidence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code. There are
two exceptions to this: (1) previous conviction when denied can be proved (section
298, Criminal Procedure Code); and (2) any fact tending to impeach his impartiality
when denied can be proved. This is a salutary rule and is meant to curtail every inquiry.
If contradictory evidence be allowed on side issues for instance, as shaking the
witness's credit by injuring his character, there can be no limit to an enquiry. The main
issue in the case is almost always likely to be fogged by subsidiary inquiries which are
proﬁtless as well as perplexing. The two exceptions engrafted on the section are
capable of easy proof and are material in assessing the weight to be attached to the
testimony of an individual witness. The section should be strictly construed and
narrowly interpreted, otherwise Courts would have to investigate, on most imperfect
materials, questions which have no bearing upon the matter really in contest.169.
The rule limiting the right to call evidence to contradict witnesses on collateral
questions excludes all evidence of facts which are incapable of affording any
reasonable presumption or inference as to the principal matter in dispute; the test
being whether the fact is one which the party proposing to contradict would have been
allowed himself to prove in evidence.170.
The principle that evidence cannot be adduced to contradict the denials of a witness in
cross-examination on matters going to collateral issues affecting credit only, although
a general rule, is an absolute rule and the categories of exceptions to it are not
closed.171.
There was the allegation as shown by the testimony of the eyewitness in a case that
the husband of the eyewitness and the father of the accused had loan transactions on
which they later fell out. No questions were put to her to contradict her on this point.
She was not allowed to be contradicted through the mouth of other witnesses by
putting questions to them about her testimony.172.

[s 153.3] "If he answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with giving false
evidence".—
These words were apparently inserted in forgetfulness of the fact that the Indian law as
to false evidence differs from the English law as to perjury in not requiring that the
matter charged as false should have been material to the issue.173.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

168. Markby, 108.
169. Bhogilal v Royal Insurance Co Ltd, (1927) 30 Bom LR 818 : 6 Ran 142 (PC).
170. Kazi Gulam Alli Bin Kasi Ismail v HH Aga Khan, (1869) 6 BHC (OCJ) 93. The antecedents of

the witness can be brought to light only for the purpose of shaking his credit. Bhaskaran Nair v
State of Kerala, 1991 Cr LJ 23 (Ker).
171. Urban Transport Authority v Nweiser, 1993 ALMD 1487 (CA).
172. State of Karnataka v K Varappa Reddy, 2000 Cr LJ 400 : AIR 2000 SC 185 : (1999) 8 SCC

715 .
173. Stokes,Vol II, p 929, f.n. 2.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 154] Questions by party to his own witness.—
[(1)] The Court may, in its discretion, [s 154.2] permit the person who calls a

174.

witness to put any questions to him which might be put in crossexamination by the adverse party.
175.

[(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under sub-

section (1), to rely on any part of the evidence of such witness].

COMMENT
[s 154.1] Principle.—
Where a party calling a witness and examining him discovers that he is either hostile or
unwilling to answer questions put to him, he can obtain permission of the court to put
questions to him which may be put to him by way of cross-examination. The section
does not say that a person who calls a witness may cross-examine him in certain
circumstances, but he might put questions to him which might be put in crossexamination by the adverse party. That is not the same as cross-examination.176. This
section vests discretion in the court to permit such person to put any such question.
Such a request can be made in civil as well as in criminal cases. Permission for crossexamination in terms of the section cannot and should not be granted at the mere
asking of the party calling the witness. The courts are under a legal obligation to
exercise the discretion vesting in them in a judicious manner by proper application of
mind and keeping in view the attending circumstances.177.
A discretion is given to the court to allow or not to allow a person to cross-examine his
own witness as hostile. The witness may be asked leading questions (section 143); or
questions as to his previous statements in writing (section 145); or any questions
under section 146; or his credit may be impeached (section 155).
Under this section, before a party calling a witness can cross-examine him, it is not
necessary that the witness should ﬁrst be declared to be hostile to the party calling
him, and the court has unfettered discretion to allow a counsel to put questions of a
cross-examination nature to his own witness even though he did not show himself
hostile to the party calling him, but the court ought not to exercise its discretion unless
during the examination-in-chief something happens which makes it necessary for the
facts to be got from that witness by cross-examination; it is necessary before the
procedure under this section can be adopted that leave of the court should be asked
for and obtained or permission given by the court suo motu for the said purpose before
such questions are put to a witness though the section may not make such a
procedure imperative and the permission contemplated by the section should be
signiﬁed, if not in words, by some other action of the court indicating its permission
during the cross-examination of the witness by the party calling him.178.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 154.2] "The Court may, in its discretion".—
A party who calls an opponent as a witness has no right to cross-examine him,
however hostile he may be, without the leave of the judge. Whether a witness is a
litigant or not, it is a matter of discretion in the judge whether he shows himself so
hostile as to justify his cross-examination by the party calling him.179. The permission
under the section should not and cannot be granted at the mere asking of the party
calling the witness.180. The court said that the fact that the witness was not concurring
with the suggestion in respect of a post event detail was not suﬃcient for public
prosecutor to proclaim that the witness had become hostile to the prosecution.
The court has the discretion under this section, to permit the prosecution to test, by
way of cross-examination, the veracity of their own witnesses with regard to the
(unconnected) matters elicited by the defence in cross-examination.181. The discretion
conferred on the court is to be exercised judicially and in the interest of justice. The
witness in this case was deposing in favour of the opposite party but not against the
interest of his party. The veracity of his statement could not be doubted. The court
refused to declare him as a hostile witness.182.

[s 154.3] Stage for seeking permission.—
Where a witness called by the prosecution started giving statements in favour of the
defence even in his examination-in-chief, but the public prosecutor did not immediately
seek permission for getting the witness declared as hostile and allowed his crossexamination by the defence and then applied for permission to cross-examine him, the
Supreme Court refused to interfere in the order refusing permission.183.

[s 154.4] CASES.—Hostile witness.—
A "hostile witness" is one who from the manner in which he gives evidence shows that
he is not desirous of telling the truth to the court.184. In Shatrughan v State of MP, a
hostile witness is not necessarily a false witness.185. The court can permit a person,
who calls a witness, to put questions to him which might be put in the crossexamination at any stage of the examination of the witness, provided it takes care to
give an opportunity to the adverse party to cross-examine him on the answers elicited
which do not ﬁnd place in examination-in-chief.186. Where a party is allowed to crossexamine his own witness, the effect of that cross-examination must be to discredit that
witness altogether and not merely to get rid of part of his testimony, and hence that
witness's evidence must be excluded altogether. In the case of a witness for the
prosecution, this means so far as it supports the case for the prosecution, for obviously
the defence is entitled to rely on so much of his evidence as supports their case:
otherwise a party who found that his witness had given evidence which supported his
adversary's case could get rid of the evidence by declaring him hostile.187. The
expression "hostile witness" has been avoided because of the confusion caused by it in
English Law. The section confers a simple discretion upon the court to allow a party to
cross-examine his own witness.188. In short, the rule prohibiting a party to put
questions to his own witness in the manner of cross-examination or in a leading form
is relaxed not because the witness has already forfeited all right to credit but because
of his antipathetic attitude or otherwise the court feels that for doing justice, his
evidence will be more fully given, the truth more effectively extracted and credit more
adequately tested by questions put in a more pointed, penetrating and searching way.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
The expression "any questions that may be asked by the adverse party in crossexamination" shows that neither party is excluded from relying on his testimony.
In a departmental enquiry against the appellant, the enquiry oﬃcer made adverse
comments about the correctness or otherwise of the statements made by the
witnesses examined on behalf of the department without assigning any reasons
therefor. They were examined by the department. It was held that if those witnesses
deposed falsely, they should have been cross-examined. Only because their evidence
was totally against the department, the same per se would not mean that they deposed
falsely.189.
The mere fact that a party has cross-examined its own witness does not make him an
unreliable witness. There must be some material to show that the witness has resiled
from his earlier statements.190. The evidence of a hostile witness can be relied upon to
the extent to which it supports the prosecution version.191. The testimony of a hostile
witness need not be rejected in its entirety.192.
In Gulshan Kumar v State,193. it was held that the court is not precluded from taking into
account the statement of a hostile witness altogether and it is not necessary to discard
the same in toto. Thus, the statement of the hostile witness can be relied upon partly. In
Balu Sonba Shinde v State of Maharashtra,194. while it is true declaration of a witness to
be hostile does not ipso facto amount to rejection of his evidence—and it is now wellsettled that the portion of evidence being advantageous to the parties may be taken
advantage of—but the court before whom such a reliance is placed shall have to be
extremely cautious and circumspect in such acceptance. Reference in this context may
be made to the decision of this Court in State of UP v Ramesh Prasad Misra,195. wherein
this Court stated:
It is equally settled law that the evidence of a hostile witness would not be totally rejected if
spoken in favour of the prosecution or the accused, but it can be subjected to close scrutiny
and that portion of the evidence which is consistent with the case of the prosecution or
defence may be accepted.196.

In Gurpreet Singh v State of Haryana,197. the Supreme Court relied on the observations
passed in an earlier case in both of which similar facts were involved as cited the
following passage: "Incidentally, it is now well-settled that in the event of a portion of
evidence not being consistent with the statements given under 161, CrPC, and the
witness stands declared hostile that does not mean and imply total rejection of the
evidence. The portion which stands in favour of the prosecution or the accused may be
accepted but the same shall be subjected to close scrutiny. It is in this context the
observations of this Court in State of UP v Ramesh Prasad Misra,198. seem to be rather
apposite."
In another Supreme Court decision it was held that the mere fact that the prosecution
witness was not concurring with a suggestion made by the public prosecutor which
was dealing with a post event detail, was not suﬃcient to seek that the witness be
declared hostile. The court observed that a declaration of this kind cannot be granted
at the mere asking of the party who called the witness and that the evidence of such a
person cannot be regarded as unworthy of credit only because he has been declared
hostile.199. Where hostile witness did not speak anything about the occurrence, his
evidence was of no use.200. Where in a murder case all the prosecution witnesses
resiled from their earlier statements to the police and were treated hostile in wholesale,
their testimony was of no use.201.
This section does not warrant an inference that only when any previous statement of
the witness is available and if he is alleged to have departed from that that the court
can declare that witness hostile.202. Inconsistent and contradictory statements are not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
enough. The witness must appear to be not desirous of telling the truth and it is
necessary to regard him hostile for eliciting the truth.203. The Supreme Court further
elaborated this aspect in RK Dey v State of Orissa.204. The court has a discretion but no
guiding principles. The witness should exhibit an element of hostility or resile from a
material statement made before an earlier authority or not be speaking the truth. There
must be some material to show that the witness is not speaking the truth. Merely
because a witness in an unguarded moment speaks the truth which may not suit the
prosecution or which may be favourable to the accused, the discretion to allow crossexamination of one's own witness cannot be exercised. In this case the witnesses in
their statements before the police attributed a clear intention to the accused to commit
murder but before the court they stated that the accused was insane. The right to
cross-examine them was upheld. But this does not make him an unreliable witness so
as to exclude his evidence from consideration altogether.205. The evidence remains
admissible in the trial and there is no legal bar to base a conviction upon his testimony
if corroborated otherwise.
In a suit to recover moneys alleged to have been expended by the plaintiff in the
performance of a ceremony, the plaintiff's witnesses having failed to prove any
damages, he called the defendant as a witness who gave evidence to the effect that
the plaintiff had no claim. The court refused to allow the plaintiff to cross-examine the
defendant. It was held that the refusal to cross-examine was not justiﬁable.206.

[s 154.4.1] Cross-Examining one's own Witness without being Hostile.—
The trial was under an election petition. The court said that the right to cross-examine
one's own witness is not necessarily conﬁned only to the situation where the witness
exhibits hostility or is resiles from his earlier statement. Such cross-examination may
be permitted to retract truth if the court ﬁnds that the witness is withholding the truth.
Permission can be granted at any stage of the trial since the power of the court under
section 154 is not fettered by section 137 or section 138.207.

[s 154.5] Stage at which permission should be sought.—
A witness made statements favourable to the defence even during his examination-inchief. The public prosecutor allowed his cross-examination to proceed without making
an application for permission for cross-examining him. He applied for permission after
the cross-examination by the defence. The court refused it. The Supreme Court refused
to interfere in the refusal.
Declaration of a witness as hostile is to be done immediately at the time of
examination of witness and cannot be permitted to be done long after witness has
been examined.208.

[s 154.6] Effect upon testimony.—
The testimony of a witness who has turned hostile is not to be excluded entirely or
rendered unworthy of consideration.209. His testimony remains admissible. A
conviction can be based on it if it ﬁnds some corroboration.210.
Referring to its earlier decisions on hostile witness,211. the Supreme Court relied upon
the examination-in-chief of hostile witnesses only to the extent to which they supported

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
the case of the prosecution and were duly corroborated, not only by other witnesses
but even by the dying declaration and the medical evidence.212.
The evidence of a witness who has been declared hostile can be relied if there are
some other materials on the basis of which the said witness can be corroborated. More
so, that part of evidence of a witness as contained in the examination-in-chief, which
remains unshaken even after cross-examination, is fully reliable even though the
witness has been declared hostile.213. Evidence of a hostile witness can be accepted, if
the same is otherwise worthy of trust though he was declared hostile with regard to
some aspects of evidence tendered by him.214.

[s 154.7] 2005 Amendment.—
This section was amended in 2005 vide which the earlier section 154 was re-numbered
as sub-section (1) of this section, and a new sub-section (2) was inserted. What was
earlier being laid down through judicial pronouncements, was brought into the statute
book by way of this insertion of sub-section (2) so as to re-aﬃrm that the courts shall
be entitled to rely upon any part of the evidence of a witness declared "hostile" by
court.
In view of this amendment in section 154, the evidence of a hostile witness remains
admissible and there is no legal bar to base conviction upon the testimony of such
hostile witnesses if corroborated by other reliable evidence.215. In view of the amended
section 154, prosecution can rely on part of the evidence of a hostile witness.216. The
evidence of a person does not become effaced from the record merely because he has
turned hostile and his deposition must be examined more cautiously to ﬁnd out as to
what extent he has supported the case of the prosecution.217. The deposition of a
hostile witness can be relied upon at least up to the extent he supported the case of
the prosecution.218. It is also now a settled canon of criminal jurisprudence that the
part which has been allowed to be cross-examined can also be relied upon by the
prosecution.219.

174. Section 154 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 2 of 2006, section 9 (w.e.f. 16-4-

2006).
175. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, section 9 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006).
176. Bikram Ali Pramanik v Emperor, (1929) 57 Cal 801 ; Luchiram Motilal Boid v Radha Charan

Poddar, (1921) 49 Cal 93 ; Khijiruddin Sonar v Emperor, (1925) 53 Cal 372 ; See also State v
Bhera, 1997 Cr LJ 1237 (Raj), evidence of hostile witness deserves to be scrutinized carefully.
The prosecution should bring out contradictions in his testimony by confronting him with his
previous statements, should the prosecution fail to do so, it would became the duty of the court
to put such questions to him as may be necessary to ascertain the truth. Public Prosecutor v
Thummala Janaradhana Rao, 1998 Cr LJ 4450 (AP), no permission to cross-examine one's own
witness was granted where the witness had not shown any element of hostility to the party.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Samir Das v State of Tripura, 1999 Cr LJ 953 (Gau), no permission to cross-examine a witness
where there was nothing to show that he had resiled from his earlier statements.
177. Mattam Ravi v Mattam Raja Yellaiah, AIR 2017 Hyd 155 : 2017 (4) ALT 547 .
178. Ammathayarammal v Oﬃcial Assignee, Madras, (1932) 56 Mad 7; Mohan Banjari v The King-

Emperor, (1933) 30 NLR 55.
179. Price v Manning, (1889) 42 Chapter D 372.
180. Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 487 (SC).
181. Amrita Lal Hazra v Emperor, (1915) 42 Cal 957 ; Dadabuddappa Gouli v Kalu Kanto Gouli, AIR

2000 Kant 158 , the court has the power to permit a party to put any questions to his own
witness which might be put in cross-examination when the witness turns hostile.
182. S Murugesan v S Pethaperumal, AIR 1999 Mad 76 .
183. State of Bihar v Lalu Prasad 2002 Cr LJ 3236 (SC).
184. Panchanan Gogai v Emperor, (1930) 57 Cal 1266 .
185. Shatrughan v State of MP, 1993 Cr LJ 120 (MP).
186. Dahyabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1964 SC 1563 : (1964) 2 Cr LJ 472 : (1964) 7 SCR 361 .

The value of his testimony is not destroyed by such a permission. Lodai v State, 1991 Cr LJ 1878
(All). Evidence of such witness need not be wholly discarded. KP Rajan v State of Kerala, 1991 Cr
LJ 1859 (Ker); Suyambu Re, 1991 Cr LJ 2506 (Mad). At appellate stage, the prosecution cannot
say that a statement of its own witness is not binding on it. Murugan v State, 1991 Cr LJ 1680
(Mad), his evidence can be used to the extent to which it is natural and supports the party's
case. Laxman Sahu v State of Orissa, 1990 Cr LJ 821 (Ori).
187. Emperor v Mokbul Khan, (1928) 56 Cal 145 ; Sohrai Sao v King-Emperor, (1929) 9 Pat 474.

Jagir Singh v State, AIR 1975 SC 1400 . Prosecution case cannot be judged on the basis of
testimony of hostile witnesses. Keshoram Bros. v Assam, AIR 1978 SC 1096 : (1978) 2 SCR 788 .
188. Sat Paul v Delhi Admn., AIR 1976 SC 294 : 1976 (1) Cr LJ 295 . The Court explains at this

stage (p 306) the purpose of cross-examination and the validity of some of the Cal HC decisions
to the effect that once a witness is declared hostile his testimony cannot be used at all.
Followed in Ashim Das v State of Assam, 1987 Cr LJ 1533 (Gau), so as to hold that it was a lame
excuse not to produce the son of the deceased as a witness on the ground that he was won
over by the defence. Relied upon in Lalu v State, 1988 Cr LJ 1301 (Cal), in connection with the
testimony of child witness.
189. MV Bijlani v UOI, (2006) 5 SCC 88 .
190. Dhanu v State of Tripura, 1999 Cr LJ 1231 (Gau).
191. Koli Lakhmanbhai Chanabhai v State of Gujarat, 2000 Cr LJ 408 : AIR 2000 SC 210 .
192. G Parshwanath v State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 2914 : (2010) 8 SCC 593 .
193. Gulshan Kumar v State, 1993 Cr LJ 1525 . See also Kunwar v State of UP, 1993 Cr LJ 3421

(All). Haneefa v State of Kerala, 1993 Cr LJ 2125 (Ker), such portions of the evidence which
inspire conﬁdence can be relied upon.
194. Balu Sonba Shinde v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 3137 at p 3141 : 2002 Cr LJ 4650 .
195. State of UP v Ramesh Prasad Misra, AIR 1996 SC 2766 : AIR SCW 3468 : 1996 All LJ 1619 :

1996 Cr LJ 4002 .
196. Also see, Khachar Dipu v State of Gujarat, (2013) 4 SCC 322 ; Rameshbhai Mohanbhai Koli v

State of Gujarat, (2011) 11 SCC 111 .
197. Gurpreet Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 3217 : 2002 Cr LJ 4688 .
198. State of UP v Ramesh Prasad Misra, (1996) 10 SCC 360 : AIR 1996 SC 2766 : 1996 AIR SCW

3468 : 1996 Cr LJ 4002 : 1996 All LJ 1619.
199. Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2001 SC 330 at pp 334-335.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
200. Kathi Odhabhai Bhimabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR 1993 SC 1193 : 1993 Cr LJ 187 .
201. Subbiramani v State, 1995 Cr LJ 3382 (Mad).
202. Sahdeo v Bipti, AIR 1969 Pat 415 .
203. Phanindra Nath v Bholanath Banerjee, AIR 1982 Cal 397 .
204. RK Dey v State of Orissa, AIR 1977 SC 170 : (1976) 4 SCC 233 : 1977 Cr LJ 173 .
205. Bhagwan Singh v Haryana, AIR 1976 SC 202 , 203 : 1976 Cr LJ 203 . Where some witnesses

of rape turned hostile, the evidence of others was not to be rejected and was to be considered
independently of that fact and on its own intrinsic merit, State of Karnataka v Mehaboob, 1987 Cr
LJ 940 (Karn).
206. Radha Jeebun Moostuffy v Taramonee, Dosssee, (1869) 12 Moo Ind App 380 .
207. Atul Bora v Akan Bora, AIR 2007 Gau 51 .
208. Jatinder Singh Bhatia v State,, 153 (2008) DLT 633 .
209. Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 487 (SC).
210. Anil Rai v State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 3969 (SC), the wife was the eye-witness to the fact of

the murder of her husband.
211. Koli Lakhmanbhai Chanabhai v State of Gujarat, (1999) 8 SCC 624 ; Prithi v State of Haryana,

(2010) 8 SCC 536 ; Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6 SCC 1 , and Ramkrushna v State
of Maharashtra, (2007) 13 SCC 525 . Also see, Sidhartha Vashisht v State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6
SCC 1 ; Paramjeet Singh v State of Uttarakhand, (2010) 10 SCC 439 ; Ramesh Harijan v State of
UP, (2012) 5 SCC 777 – para 23, 24; Himanshu v State (NCT of Delhi), (2011) 2 SCC 36 – relied
upon the previous decisions of Supreme Court in Bhagwan Singh v State of Haryana, (1976) 1
SCC 389 ; Rabindra Kumar Dey v State of Orissa, (1976) 4 SCC 233 ; Syad Akbar v State of
Karnataka, (1980) 1 SCC 30 ; Khujji v State of MP, (1991) 3 SCC 627 ; Koli Lakhmanbhai
Chanabhai v State of Gujarat, (1999) 8 SCC 624 ; Prithi v State of Haryana, (2010) 8 SCC 536 ;
212. Bhajju v State of MP (supra).
213. Devraj v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2016 SC 3498 , para 19.
214. SC Goel v State, 2017 Cr LJ 536 , para 4 (SC).
215. Parimal Gowala v State of Tripura, 2007 Cr LJ 2394 (Gau.).
216. Shushendra alias Sushai Deb v State of Tripura, 2010 Cr LJ 4777 (Gau).
217. Paramjeet Singh v State of Uttarakhand, (2010) 10 SCC 439 .
218. Govindappa v State of Karnataka, (2010) 6 SCC 533 ; Also see Prithi v State of Haryana,

(2010) 8 SCC 536 .
219. Bhajju v State of MP, (2012) 4 SCC 327 ; Also see, Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi),

(2010) 6 SCC 1 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 155] Impeaching credit of witness.—
The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following ways by the adverse party,
or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him:—
(1) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the

witness, believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(2) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has 220.[accepted] the offer of a

bribe, or has received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(3) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which

is liable to be contradicted;
221.

[(4) * * * ]

Explanation .—A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not,
upon his examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his
reasons in cross-examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be
contradicted, though, if they are false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false
evidence.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that A delivered

the goods to B.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he had not
delivered the goods to B. The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is indicted for the murder of B.

C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which he died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was
not given by A or in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.

COMMENT
[s 155.1] Principle.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
This section enables the parties to give independent testimony as to the character of a
witness in order to indicate that he is unworthy of belief by the court. Its provisions
apply to both criminal and civil cases.
The section indicates four ways in which the credit of a witness may be impeached; (a)
by the adverse party, or (b) with the consent of the court by the party who calls him.222.
They are:—
(1) evidence of persons that the witness is unworthy of credit;
(2) proof that the witness (i) has been bribed; (ii) has accepted the offer of a bribe; or
(iii) has received any other corrupt inducement;
(3) former statements inconsistent with the present evidence and
(4) general immoral character of the prosecutrix in cases of rape or attempt to ravish.
The above sub-clause (i) has an explanation, which is a re-echo of section 153.
Witnesses deposing to character can be asked in cross-examination to give reasons for
their opinion. They are not liable to be contradicted in those reasons; but, if they are
false, they can be charged with giving false evidence.
The ﬁrst three grounds are general. They indicate that the credit of a witness may be
impeached, ﬁrst of all, by the best of evidence, that is, his own former statements to the
contrary; secondly, he can be shown to be unworthy of credit by the oral testimony of
other persons; and, lastly, his credit can be completely overthrown by proving that he
had accepted (a) a bribe, or (b) an offer of a bribe, or (c) any other corrupt inducement.
The fourth ground is a special one. If the woman complaining of rape or attempt to
ravish is proved to be a woman generally of immoral character, her story in the
complaint will necessitate strong proof.
This section should be strictly construed and narrowly interpreted, otherwise Courts
would have to investigate, on most imperfect materials, questions which have no
bearing upon the matter really in contest.223.

[s 155.2] Witness unworthy of credit
[Clause 1].—In order to impeach the character of a witness for veracity, witnesses may
be called to prove that his general reputation is such that they would not believe him
upon his oath. Such evidence can be given, and the practice is ancient and
undoubted.224.
The opinion of another Court in another case as to a witness cannot be put in to
impeach his credit.

[s 155.3] Bribe or corrupt inducement
[Clause 2].—The credit of a witness may be impeached on the ground that his evidence
was obtained by corrupt inducement, and it was open to the defendant to contend that
the application of a third degree method by the persistent questioning in the
investigation constituted a form of unfair evil, the avoidance of which was a corrupt
inducement to witness to say what was required of him. It would be open to the
defendant also to attempt to establish this by evidence, and it was clear that an
important witness for this purpose would be the counsel. There was also the possibility

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
of certain contingencies in which the counsel's association with the enquiry may be
unseemly.225.

[s 155.4] Former inconsistent statements
[Clause 3].—The words "which is liable to be contradicted" mean "which is relevant to
the issue,"226. but, according to the Supreme Court this proposition has been too
broadly laid down.227.
This sub-clause does not do away with the necessity of drawing the attention of the
witness to the previous statement because this section is controlled by section
145.228.
A conversation recorded in a tape-recorder is admissible in evidence under this
clause.229.

[s 155.4.1] Section 154, Criminal Procedure Code.—
The ﬁrst information report recorded under section 154, Criminal Procedure Code, may
be used to contradict the informer under this section.230.

[s 155.4.2] Section 164, Criminal Procedure Code.—
A previous statement of a witness recorded under section 164, Criminal Procedure
Code, can be used as provided for by this section, but it cannot be used as substantive
evidence of the facts deposed to therein.231.

[s 155.5] Immoral character of prosecutrix
[Clause 4].—In a case of rape the general immoral character of the complainant is
relevant. The non-consent of the complainant is a material element; and the character
of the woman as to chastity is of considerable probative value in judging of the
likelihood of that consent.232. Thus where the prosecutrix was asked the question
about her previous sexual experience with other men and the question was not
allowed, it was held on appeal that the question should have been allowed, for, if she
had denied the imputation, she could have been contracted by citing her prior
inconsistent statements about the matter and that would have very seriously affected
her credibility as witness.233.
Where the disclosure of incident of rape by the eyewitness the next day was supported
by sound reasons, it was held that delayed disclosure per se was not fatal.234.

[s 155.5.1] Deletion of clause (4).—
Clause 4 has been deleted. It has been deleted in England also by the Youth Justice
and Criminal Evidence Act, 1999. Now it is not permissible to ask any questions about
the complainant's sexual history or previous sexual behaviour, not even under the guise
of seeking information about previous false complaints.235.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 155.5.2] CASES.—
The defendant was accused of indecently assaulting the complainant in a restaurant.
There were no witnesses. The defence cross-examined the complainant as to
allegations of sexual impropriety which she had made against other men. She denied
making the complaints. The judge refused to allow the defence to call evidence as to
the making of those complaints. On appeal it was contended that the judge erred in so
ruling.
Held, allowing the appeal and ordering a retrial, that the judge should have permitted N
to adduce the evidence of the making of the other complaints which went not merely to
credit but to the central issue as to whether or not there had been any indecent assault
in the instant case. As to that matter, only the complainant and the defendant were able
to give evidence. If the evidence as to the other complaints had been called, it might
well have caused the jury to take a different view.236.

[s 155.6] Reasons for characterising witness hostile
[Explanation].—In the examination-in-chief a witness cannot be asked the reasons for
his belief that another witness is unworthy of credit. Such questions can only be asked
in cross-examination. But it is very dangerous in cross-examination to ask a witness his
reasons for believing a witness to be untrustworthy. He is, by such a question, enabled
to state any unfavourable fact without fear of contradiction.237.

220. Subs. by Act 18 of 1872, sec. 11, for "had".
221. Clause (4) omitted by the Indian Evidence (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act 4 of 2003) w.e.f.

31-12-2002. Clause (4) prior to omission read as:
"(4) when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt to ravish, it may be shown that the
prosecutrix was of generally immoral character."
222. The court may reject the testimony of a witness of its own even if he has not been

exposed by cross- examination. Juwar Singh v State of MP, AIR 1981 SC 373 : 1980 Cr LJ 1418 .
223. Bhogilal v Royal Insurance Co Ltd, (1927) 30 Bom LR 818 : 6 Ran 142 (PC).
224. The Queen v Brown and Hedley, (1867) LR 1 CCR 70.
225. Hussain Khan of Mamdot v Iftikhar Hussain Khan of Mamdot, (1949) 2 Lah 844.
226. Khadijah Khanum v Abdool Kurreem Sheraji, (1889) 17 Cal 344 , 347.
227. Rama Reddy v VV Giri, AIR 1971 SC 1162 : (1970) 2 SCC 340 .
228. Gopi Chand v The Crown, (1930) 11 Lah 460; Majid v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 382 :

2002 Cr LJ 938 , a son deposed that his mother was killed by the accused. He was sought to be
contradicted by an earlier statement to the effect that his father had killed his mother. This was
not allowed because the earlier statement was not in writing. He was also not questioned about
his earlier statement in cross-examination.
229. Rup Chand v Shri Mahabir Pershad, (1956) Pun 1351.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
230. Manimohan Ghosh v Emperor, (1931) 58 Cal 1312 ; Ramprasad v State of Maharashtra, 1999

Cr LJ 2889 : AIR 1999 SC 1969 : (1999) 5 SCC 30 , a dying declaration can be used for
corroborating or contradicting the maker of the statement if he survives and appears as a
witness. State of Rajasthan v Teja Ram, AIR 1999 SC 1776 : 1999 Cr LJ 2588 , former statement
of the witness, mode of proving.
231. Emperor v Bishun Datt, (1927) 50 All 242 .
232. Cunnigham, 360.
233. R v Funderburk, (1990) 2 All ER 482 (CA), applying R v Sweet Escote, (1971) 55 Cr App R

316. It was pointed out per curiam that the court will be astute to see that such crossexamination is not abused or unnecessarily extended.
234. Mukhera Belakota Reddi v State of AP, 1992 Cr LJ 2236 (AP).
235. R v T (complainant's Sexual History); R v H (Complainant's Sexual History), (2002) 1 WLR 632

(CA) : (2002) 1 All ER 683 . Questions about previous false complaints would require ruling from
the Judge. R v Mohrecovas, (20010 EWCA Crimes 1644 : (2002) 1 Cr App R 20, the complainant
not allowed to be questioned on the point whether prior to the alleged rape by the accused, she
had consensual sexual intercourse with the accused's brother. R v A (2001) 3 All ER 1 : (2002) 1
AC 45 : (2001) 2 WLR 1456 : (2001) 2 Cri App R 21 : (2001) UR HL 25 (HL). Their Lordships said
that:
Under section 41(3)(c) of the 1999 Act, construed where necessary by applying the
interpretative obligation under section 3 of the 1998 Act, and always paying due regard to the
importance of seeking to protect the complainant from indignity and humiliating questions, the
test of admissibility was whether the evidence, and questioning relating to it, was nevertheless
so relevant to the issue of consent that to exclude it would endanger the fairness of the trial
under Article 6 of the Convention. If that test were satisﬁed, the evidence should not be
excluded. In the instant case the permissibility of questioning the complainant about the alleged
recent sexual relationship between her and the accused and the admissibility of evidence on
that point, were matters for the trial judge to decide at the resumed trial.
236. R v Nagrecha (Chandu), (1997) 2 Cr App R 401 [CA (Crim Div)].
237. Cunnigham, 360.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 156] Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact admissible.
—
When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant
fact, he may be questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or
near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of
opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the
witness as to the relevant fact which he testiﬁes.
ILLUSTRATION
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes
various incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from
the place where it was committed.
Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to corroborate his evidence
as to the robbery itself.

COMMENT
[s 156.1] Principle.—
It is a well-settled law that even where the evidence of the complainant is quite
credible, no conviction can be based on such evidence unless it is corroborated by
independent material.238. This section permits the court to allow a witness, who has
testiﬁed to a relevant fact, to corroborate his testimony by deposing to any
circumstances which he observed at or near the time or place at which such relevant
fact occurred. The frame of the section indicates what questions are to be asked in
examination-in-chief. In most cases, it paves the way for cross-examination, which, if
successful, brings out contradiction; but which, if unsuccessful, must inevitably result
in corroboration. Like contradiction, corroboration is meant to test the truthfulness of a
witness.
The Legislature has indicated how and when a witness may be contradicted (sections
145, 153 and 158). We have now to see in what circumstances a witness may be
corroborated. First of all, he may be asked questions tending to corroborate evidence
of a relevant fact (section 156); secondly, former statements made by him may be
proved to corroborate later testimony to the same fact (section 157); thirdly, when any
statement relevant under section 32 or section 33 is proved, all matters may be proved
either to contradict or corroborate it (section 158).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
238. MG Thatte v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 2878 (Bom).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 157] Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later
testimony as to same fact.—
In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement [s 157.2] made
by such witness relating to the same fact at or about the time when the fact took
place, [s 157.3] or before any authority legally competent to investigate [s 157.4] the fact,
may be proved.

COMMENT
[s 157.1] Principle.—
A witness's former statement relating to the same fact made at or about the time when
the fact took place may be proved in order to corroborate his present testimony. There
are only two things which are essential for the section to apply. The ﬁrst is that a
witness should have given testimony with respect to some fact. The second is that he
should have made a statement earlier with respect to the same fact at or about the
time when the fact took place or before any authority legally competent to investigate
the fact. But in order to make the former statement admissible it is not necessary that
the witness to be corroborated must also say in court in his testimony that he had
made the former statement.239. The word investigate used in section 157 is not to be
understood in narrow sense in which it is used in CrPC. It must carry its ordinary
dictionary meaning in the sense of ascertainment of facts, sifting of materials and
search of relevant data etc.240.
A ﬁrst information report is not a substantive piece of evidence and can only be used to
corroborate the statement of the maker under this section or to contradict it under
section 145 of this Act. It cannot be used as evidence against the maker at the trial if
he himself becomes an accused, nor to corroborate or contradict other witnesses.241.

[s 157.2] "Any former statement".—
Such statement may be written or verbal, on oath, or in ordinary conversation. A
witness's account-books, duly kept in the ordinary course of business, may be used
under this section.242.
The word "statement" means only "something that is stated" and the element of
communication to another person is not necessary before "something that it stated"
becomes a statement under this section.243.
Statement of victim of sexual offence made immediately after the occurrence is
admissible as a previous statement in terms of section 157 or section 8 of the Act.244.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 157.3] "At or about the time when the fact took place".—
These words mean that the statement must be made at once or at least shortly after
when a reasonable opportunity for making it presents itself. What is a reasonable time
is a question of fact in each case. The object of the section is to admit statements
made at a time when the mind of the witness is still so connected with the events as to
make it probable that his description of them then would be accurate. But if time for
reﬂection passes between the event and the subsequent statement, it not only can be
of very little value but may be actually dangerous as such statements can be easily
brought into being. Such delayed statements are inadmissible. The section says that
the statement must be made "at or about the time" not "at any time after the event."245.
The Supreme Court has held that the main test as to whether a previous statement was
made "at or about the time when the fact took place" is whether the statement was
made as early as could reasonably be expected in the circumstances of the case and
before there was an opportunity for tutoring or concoction.246.
The expression "at or about time when fact took place" in section 157 should be
understood in the context according to facts and circumstances of each case. Where
the testimony of witnesses is that soon after the incident when they arrived at the spot,
eyewitnesses told them that accused chopped deceased by axe, while appellantaccused dealt Thunsa blow of lathi, the testimony is admissible in evidence and is
relevant piece of evidence in terms of section 157.247.
In Mahabir Singh v State of Haryana,248. the Supreme Court construed the words "at or
about the time when the fact took place." There was the solitary eyewitness to the fact
of a murder. Soon after the incident he narrated the details to his father. The father
narrated the same details in the FIR lodged by him. The court said that the interval
between the occurrence and the time of communicating its details by the eyewitness to
his father had not crossed the boundaries envisaged by the words "at or about the time
when the fact took place." The testimony of father could be used to corroborate the
evidence of his son, the eyewitness. The court said:249. "It is useful to refer to the
decision of this Court in State of Tamil Nadu v Suresh.250. Following passage in that
decision will be apposite: "We think that the expression "at or about the time when the
fact took place" in section 157 of the Evidence Act should be understood in the context
according to the facts and circumstances of each case. The mere fact that there was
an intervening period of a few days, in a given case, may not be suﬃcient to exclude the
statement from the use envisaged in section 157 of the Act. The test to be adopted,
therefore, is this: Did the witness have the opportunity to concoct or to have been
tutored? In this context the observation of Vivian Bose J in Rameshwar v State of
Rajasthan251. is apposite:
There can be no hard and fast rule about the 'at or about' condition in Section 157. The main
test is whether the statement was made as early as can reasonably be expected in the
circumstances of the case and before there was opportunity for tutoring or concoction.

[s 157.4] "Any authority legally competent to investigate".—
An Inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department is "an authority legally
competent to investigate" within the meaning of this section.252.
The ﬁrst information report recorded under section 154, Criminal Procedure Code, is
not a substantive piece of evidence; it can be used merely by way of corroboration or
contradiction and not any further. It is inadmissible for the purpose of proving that the
facts stated in it are correct.253. The statement of a prosecution witness during the
course of enquiry under section 202, CrPC cannot be proved under section 157 to

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
corroborate evidence of other witnesses examined during trial.254. Statements of
witnesses before an investigating oﬃcer are also not evidence. Such statements can
be used only to contradict a witness in the witness box.255. The statements in an FIR
also do not constitute a substantive evidence. They can also be used either for
corroboration or contradiction of the testimony of the witness.256. It should not be
admitted in evidence or placed before the jury unless it is admissible under one of the
provisions of the Evidence Act. If, however, it is admissible it should be placed before
the jury with proper directions. An information lodged by a person who died
subsequently, relating to the cause of his death, is admissible as a substantive piece of
evidence under the provisions of section 32(1). At the same time, the jury should be
reminded that the statement in question had not been made on oath nor had it been
tested by cross-examination but that after bearing these points in mind it would be for
the jury to attach to it such weight as they considered necessary.257.
When the prosecution has neither produced in evidence the person who made the ﬁrst
report in the Thana nor produced the person who wrote it out at the Thana, the ﬁrst
report cannot be referred to in evidence.258.

[s 157.5] Effect of section 162, Criminal Procedure Code.—
The general rule laid down in section 157 is controlled by the special provisions of
section 162, Criminal Procedure Code, so far as statements to the police taken under
section 161, Criminal Procedure Code, are concerned. Section 162 prohibits the use of
the record containing the statement of a witness to the police as evidence against the
accused as well as proof of such statement by oral evidence.259. Such statements
cannot be used as corroboration under this section.260. Cases which laid down that the
record was inadmissible but oral evidence as to the nature of those statements could
be given to corroborate the testimony of a witness are no longer of any authority in
virtue of the amended section 162, Criminal Procedure Code.261. A ﬁrst information
does not prove itself; it has to be tendered under some section of the Evidence Act. The
usual course is for the prosecution to tender it under this section to corroborate the
informant, and the defence can prove it to impeach his credit under section 155, or to
contradict him under section 145, of the Act. It is admissible also in proper cases under
sections 8 and 32(1) of the Act.262.

[s 157.6] Dying declaration.—
Where a person making a dying declaration chances to live, his statement cannot be
admitted in evidence as a dying declaration under section 32, but it may be relied on,
under this section, to corroborate the testimony of the complainant when examined in
the case.263.
Where the maker of statement is alive and has also been examined, her statement is
not admissible under section 32 but admissible under section 157.264. In a case,265.
the statement of one of the victim was recorded as dying declaration, but subsequently,
the victim survived and became an injured witness. Relying on its previous
decisions,266. it was held by Supreme Court that the statement cannot be treated as a
dying declaration, but only as a previous statement made by that witness, but the
statement has to be treated as of superior quality/high degree than that of the
statement recorded under section 161, CrPC. It can also be used for the purposes of
section 157 of Act.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where a person in anticipation of death makes his dying declaration in terms of section
32 of Evidence Act but thereafter survives, in such an eventuality the statement so
recorded has to be treated as of a superior quality/high degree than that of a statement
recorded under section 161, CrPC and can be used as provided under section 157 of
the 1872 Act.267.
Where plaintiffs sought to establish their pedigree by proving inter alia that A and B
were brothers, it was held that a statement to that effect made by one of the plaintiffs
in a deposition given long before the controversy in suit arose was admissible in
evidence.268.

239. Ramratan v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1962 SC 424 : (1962) 1 Cr LJ 473 .
240. Satendra Singh v State of Jharkhand, 2009 Cr LJ 2280 (Jhar.).
241. Nisar Ali, (1957) All 361 SC.
242. Stokes,Vol II, p 931 fn 1.
243. Bhogilal Chunilal, (1958) 61 Bom LR 746 SC : (1958) 22 SCJ 240 .
244. Thottakkara Chanthan v State, 2009 Cr LJ (NOC) 594 (Ker.).
245. Re Appaduras, (1945) Mad 821.
246. Rameshwar v State of Rajasthan, (1952) SCR 377 : AIR 1952 SC 54 : 1952 Cr LJ 547 .

Following this the Kerala High Court observed in Rajan v State of Kerala, 1992 Cr LJ 575 , 578
(Ker), that the words "at or about the time" must mean that the statement was made at once or
at least shortly after the event. The statement loses its value if the interval between the event
and the statement is such as to afford opportunity for reﬂection. The court accordingly admitted
the evidence of the statement of a bystander to another person who came running on hearing
the sound of an explosion.
247. Balram alias Ballu v State of MP, 2011 Cr LJ 836 (MP).
248. Mahabir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2001 SC 2503 : 2001 Cr LJ 3945 .
249. Ibid, p 2509.
250. State of Tamil Nadu v Suresh, AIR 1998 SC 1044 : (1998) 2 SCC 372 : 1998 AIR SCW 819 :

1998 Cr LJ 1416 .
251. Rameshwar v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1952 SC 54 : 1953 Cr LJ 5471
252. Muthukumaraswami Pillai v King-Emperor, (1912) 35 Mad 397 (FB).
253. Gajadhar Lal v King-Emperor, (1931) 7 Luck 552 , 562; Manimohan Ghosh v Emperor, (1931)

58 Cal 1312 .
254. Sashi Jena v Khadal Swain, (2004) 4 SCC 236 : AIR 2004 SC 1492 .
255. Hamidulla Bismillakhan v State of Gujarat, 1988 Cr LJ 981 (Guj); VA Abraham v S P Cochin,

1988 Cr LJ 1144 (Ker).
256. Shayam Nandan Singh v State of Bihar, 1991 Cr LJ 3350 (Pat).
257. Emperor v Mohammad Shaikh, (1942) 2 Cal 144 ; Emperor v Rehenuddin Mondal, (1943) 2

Cal 381 .
258. The State v Gajraj, (1952) Raj 910 .
259. Rakha v The Crown, (1925) 6 Lah 171, disapproving Mam Chand v The Crown, (1924) 5 Lah

324.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
260. Jagwa Dhanuk v King-Emperor, (1925) 5 Pat 63; King-Emperor v Maung Tha Din, (1926) 4

Ran 72 (FB); Rakha v The Crown, (1925) 6 Lah 171, disapproving Mam Chand v The Crown,
(1924) 5 Lah 324; King-Emperor v Nga Lun Thoung, (1935) 13 Ran 570 (FB).
261. The following cases are no longer of any authority: Emperor v Hanmaraddi, (1914) 16 Bom

LR 603 : 39 Bom 58; Fanindra Nath Banerjee v Emperor, (1908) 36 Cal 281 ; Muthukumaraswami
Pillai v King-Emperor, (1912) 35 Mad 397 (FB).
262. Azimuddy v Emperor, (1926) 54 Cal 237 . Shanker v State of UP, AIR 1975 SC 757 : 1975 Cr

LJ 634 , FIR can be used as evidence under sections 32(1), 8, 154, 155 and 157.
263. Emperor v Rana Sattu, (1902) 4 Bom LR 434 ; Maqsoodan v State of UP, AIR 1983 SC 126 :

(1983) 1 SCC 218 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 176 : 1983 Cr LJ 218 : 1982 All LJ 1524 ; Ramprasad v State
of Maharashtra, 1999 Cr LJ 2889 : AIR 1999 SC 1969 : (1999) 5 SCC 30 , which is to the same
effect.
264. Gajula Surya Parakash Rao v State of Andhra Pradesh, 2010 Cr LJ 2102 (SC); Also see—

Mona Hang Subba v State of Sikkim, 2012 Cr LJ 122 (SK); Sunder Singh v State of Uttaranchal,
(2010) 10 SCC 611 .
265. Ranjit Singh v State of Madhya Pradesh, 2011 Cr LJ 283 (SC).
266. Sunil Kumar v State of MP, (1997) 10 SCC 570 , Maqsoodan v State of UP, (1983) 1 SCC 218

, Ramprasad v State of Maharashtra, (1999) 5 SCC 30 , Gentela Vijayavardhan Rao v State of AP,
(1996) 6 SCC 241 , and State of UP v Veer Singh, (2004) 10 SCC 117 .
267. Ranjit Singh v State of MP, (2011) 4 SCC 336 .
268. Jadu Nath Sarker v Mahendra Nath Rai Chowdhury, (1907) 12 Cal WN 266.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 158] What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement
relevant under section 32 or 33.—
Whenever any statement, relevant under section 32 or 33, is proved, all matters may
be proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or
conﬁrm the credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved
if that person had been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination
the truth of the matter suggested.

COMMENT
Sections 32 and 33 of the Act permit the putting in of statements, oral or written, or
statements made in a judicial proceeding, by a person who cannot be examined as a
witness. The Legislature intends by this section to submit such statements to the tests
of contradiction and corroboration, in the same way as if those statements were made
by the witness in the box. No sanctity attaches to such statements simply because the
person is dead or cannot be examined as a witness. His credibility may be impeached
or conﬁrmed in the same manner as in the case of a living witness.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 159] Refreshing memory.—
A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by referring to any
writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is
questioned, or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the
transaction was at that time fresh in his memory.
The witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other person, and read by
the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it he knew it to be correct.
When witness may use copy of document to refresh memory.—
Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he
may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document: [s 159.1]
Provided the Court be satisﬁed that there is suﬃcient reason for the nonproduction of the original.
An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treatises.

COMMENT
This section says how a witness may refresh his memory. He may, during his
examination, refresh his memory by referring to—
(1) any writing made by himself (i) at the time of the transaction concerning which he is
questioned, or (ii) so soon afterwards that the court considers it likely that the
transaction was fresh in his memory;
(2) any such writing made by any other person and read by the witness within the time
aforesaid;269.
(3) professional treatises, if the witness is an expert (section 159).
It is not necessary that the writing referred to should be one which is admissible in
evidence. A document not produced in court within proper time and, in consequence,
rejected, may be referred to, to refresh memory if it comes within the purview of this
section.270. Even if a panchanama containing a statement made by a witness as to the
crime committed is not admissible in evidence, a panch witness can make use of it for
the purpose of refreshing his memory, where the panchanama is made by the police but
is immediately read over to the panch and admitted by him to be correct.271. But a
Court should not take cognizance of the terms of a document which is inadmissible in
evidence and has been referred to by a witness merely in order to refresh his memory
as to a date.272. The mere handing over of a document to a witness for the purpose of
refreshing his memory does not make the document a piece of evidence in the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
case.273. It is immaterial what the document is, whether it be a book of account, letter,
tradesman's bill, notes made by the witness, or any other document which is likely to
assist the memory of the witness. Where the question was whether a candidate
appealed to voters on the ground of religion, short and long-hand notes made by
persons who heard the speeches were permitted to be used by them for refreshing
memory.274. Their contents can also be brought on record by direct oral evidence in the
manner prescribed by section 160.
It is not necessary that the witness should have speciﬁc recollection of the facts
themselves (section 160). But he has to appear before the court in person. Where the
question was whether a marriage was solemnised before attaining the age of 15 years,
the court said that the horoscope can be used in evidence by examining the person
who prepared it not under section 32 but under sections 159–160.275.
Deposition of complainant by referring to documents after permission from Court for
the purposes of refreshing his memory does not result in any illegality or
irregularity.276.
The adverse party has the right of seeing the writing so used and cross-examining the
witness thereupon (section 161).
The grounds upon which the opposite party is permitted to inspect a writing used to
refresh the memory of a witness are threefold; (i) to secure the full beneﬁt of the
witness's recollection as to the whole of the facts; (ii) to check the use of improper
documents; and (iii) to compare his oral testimony with his written statement.277.
The section says a witness may refresh his memory as stated. He is not bound to do
so; and the accused cannot compel him to do it.278. Nor the accused can prevent from
doing so. A person was charged with unlawfully possessing a controlled drug. The
witness for the prosecution did not give at the trial as detailed a statement as he gave
to the police when he was initially interviewed in relation to the offence. He was invited
to refresh his memory from the record of his interview. The accused objected. The
court said that there is no reason why a witness should not be allowed to supplement
his testimony with certain essential details which are eluding him in oral testimony
from his own earlier recorded statements. This is allowed in all cases where his
testimony otherwise lays a proper foundation for his testimony.279.
Records of investigating oﬃcers are in the nature of contemporaneous entries made by
him for the purpose of refreshing his memory. The court said that it is always advisable
to that he should look into his records before any concerned question.280.

[s 159.1] "Copy of such document".—
The Act does not require that this copy shall have been made by the witness himself, or
in his presence, or so as to enable him to swear to its accuracy.281. A register which is
not a secondary evidence of the contents of a bond may be referred to by a witness for
the purpose of refreshing his memory.282.
Recovery memos and Discovery memos are used for the purposes of section 159.
Statements of attesting witness to such memos are only corroborating evidence and
their support to the prosecution cannot be considered as mandatory.283.

[s 159.2] Post-mortem examination reports.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A medical man in giving evidence may refresh his memory by referring to a report
which he has made of his post-mortem examination, but the report itself cannot be
treated as evidence.284.

[s 159.3] Dying declaration.—
The dying statement of a deceased person may be proved in the ordinary way by a
person who heard it; and the writing may be used for the purpose of refreshing the
witness's memory.285.

[s 159.4] Special diary.—
The special diary may be used by the police-oﬃcer who made it, and by no witness
other than such oﬃcer, for the purpose of refreshing his memory.286.

269. Burrough v Martin, (1809) 2 Camp 112; Abdul Salim v Emperor, (1921) 49 Cal 573 .
270. Jewan Lal Daga v Nilmani Chaudhuri, (1927) 30 Bom LR 305 : 55 IA 107 : 7 Pat 305.
271. Emperor v Mahadeo Dewoo, (1945) 47 Bom LR 992 .
272. Bhogilal Bhikachand v Royal Insurance Co Ltd, (1927) 6 Ran 142 : 30 Bom LR 818 (PC).
273. Tribhuvan Ojha v Ramchandra Dube, (1934) 14 Pat 233.
274. ZB Bukhari v BR Mehra, AIR 1975 SC 1788 : (1976) 2 SCC 17 .
275. Savitri Bai v Sitaram, AIR 1986 MP 218 .
276. Mahendra Amratlal Kayastha v State of Gujarat, 2012 Cr LJ 959 (Guj.).
277. Per Field J, In the matter of the petition of Jhubboo Mahton, (1882) 8 Cal 739 , 744.
278. In the matter of the Petition of Kali Churn Chunari, (1881) 8 Cal 154 .
279. R v Sutton, (1992) Cr App R 70 (CA).
280. State of Karnataka v R. Varappa Reddy, 2000 Cr LJ 400 : AIR 2000 SC 185 .
281. Stokes, Vol II, p 932, fn 3.
282. Taruck Nath Mullick v Jeamat Nosya, (1879) 5 Cal 353 .
283. Liyakat Ali v State of Rajasthan, 2010 Cr LJ 2450 (Raj).
284. Roghuni Singh v The Empress, (1882) 9 Cal 455 ; Loku Basappa Pujari, (1959) 61 Bom LR

1271 .
285. In the matter of the Petition of Samiruddin, (1881) 8 Cal 211 .
286. Queen-Empress v Mannu, (1897) 19 All 390 (FB); King-Emperor v Nga Lun Thoung, (1953) 13

Ran 570 (FB).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 160] Testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section 159.—
A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is mentioned
in section 159, although he has no speciﬁc recollection of the facts themselves, if he
is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
ILLUSTRATION
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the
course of business, if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has
forgotten the particular transactions entered.

COMMENT
The principle of the foregoing section is carried a step further here. A witness may
refresh his memory by a document even though he has no speciﬁc recollection of the
facts themselves; but he must be sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the
document. If the witness had not correctly recorded the words used by the speaker but
only his impression, then the notes made by him would be inadmissible to prove the
words used.287. The section applies when the witness states in so many words that he
does not recollect, and when the circumstances establish beyond doubt that this is so.
Having no speciﬁc recollection of the facts he can only testify regarding the contents of
the document before him and explain that he recorded correctly what the deponent
said at the time.288. A witness testifying to large number of transactions contained in
account books or in other documents can be permitted to testify by referring to
them.289.
That a document may be used as the refresher of memory, it is by no means necessary
that the witness, after having seen it, should have an independent recollection of the
facts mentioned therein or connected therewith. It will suﬃce if he remembers that he
has seen the paper before, and that, when he saw it, he knew its contents to be correct,
or even if, entirely forgetting the circumstances themselves, and the fact of his having
seen the paper, he can still, in consequence of recognising his signature or writing upon
it, vouch for the accuracy of the memorandum, or swear to the particular fact in
question.290.
A witness may refresh his memory from a writing made by another person and
inspected and signed by him, at the close of the day on which it was made, when it
brings to his mind neither any recollection of the facts mentioned therein nor any
recollection of the writing itself but when it nevertheless enables him to testify to a
particular fact from the conviction of his mind on seeing the writing which he knows to
be genuine.291.
The notes of a speech taken at the time by a police-oﬃcer should be proved in the
following way. The police-oﬃcer should describe his attendance at the place where the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
speech was made by the accused and the making of the relevant speech, and give a
description of its nature so as to identify his presence there and his attention to what
was going on. After that it is quite enough if he says: "I wrote down that speech and
this is what I took down."292.
Where a commissioner's report was cancelled and a party sought to examine him as an
ordinary witness and not in the capacity of commissioner, it was held that he could be
allowed to refer to his report for refreshing memory.293.

287. Per Wallis J, in Mylapore Krishnasami v Emperor, (1909) 32 Mad 384, 395.
288. Partap Singh v The Crown, (1925) 7 Lah 91.
289. State of Andh. Pra. v Ganeswara Rao, AIR 1963 SC 1850 : (1963) 2 Cr LJ 671 .
290. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1412, pp 896- 897.
291. Abdul Salim v Emperor, (1921) 49 Cal 573 .
292. Public Prosecutor v Venktarama Naidu, (1944) Mad 113.
293. VP Padmnabhan v Grassim Industries, AIR 1997 Ker 356 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 161] Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.—
Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding sections must
be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it; such party may, if he
pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.

COMMENT
[s 161.1] Principle.—
This section gives the opposite party a right of inspecting documents used in court for
the purpose of refreshing the memory of a witness. He may look at the writing to see
what kind of writing it is in order to check the use of improper documents.294. He has a
right to look at any particular writing before or at the moment when the witness uses it
to refresh his memory in order to answer a particular question; but if he then neglects
to exercise his right, he cannot continue to retain the right throughout the whole of the
subsequent examination of the witness.295.
In all cases where documents are used to refresh the memory of a witness, it is usual
and reasonable—and if the witness has no independent recollection of the fact, it is
necessary—that they should be produced at the trial, and that the opposite counsel
should have an opportunity of inspecting them, that, on cross or re-examination, he
may have the beneﬁt of the witness's refreshing his memory by every part. Neither is
the adverse party bound to put in the document as part of his evidence, merely
because he has looked at it, or examined the witness respecting such entries as have
been previously referred to, but, if he goes further than this, and asks questions about
other parts of the memorandum, it seems that he thereby makes it his own
evidence.296.

294. Per Field J, In the matter of the Petition of Jhubboo Mahton, (1882) 8 Cal 739 , 745.
295. In the Matter of the Petition of Jhubboo Mahton, (1882) 8 Cal 739 , 745.
296. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1413, p 897.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 162] Production of documents.—
A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his possession or power,
bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production
or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the
Court.
The Court, if it sees ﬁt, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of State,
[s 162.2] or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.

Translation of documents.—
If for such purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the
Court may, if it thinks ﬁt, direct translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence: and, if the interpreter disobeys such
direction, he shall be held to have committed an offence under section 166 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).

COMMENT
This section refers to oﬃcial as well as private documents. The second paragraph of
the section provides that when a document, in respect of which an objection to
production or admissibility is raised, refers to matters of State, the court has no power
to inspect the document. With regard to other documents in respect of which privilege
is claimed, the court, if it thinks ﬁt, may inspect the documents.

[s 162.1] Principle.—
Under this section the validity of an objection to the production of a document has to
be determined by the court. The only limitation on the power of the court is that in
cases of documents where privilege is claimed under section 123, the court may not
look at those documents but must determine the validity of the claim on materials
other than the document itself.297.
When a witness is summoned to produce a document which is in his possession or
power, he must bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection that he may have with
regard to its production or admissibility. Under the provisions of O XVI, rule 6, of the
Civil Procedure Code, a person may be summoned to produce a document without
being summoned to give evidence. He may either attend the court personally or depute
another to produce it. In neither case is he liable to be cross-examined (section 139). If
the document be in his possession or power, he is bound, under this section, to bring
the document with him to Court notwithstanding any objection he may have to its
production (e.g., sections 130–131 or sections 126–129) or admissibility. Having
brought it to Court, he is entitled to raise his objection to its production or admissibility.
The court has then to decide the validity of any such objection. For the purpose of

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
deciding on the validity of the reason that may be offered for withholding them, the
court may receive evidence298. and in so doing it is entitled to inspect the document, if
it does not refer to matters of State (section 123). If the document in question happens
to be in a language not known to the presiding oﬃcer, he may get it translated, and call
upon the translator to keep its contents secret.
In criminal cases, the protection under section 126 afforded to communications by a
client to lawyers cannot be availed of against an order to produce the document; the
document must be produced, and then, under this section it will be for the court, after
inspection of the document, if it deems ﬁt, to consider and decide any objections
regarding its production or admissibility.299. Where the matter in a Government was
found to be of privileged character, the matter was held to be not available to support a
contempt or defamation case.300.
The party claiming privilege may waive it, either absolutely or subject to reservations.
Where a document was disclosed for the purposes of criminal proceedings, it was held
that there was no waiver of the privilege in the matter of civil proceedings.301.

[s 162.2] "Matters of State".—
See section 123 as to "affairs of State." Where an oﬃcer is summoned to produce an
oﬃcial document, he is bound to produce it in court. He should raise the objection in
court, and the question whether that objection is well-founded is one for the court to
decide. For this purpose the court is not entitled to inspect the document if it refers to
matters of State. It must decide the question without such inspection by examining the
oﬃcer producing it or otherwise. It is for the court to decide whether a particular
document is an unpublished record relating to affairs of State, i.e., whether it is a
document in respect of which privilege can properly be claimed. But once the court has
decided that the document is one in respect of which privilege may be claimed, i.e., it is
an unpublished record relating to matters of State, the question whether the document
should be produced or not is one entirely in the discretion of the head of the
department concerned, and the court has no power to inspect the document to
determine the question of its admissibility. The oﬃcer claiming privilege for a
document that he is summoned to produce must appear and produce the document in
court and must satisfy the court that his claim is well-founded. It is for the court to
decide whether the claim should be allowed or not. But once the court holds that the
document is one with regard to which privilege can be claimed, in other words, that it is
a communication made to a public oﬃcer in oﬃcial conﬁdence or that it is an
unpublished oﬃcial record relating to affairs of State which it would not be in the public
interest to disclose, the question whether privilege should be claimed for it or not is
entirely within the discretion of the oﬃcer in charge of the document. The court for the
purpose of deciding whether the claim to privilege is well-founded or not is not entitled
to look at the document. It must decide the question of the validity of the objection
without looking at the document.302.
This aspect was closely scrutinised by the Supreme Court in its decision in SP Gupta v
UOI,303. The case arose out of the matter of the transfer of a High Court judge and nonrenewal of the terms of an additional judge. The correspondence between the Law
Minister and the Chief Justice of India and that between the Chief Justice of the High
Court and the State Government was required to be produced. It was held that though
the advice was protected from judicial scrutiny by virtue of Article 74 of the
Constitution, the material on the basis of which the advice was formulated was not
protected. The approach adopted appears from the following statement: "So where an
objection is taken against the disclosure of any document the court would allow the
objection if it ﬁnds that the document relates to the affairs of the State and its

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
disclosure would be injurious to public interest, but, on the other hand if the court
reaches the conclusion that the document does not relate to the affairs of the State or
that the public interest in the administration of justice in the particular case overrides
all other aspects of public interest, the court will overrule the objection and order
disclosure of the document. The ﬁnal decision in regard to the validity of an objection
against disclosure raised under section 123 would always be with the court by reason
of section 162.
"The Court is not bound by the assertions made by a Minister or a Head of the
Department in an aﬃdavit in support of plea against non-disclosure. The Court retains
the power to balance the injury to the State or the public service against the risk of
injustice, before reaching the decision. At the same time the immunity against
disclosure allowed under section 123 is not a privilege which can be waived by the
State.
In the weighting process which the court has to perform in order to decide which of the
two aspects of public interest should be given predominance, the character of the
proceeding, the issues arising in it and the likely effect of the documents on the
determination of the issues must form vital consideration.
Of course, there are certain classes of documents which should not be disclosed, no
matter what a particular document in those classes may contain. Law recognises their
immunity from disclosure as a class. It does appear that cabinet papers, minutes of
discussions of Heads of Departments and high level documents relating to the inner
working of the Government machinery which are concerned with the framing of
Government polices belong to this class which in public interest must be regarded as
protected against disclosure.
In this regard it is necessary to bear in mind that the burden of establishing a claim for
class immunity is very heavy on the person making the claim.
So even where a claim for immunity against disclosure of a document is made under
section 123, the court may in an appropriate case inspect the document in order to
satisfy itself whether its disclosure would, in the particular case before it, be injurious
to public interest and whether the claim for immunity must, therefore, be upheld. This
power of inspection is a power which is to be sparingly exercised, that is, only if the
court is in doubt, after considering the aﬃdavit, if any, ﬁled by the Minister or the
Secretary, the issues in the case and the relevance of the document whose disclosure
is sought."
"What is impermissible under section 123 is giving evidence derived from unpublished
oﬃcial records relating to affairs of the State. Section 123 must be construed on its
own terms. Undoubtedly, a century old provision enacted to some extent keeping in
view the needs of the Empire builders must change in the context of the Republican
Government and the open society which we have set up. Undoubtedly there must be
such affairs of the Sate involving security of the nation and foreign affairs where public
interest requires that the disclosure should not be ordered. It is, however, equally well
recognised that fair administration of justice is itself a matter of vital public interest.
Therefore, if the two public interest conﬂict, the court will have to decide whether the
public interest which formed the foundation for claiming privilege would be jeopardised
if disclosure is ordered and on the other hand whether fair administration of justice
would suffer by non-disclosure and decide which way the balance tilts."
"The rules now developed by Supreme Court relating to the disclosure of documents
need to be carefully applied. The balance between the conﬂicting claims of public
interest represented by oﬃcialdom and the public interest ﬂowing from the
administration of justice often calls for a delicate assessment, into which per force

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
must enter consideration vital to the operations of Government on the one hand and
the demands of adjudication on the other. The responsibility ﬁxed on the court is a
serious one, and there is need to warn that this power which now vests in the court can
have grave consequences if the content of its potential is not truly appreciated and
realised by those who wield it. Whenever a court breaks new ground, the development
and recognition of new rights is often accompanied by the birth of problems surfacing
also for the ﬁrst time. New doctrines must be cautiously applied. Yet no court can shirk
its duty if it ﬁnds that its power has been rightly invoked."
The Supreme Court laid emphasis upon public interest aspects of the provisions: A
plain reading of sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act, section 162 of the CrPC and
Article 74(2) of the Constitution would show that these provisions are expressed in a
negative form which is the clearest possible proof of the fact that the legislature has
incorporated a direct prohibition against the use of documents mentioned in the
aforesaid provisions.
Thus, a disclosure can be allowed only in exceptional circumstances where there is no
injury to public interest because public interest is always paramount to private interest.
In fact, those provisions clearly contain four important attributes of the doctrine of
disclosure—(a) public interest, (b) conﬁdentiality, (c) candour and (d) expediency. The
legislature seems to have laid the greatest possible emphasis on public interest and
conﬁdentiality aspects of these documents.
Any revolutionary decisions so as to expose high conﬁdential matters to public gaze by
following a policy of liberal disclosure of documents ignoring the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Act would not only be detrimental to our progress but may cause
serious obstruction in the practical running of day-to-day affairs of the Government or
for that matter the governance of the country itself.
The statutory provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Evidence Act as also those of
Article 74(2) of the Constitution have fully safeguarded high Government and oﬃcial
secrets and disclosure is prohibited in public interest unless the court is fully satisﬁed
that disclosure will not harm the public interest."
In a subsequent case,304. the Supreme Court thus commented on this case: "Though
the ratio of the court's decision in Bachhittar Singh305. case outlines the conservative
view in the law relating to privilege, the doctrine of privilege received a shock treatment
against the State at the hands of the Supreme Court in SP Gupta v UOI"306. It may be
said that the legal milestone in Gupta case also needs to retreat a bit.
Statements made and documents produced by assesses before the Income-tax Oﬃcer
for the purpose of showing the income of such assesses do not refer to matters of
State.307.
In an employment dispute, the employee had ﬁled a suit against his employer seeking a
declaration that he is entitled to promotion to the post of Senior Branch Manager with
effect from the date when his batch mates were so promoted. The employee pleaded
that his performance was admittedly comparatively better than his batch mates. During
trial, a witness was summoned to produce the Annual Conﬁdential Report of the
employee when an application was ﬁled seeking privilege on the ground that the
Annual Conﬁdential Report cannot be allowed to be produced in public interest. It was
held by the Punjab & Haryana High Court that claim of privilege is not available to
"Annual Conﬁdential Report". Information cannot be protected from disclosure merely
because it has been supplied in conﬁdence. Accordingly, the claim of privilege in regard
to the class of document known as Annual Conﬁdential Report was declined.308.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 162.3] Privilege of newspapers.—
The privilege of newspapers (known as the newspaper rule) protects their sources of
information. In a matter in which a privilege of this kind was claimed by a newspaper (a
libel action), the court said:309. In determining whether the disclosure of sources is
"necessary" in the interests of justice, the court has ﬁrst to identify and deﬁne the issue
for which disclosure was required and then to decide whether, having regard to the
nature of the issue and the circumstances of the case, it is in fact "necessary" to order
disclosure. Although disclosure of sources might be relevant and important in
determining whether the defendants had acted disgracefully and whether that should
be reﬂected in an award of aggravated or exemplary damages, that does not make
disclosure "necessary" in the interests of justice.310.
Where a news reporter collected information from some hospital sources identifying
the victims of AIDS admitted there and the newspaper was permanently restrained
from publishing the matter because freedom of the press was comparatively less
important than the secrecy of AIDS victims so that they may not be deterred from going
to hospitals, the reporter was not compelled to disclose the source of his information
because the plaintiff had to fail to prove on a balance of probability that the disclosure
was necessary in public interest or interests of justice, such as for example, prevention
of crime.311.

297. Dinbai Petit v Dominion of India, (1950) 53 Bom LR 229 .
298. Venkatachella Chettiar v Sampathu Chettiar, (1908) 32 Mad 62, 64.
299. Ganga Ram v Habib-Ullah, (1935) 58 All 364 .
300. State of Bihar v Kripalu Shankar, AIR 1987 SC 1554 : (1987) 3 SCC 34 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 442 .

The court considered Bachitar Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1963 SC 395 : 1962 Supp (3) SCR 713
; Home Oﬃce v Harman Singh, (1981) 2 WLR 310 ; Harman v Secy of State for Home Deptt, 1983
AC 280 .
301. British Coal Corpn v Rye (Dennis) (No. 2) The Times, March 7, 1988 CA; 1988 CLY 1592.
302. Re Mantubhai Mehta, (1943) 46 Bom LR 802 .
303. SP Gupta v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 . The court overruled its own

decision in State of Punjab v Sodhi Sukhdev Singh, AIR 1981 SC 493 .
304. State of Bihar v Kripalu Shankar, (1987) 3 SCC 34 : AIR 1987 SC 1554 .
305. Bachhittar Singh v State, AIR 1963 SC 395 : 1962 Supp 3 SCR 713.
306. SP Gupta v UOI, AIR 1982 SC 149 : 1981 Supp SCC 87 .
307. Venkatachella Chettiar v Sampathu Chettiar, (1908) 32 Mad 62; Jadobram Dey v Bulloram

Dey, (1899) 26 Cal 281 .
308. LIC of India, Sector-17B, Chandigarh v BB Singla,, 2008 (4) CCC 406 (P&H).
309. Maxwell v Pressdram Ltd, (1987) 1 All ER 656 (CA).
310.

Applying the dictum of Lord DIPLOCK in Secretary of State for Defence v Guardian

Newspapers Ltd, (1984) 3 All ER 606 -607.
311. X v Y, (1988) 2 All ER 649 (SBD).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 163] Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.—
When a party calls for a document [s 163.3] which he has given the other party notice to
produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling for its
production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires him to
do so.

COMMENT
[s 163.1] Principle.—
Where a party to a suit gives notice to the other party to produce a document, and
when produced, he inspects the same he is bound to give it as evidence if the other
party requires him to do so.312. The reason for this rule is that it would give an
unconscionable advantage to a party to enable him to pry into the affairs of his
adversary, without at the same time subjecting him to the risk of making whatever he
inspects as evidence for both parties.313.
A party is bound to give the opponent's documents as evidence in the case if three
conditions are fulﬁlled: (1) the document should be required by that party to be
produced in evidence; (2) it should be inspected by the party calling for its production;
(3) the party producing the document should require the party calling for it to put it in
evidence.314.

[s 163.2] Scope.—
This section is applicable to criminal trials as well as to civil actions.315. Records of
statements made not on oath in the course of a departmental inquiry by Government
are not public documents. But, when the defence had called for their production and
they were, thereupon, produced and inspected and used for the cross-examination of
the prosecution witnesses, it was held that the Crown could insist on the entire
statements being put in under this section.316.

[s 163.3] "When a party calls for a document".—
The terms of the section make it clear that the section refers to documents asked for
by a party during trial. It does not refer to documents produced under O XI, rule 14, of
the Civil Procedure Code.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 163.4] Foreign document, production in home country illegal.—
The documents in question were involved in assisting banking fraud connected with
BCCI. The French Law prohibited the documentary evidence of a business of a ﬁnancial
nature for use in foreign proceedings. It was held317. that the court had a jurisdiction to
order disclosure in such circumstances and could exercise its discretion in deciding
whether or not to so order. The court would not have jurisdiction to order inspection
where to do so would involve an offence under English law. It was, however, different
where the obligation to disclose was under English law but the offence was under a
foreign jurisdiction.318. The existing authorities indicate that the court has a discretion
whether or not to order disclosure.

312. Mahomed v Abdul, (1903) 5 Bom LR 380 .
313. Taylor, 12th Edn, section 1817, p 1126.
314. Liladhar Ratanlal v Holkarmal, (1958) 60 Bom LR 203 .
315. Emperor v Makhan Lal Datta, (1939) 2 Cal 429 .
316. Govt of Bengal v Santiram Mandal, (1930) 58 Cal 96 .
317. Morris v Banque Arable Et International Dinvestissment SA (No. 1), 2000 CP Rep 65 (Ch D).
318. The court applied the principle Brannigan v Davison, (1997) AC 238 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 164] Using, as evidence of document production of which was refused on
notice.—
When a party refuses to produce a document which he had notice to produce, he
cannot afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the other
party or the order of the Court.
ILLUSTRATION
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial A calls for the
document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B
seeks to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A,
or in order to show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.

COMMENT
[s 164.1] Principle.—
If a party having a document in his possession refuses to produce it when called upon
at the hearing to do so, he is not at liberty afterwards to give the document in evidence
for any purpose without (1) the consent of the other party, or (2) the order of the court.
This is meant as a penalty for unfair tactics. The Civil Procedure Code, O XI, rule 15,
makes a similar provision.
This section does not contemplate the production of a document for inspection. It
contemplates that one party should call upon another in court to produce a document
of which the ﬁrst party has given the other notice to produce. It does not give him any
right, at any stage of the case, to call upon his opponent to produce the document and,
after inspecting it, use it or not as he sees ﬁt. It is doubtful if this section applies to
criminal proceedings.319.

319. Shyamdas Kapur v Emperor, (1932) 60 Cal 341 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 165] Judge's power to put questions or order production.—
The Judge may, in order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, [s 165.2]
ask any question he pleases, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties
about any fact relevant or irrelevant; and may order the production of any document
or thing; and neither the parties nor their agents shall be entitled to make any
objection to any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to crossexamine any witness upon any answer given in reply to any such question: [s 165.3]
Provided that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by this Act to be
relevant, and duly proved:
Provided also that this section shall not authorize any Judge to compel any witness to
answer any question or to produce any document which such witness would be
entitled to refuse to answer or produce under sections 121 to 131, both inclusive, if
the question were asked or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor
shall the Judge ask any question which it would be improper for any other person to
ask under section 148 or 149; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any
document, except in the cases hereinbefore excepted.

COMMENT
[s 165.1] Principle.—
This section is intended to arm the judge with the most extensive power possible for
the purpose of getting at the truth. The effect of this section is that in order to get to
the bottom of the matter before it, the court will be able to look at and enquire into
every fact whatever.320. Each party in a case is interested in setting up his own case
and demolishing the one set up by his adversary. There is danger in some cases that
the whole truth may not come out before the court. The judge, in order to discover, or to
obtain proper proof of relevant facts, may exercise very wide powers indeed; but they
all pivot upon the ascertainment of relevant facts. He may approach the case from any
point of view, and is not tied down to the ruts marked out by the parties. He can ask (1)
any question he pleases, (2) in any form, (3) at any time, (4) of any witness, (5) or of the
parties, (6) about any fact relevant or irrelevant. No party is entitled to object to any
such question or order, or to cross-examine the witness without the leave of the court.
But out of the evidence so brought out, the judge can only use that which is relevant
and duly proved. There are three exceptions to the very wide powers given to the judge.
The witness cannot be compelled to answer (1) any question or to produce any
document contrary to sections 121–131; (2) any question contrary to section 148 or
149; and (3) the judge shall not dispense with primary evidence of any document
except as provided before.
A trial judge is not expected to act like a mere tape recorder to record whatever has
been stated by the witnesses. Section 311 of CrPC and section 165 of Evidence Act

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
confers vast and wide powers on Court to elicit all necessary materials by playing an
active role in the evidence collecting process.321.
In civil as well as in criminal proceedings the Legislature has vested ample powers in
the courts to exercise this power (Civil Procedure Code, O X, rules 2, 4, O XVI, rule 14;
section 311, Criminal Procedure Code).
The effect of this section is that in order to get to the bottom of a matter before it, the
court will be able to look at and enquire into every fact whatever and thus possibly
acquire valuable indicative evidence which may lead to other evidence strictly relevant
and admissible.322.
This power has been explained by the Supreme Court as an extraordinary power
conferred upon the court to elicit the truth and to act in the interest of justice. A wide
discretion has been conferred on the court to act as the exigencies of justice require.
Thus, in order to discover or obtain proper proof of the relevant facts, the court can ask
the question to the parties concerned at any time and in any form. "Every trial is voyage
of discovery in which truth is the quest". Therefore, power is to be exercised with an
object to subserve the cause of justice and public interest, and for getting the evidence
in aid of a just decision and to uphold the truth.323.
Even the scheme and special procedure prescribed under sections 143–146 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act does not in any way affect the judge's powers under
section 165 of the Evidence Act.324.
"When the counsel for the prisoner has examined or declined to cross-examine a
witness, and the Court afterwards, of its own motion, examine him, the witness cannot
then, without the permission of the Court, be subjected to cross-examination. When,
after the examination of a witness by the complainant and the defendant, the Court
takes him in hand, he is put under special pressure as the Judge is empowered to ask
any question he pleases, in any form about any fact relevant or irrelevant. and he is,
therefore, at the same time placed under the special protection of the Court, which
may, at its discretion, allow a party to cross-examine him, but this cannot be asked for
as a matter of right. This principle applies equally whether it is intended to direct the
examination to the witness's statements of fact, or to circumstances touching his
credibility, for any question meant to impair his credit tends (or is so designed) to get
rid of the effect of all his answers, and of each of them just as much as one that may
bring out an inconsistency or contradiction. It is then a cross-examination upon
answers—upon every answer given to the Court, and is subject to the Court's
control."325.
In a great number of cases—probably, the vast numerical majority—the Judge has to
conduct the whole trial himself. In all cases he has to represent the interests of the
public much more distinctly than he does in England. In many cases he has to get at
the truth, or as near to it as he can, by the aid of collateral inquiries, which may
incidentally tend to something relevant; and it is most unlikely that he should ever wish
to push an inquiry needlessly, or to go into matters not really connected with it. We
have accordingly thought it right to arm Judges with a general power to ask any
questions, upon any facts, of any witnesses, at any stage of the proceedings,
irrespective of the rules of evidence binding on the parties and their agents, and we
have inserted in the bill a distinct declaration that it is the duty of the Judge, especially
in criminal cases, not merely to listen to the evidence put before him, but to inquire to
the utmost into the truth of the matter. We do not think that the English theories, that
the public have no interest in arriving at the truth and that even criminal proceedings
ought to be regarded mainly in the light of private questions between the prosecutor
and the prisoner, are at all suited to India, if indeed they are the result of anything better
than carelessness and apathy in England.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
"In India, in an enormous mass of cases, it is absolutely necessary that the Judge
should not only hear what is put before him by others, but that he should ascertain by
his own inquiries how the facts actually stand. In order to do this, it will frequently be
necessary for him to go into matters which are not themselves relevant to the matter in
issue, but may lead to something that is, and it is in order to arm Judges with express
authority to do this that this section has been framed."326.
It is not the province of the court to examine the witnesses, unless the pleaders on
either side have omitted to put some material question or questions, and the court
should, as a general rule, leave the witnesses to the pleaders to be dealt with as laid
down in section 138.327.
The power to identify the matters in controversy by examination of parties at the pretrial stage under O X, rule 2, is completely different from the power exercised by the
court under section 165 of the Evidence Act to put any question it pleases in any form,
to a witness or a party in order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, or
the power under O XVIII, rule 17 of the Code to recall and examine any witness. The
court's anxiety to do justice by speeding up the process of the suit should not itself
lead to injustice.328.
Facts which are not properly proved cannot be considered by the Judge and cannot
form the basis of a judgment. It is only those facts which are declared to be relevant
and duly proved, which can be the basis of a judgment as provided by this section.329.
Judges should avoid interrupting a witness, particularly a defendant, when he is being
examined-in-chief or being cross-examined.330.
The evidence that comes on record pursuant to the questions put by the court in
exercise of powers under section 165 of the Evidence Act is outside the scheme for
recording evidence under sections 137 and 138 of the Evidence Act. However, the
adverse party against whom the witness has given evidence pursuant to the court
question is entitled to cross-examine on matters referred to in the answer given in reply
to any such Court question.331.
Where a witness was a bit confused during his cross-examination and the trial Court
intervened putting questions to him to elicit the truth, the Supreme Court said that the
trial Court ought not to have done so.332. The Supreme Court said:333.
Section 165 of the Evidence Act confers vast and unrestricted powers on the trial court to
put any question it pleases in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties, about
any fact relevant or irrelevant in order to discover any relevant facts. The section was framed
by lavishly studding it with the word "any" which could only have been inspired by the
legislative intent to confer unbridled power on the trial court to use the power whenever it
deems it necessary to elicit the truth. Even if any such question crosses into irrelevancy, it
would not transgress the contours of the powers of the court. This is clear from the words
"relevant or irrelevant". Neither of the parties have any right to raise any objection to any
such question.

The judges are not computers. In assessing the value to be attached to oral evidence,
they are bound to call into aid their experience of life.334.
It is the bounden duty cast upon the judge not merely to ensure that an innocent person
is not punished but equally not to become a mute spectator to the spectacle of convict
circumventing his conviction. If the court is derelict in doing its duty, the social fabric
will be rent asunder and anarchy will rule everywhere. The criminal justice delivery
system is being held to ransom by convicts who have developed the devious and
dishonest practice of escaping punishment and thereafter disappearing beyond the
reach of the arms of the law.335. The court cannot be a silent spectator or a mute
observer when it presides over a trial. It is the duty of the court to see that neither the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
prosecution nor the accused play truancy with the criminal trial or corrode the sanctity
of the proceeding. They cannot expropriate or highjack the community interest by
conducting themselves in such a manner as a consequence of which the trial becomes
a farcical one. The law does not countenance a "mock trial". The court is duty bound to
see that neither the prosecution nor the defence takes unnecessary adjournments and
take the trial under their control. The court is under the legal obligation to see that the
witnesses who have been cited by the prosecution are produced by it or if summons
are issued, they are actually served on the witnesses. If the court is of the opinion that
the material witnesses have not been examined, it should not allow the prosecution to
close the evidence. There can be no doubt that the prosecution may not examine all the
material witnesses but that does not necessarily mean that the prosecution can
choose not to examine any witness and convey to the court that it does not intend to
cite the witnesses. The court is also not expected to accept the version of the
prosecution, as if it is sacred. It has to apply its mind on every occasion. Nonapplication of mind by the trial Court has the potentiality to lead to the paralysis of the
conception of fair trial.336.

[s 165.2] "In order to discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts".—
The power of the court to direct production of any document under this section is
subject to the plain proviso at the beginning of that section that the direction must be
"in order to discover or obtain proper proof of relevant facts." The commentaries show
clearly that the object of allowing the Judge to ask irrelevant questions under this
section is to obtain "indicative evidence" which may lead to the discovery of relevant
evidence.337.
Although a statement made by an accused person to a police-oﬃcer on which the
defence wishes to rely is shut out by section 162, Criminal Procedure Code, a Court,
having a case diary in its possession, at the request of the defending counsel, would be
justiﬁed in putting a question to a police-oﬃcer to elicit what the accused told him,
purely in the interest of the accused, within its wide powers under this section.338.
The trial Court could not have ﬁrst put a speciﬁc ﬁnding based on its own opinion to the
expert witness and then ask him questions. The court said that the trial Court exceeded
its jurisdiction under section 165.339.

[s 165.3] "Cross-examine any witness upon any answer, etc."—
A party to a proceeding is not allowed to cross-examine a witness upon an answer
given by him to a question put by the court without the permission of such Court.340. If
what the witness has said in answer to the questions put to him by the Judge is
adverse to either of the parties, the Judge ought to allow the witness to be crossexamined upon his answers. A general ﬁshing cross-examination ought not to be
permitted.341. The accused should be given an opportunity to cross-examine a witness
on the answers to questions put by the court.342.
A Judge can himself look into previous statements of witnesses recorded in the police
diary, even though the defence neither requested him to do so nor applied for copies of
such statements, and if the interests of justice demand, the Judge may himself, under
this section, put questions to witnesses to bring out discrepancies of a vital nature
between such statements and the evidence of those witnesses in court.343.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Where a witness was confused while facing his cross-examination, it was held to be
not improper for the trial Court to ask questions to him to ﬁnd out the truth.344. The
purpose of examination of a witness by the Judge is to ascertain the matter in
controversy in the suit. The purpose is not to record evidence or to secure an
admission or to conduct cross-examination. It was held that an answer given by a party
under O X, rule 2, as to veracity of signature on the document is neither given under
oath nor while being examined as a witness. It does not amount to fabricating or giving
of false evidence.345.
The power of the court of questioning parties is of extraordinary nature. It is to be used
for eliciting truth in the interest of justice. The party cannot tell the court that the
question put to him is irrelevant.346. The presiding judge must not be a spectator and a
mere recording machine.347.

[s 165.4] Judgment to be on facts relevant and duly proved
[Proviso 1].—This proviso says that the judgment must be based upon facts declared by
this Act to be relevant (sections 5–55) and duly proved (sections 56–100). The Judge
will not be permitted to found his judgment upon the class of statements to which he
may resort as indicative evidence, for the reason that it would tempt Judges to be
satisﬁed with second-hand reports, would open a wide door to fraud, and would waste
an incalculable amount of time.348. It would be intolerable that the court should decide
right upon suspicions unsupported by testimony.349.

[s 165.5] Recalling witness.—
In a suit by the plaintiff for declaration of title, the defendant claimed that he was the
owner of the property and that the plaintiff was his labourer working for him on the land
in question. The defendant applied for an order that the plaintiff be recalled in order to
enable him to prove the receipts issued by the plaintiff acknowledging receipt of money
for working charges. Rejection of the application was held to be improper.350.

[s 165.6] Privilege of witness to refuse remains same
[Proviso 2].—This proviso subjects the judge to the provisions contained in sections
121–131, sections 148 and 149. The Judge has the power of asking irrelevant
questions to a witness, if he does so in order to obtain proof of relevant facts, but if he
asks questions with a view to criminal proceedings being taken against the witness,
the witness is not bound to answer them, and cannot be punished for not answering
them under section 179, Indian Penal Code.351. A witness should not be coerced to
answer a question.352. Where a Judge rebuked a witness and threatened him with
prosecution for perjury if he changed his statement, the Supreme Court held that the
proceeding was vitiated.353.
Section 165 would have no application in a situation where the evidence is concluded,
where the prosecution has closed its case, where the judgment has commenced and
where it appears to the court at that point of time that prosecution has failed on a
material aspect. This section cannot be pressed into service to reopen the evidence to
cover up the obvious lacuna at this point of time.354.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

320. Stephen, 162; Ramachandra Reddy, (1957) AP 742 .
321. Vikas Kumar Roorkewal v State of Uttarakhand, (2011) 2 SCC 178 . Also see Vijay Kumar v

State of UP, (2011) 8 SCC 136 wherein it was held that powers of court under section 165 of the
Evidence Act is complementary to its power under section 311 of CrPC. These two sections
between them confer jurisdiction on the court to act in aid of justice.
322. Sky Land International Pvt Ltd v Kavita Lalwani, RFA 697 of 2010 decided by the Delhi High

Court on 25-5-2012 (JR. MIDHA, J).
323. Ritesh Tewari v State of UP, (2010) 10 SCC 677 : AIR 2010 SC 3823 .
324. Mandvi Co-op Bank Ltd v Nimesh B Thakore, (2010) 3 SCC 83 .
325. Reg v Sakharam Mukundji, (1874) 11 BHC 166, 168.
326. Proceedings of the Legislative Council. Reiterated and also restated by the Supreme Court

in Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v State of Gujarat, AIR 2006 SC 1367 : (2006) 3 SCC 374 : (2006) 2
Ker LT 350 : 2006 Cr LJ 1694 .
327. Noor Bux Kazi v Empress, (1880) 6 Cal 279 , 283.
328. Kapil Corepacks Pvt Ltd v Harbans Lal, (2010) 8 SCC 452 .
329. Miyana Hasan Abdulla, (1961) 3 GLR 107 .
330. R v Marsh, The Times, July 6, 1993 (CA).
331. Popathal Jethabhai Shah v State of Maharashtra, 2007 Cr LJ (NOC) 605 (Bom.).
332. State of Rajasthan v Ani, AIR 1997 SC 1023 : 1997 Cr LJ 1529 : (1997) 6 SCC 162 .
333. 35. Ibid, p 166, (1997) 6 SCC 162 : AIR 1997 SC 1023 : 1997 Cr LJ 1529 .
334. Chaturbhuj Pande v Collector, Raigarh, AIR 1969 SC 255 : (1969) 1 SCR 412 .
335. Surya Baksh Singh v State of UP, (2014) 14 SCC 222 (paras 25 and 17).
336. Bablu Kumar v State of Bihar, (2015) 8 SCC 787 , para 22.
337. Krishna Ayyar v Balakrishna Ayyar, (1933) 57 Mad 635.
338. Molagan, (1953) Mad 284.
339. Sidhartha Vashisht @ Manu Sharma v State (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2010 SC 2352 : (2010) 6

SCC 1 .
340. Gopal Lall Seal v Manick Lall Seal, (1897) 24 Cal 288 , 290.
341. Coulson v Disborough, (1894) 2 QB 316 .
342. In the matter of The Empress v Grish Chunder Talukdar, (1879) 5 Cal 614 ; Mohendro Nath

Das Gupta v Emperor, (1902) 29 Cal 387 .
343. Emperor v Lal Miya, (1943) 1 Cal 543 .
344. State of Rajasthan v Ani, AIR 1997 SC 1023 : 1997 Cr LJ 1529 : (1997) 6 SCC 162 . Shri Ouz

Pedro Pancheco v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4628 (Bom), the material statement of the witness was that
he had seen the witness setting ﬁre to the shed. This vital fact was missing from his statement
to the police. This amounted to a contradiction. No opportunity was given to the witness to
explain this contradiction. Other witnesses also did not speak of his being present at the site.
His evidence was discarded.
345. Kapil Corepacks Pvt Ltd v Harbans Lal, AIR 2010 SC 2809 : (2010) 8 SCC 452 . Power under

Order 10, Rule 2, CPC, is completely different from power under section 165.
346. Ritesh Tewari v State of UP, AIR 2010 SC 3823 : (2010) 10 SCC 677 .

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
347. Himanshu Singh Sabharwal v State of MP, AIR 2008 MP 1943 .
348. Stephen, 162, 163.
349. Sreemutty Mohun Bibi v Saral Chand Mitter, (1897) 2 Cal WN 18, 27.
350. Surinder Singh v Sukhdev, AIR 1999 HP 72 .
351. Queen-Empress v Hari Lakshman, (1885) 10 Bom 185.
352. Queen-Empress v Ishri Singh, (1886) 8 All 672 , 675.
353. Ram Chandra v State of Haryana, AIR 1981 SC 1036 : 1981 Cr LJ 609 : (1981) 3 SCC 191 :

1981 SCC (Cri) 683 .
354. Omprakash Shankarlal Sharma v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3175 (Bom); Lalu v State

of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 1992 (MP), wife sitting by his side when her husband received knife blows but
she did not speak anything, she avoided and evaded all questions put to her in crossexamination, the court said that her testimony was liable to be discarded completely. Other
witness also turned hostile.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER X OF THE EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
[s 166] Power of jury or assessors to put questions.—
In cases tried by jury or with assessors, the jury or assessors may put any questions
to the witnesses, through or by leave of the Judge, which the Judge himself might put
and which he considers proper.

COMMENT
The jury or assessors may put any questions to the witness, through or by leave of the
Judge, which the Judge himself might put and which the Judge considers proper.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
PART III PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER XI OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
[s 167] No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.—
The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for a
new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, [s 167.5] if it shall appear to the Court
before which such objection is raised [s 167.6] that, independently of the evidence
objected to and admitted, there was suﬃcient evidence to justify the decision, or that,
if the rejected evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the decision. [s
167.7]

COMMENT
[s 167.1] Object.—
The object of the section is that the court of appeal or revision should not disturb a
decision on the ground of improper admission or rejection of evidence, if in spite of
such evidence, there are suﬃcient materials in the case to justify the decision.1. In
other words, technical objections will not be allowed to prevail, where substantial
justice appears to have been done.

[s 167.2] Principle.—
The improper (a) admission or (b) rejection of evidence is no ground for a new trial or
reversal of any decision, if—
(i) in the case of improper admission—

there is suﬃcient evidence to justify the decision independently of the evidence
objected to and admitted; or
(ii) in the case of improper rejection—

the decision could not be varied, if the rejected evidence had been received.

[s 167.3] Civil and criminal cases.—
The provisions of this section are made applicable by the clearest possible words to all
judicial proceedings in or before any Court.2. The section applies to civil cases and to
criminal cases whether or not the trial has been had before a jury.3.

[s 167.3.1] Civil.—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
In the case of ﬁrst appeal, the provisions of this section have to be read with section 99
of the Civil Procedure Code (Act V of 1908), which provides: "No decree shall be
reversed or substantially varied nor shall any case be remanded, in appeal on account
of...any error, defect or irregularity in any proceeding in the suit not affecting the merits
of the case..." See also O XLI, rules 27 to 29.
In second appeals, one of the grounds, justifying the appeal is "a substantial error or
defect in the procedure...which may possibly have produced error or defect in the
decision of the case upon the merits" [section 100(1)(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure
of 1908].
There is, however, a great diﬃculty in applying the provisions of this section to the
generality of cases which come before the High Court on second appeal. On second
appeal, the High Court has no power to deal with the suﬃciency of evidence; it has only
a right to entertain questions of law. Its duty being thus conﬁned, when evidence has
been wrongly admitted by the court below, the High Court has, generally speaking, no
right, to decide, whether the remaining evidence in the case, other than that which has
been improperly admitted, is suﬃcient to warrant the ﬁnding of the court below. The
only cases, which it may with propriety dispose of under such circumstances without a
remand, are those where independently of the evidence improperly admitted, the lower
Court has apparently arrived at its conclusion upon other grounds.4.
Where the ﬁrst Court improperly admits evidence the High Court has power to interfere
and remand the case for a new trial.5.
The omission to receive an important document6. or to examine a material witness7.
justiﬁes a reversal of the decision. Where a document has been acted upon while
pronouncing the judgment and passing the decree in consequence of that, the said
document cannot be challenged in appeal in view of this section.8.

[s 167.3.2] Criminal.—
In criminal cases also the legislature has provided a similar safeguard. No ﬁnding,
sentence or order, passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be reversed or
altered...on appeal or revision, on account of any misdirection in any charge to a jury
unless such error, omission, irregularity, or misdirection has in fact occasioned a failure
of justice [section 465 CrPC].
Where the order according sanction for the prosecution of the accused for non-ﬁling of
Provident Fund Return was on record but was not marked as exhibit, it was held that
order acquitting the accused on that ground was liable to be set aside.9.

[s 167.4] Letters Patent, clause 26.—
The provisions of this section apply to the High Court when acting under clause 26 of
the Letters Patent.10.

[s 167.5] "In any case".—
These words are very wide and include criminal trials by jury.11.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
[s 167.6] "The Court before which such objection is raised".—
The court which is to decide upon the suﬃciency of the evidence to support the
conviction is the court of review or the appellate court,12. but not the court below.13.

[s 167.7] "Decision".—
The word "decision" is more generally used as applicable to civil proceedings, but it is
by no means inappropriate to criminal cases; and, if it was the intention of the
legislature to use an expression which would apply equally to civil and to criminal
proceedings, there is probably no other word which would have answered their purpose
better.14.

[s 167.8] Appreciation of evidence—improper admission or rejection of
evidence.—
In Election Appeals, while as a Court of ﬁrst appeal there are no limitations on the
powers of Supreme Court in reversing a ﬁnding of fact or law which has been recorded
on a misreading or wrong appreciation of the evidence or law, it would not ordinarily
disregard the opinion formed by the trial judge who has recorded the evidence and who
has had the beneﬁt of watching the demeanour of the witnesses in forming ﬁrst hand
opinion regarding their credibility.15.
The legal position about appreciation of evidence in trial Court has been succinctly
summed up by Supreme Court16. as follows:
15. The golden thread which runs through the administration of justice in criminal cases is
that if two views are possible, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to the
innocence, the view which is favourable to the accused should be adopted. The paramount
consideration of the court is to ensure that miscarriage of justice is prevented. A
miscarriage of justice which may arise from acquittal of the guilty is no less than from a
conviction of an innocent.
16. The principle to be followed by the appellate court considering an appeal against an
order of acquittal is to interfere only when there are compelling and substantial reasons to
do so. Thus, in such cases, this court would usually not interfere unless:

(i) The ﬁnding is vitiated by some glaring inﬁrmity in the appraisal of evidence.17.
(ii) The ﬁnding is perverse.18.
(iii) The order suffers from substantial errors of law and fact.19.
(iv) The order is based on misconception of law or erroneous appreciation of
evidence.20.

(v) The High Court has adopted an erroneous approach resulting in miscarriage of
justice.21.

(vi) Acquittal is based on irrelevant grounds.22.
(vii) The High Court has completely misdirected itself in reversing the order of
conviction by the trial court.23.

(viii) The judgment is tainted with serious legal inﬁrmities.24.
17. In reversing an acquittal, this Court keeps in mind that presumption of innocence in
favour of the accused is fortiﬁed by an order of acquittal and if the view of the High Court is
reasonable and founded on materials on record, this Court should not interfere. However, if
this Court is of the opinion that the acquittal is not based on a reasonable view, then it may
review the entire material and there will be no limitation on this Court's jurisdiction under
Article 136 to come to a just decision quashing the acquittal.25.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE SCHEDULE
Enactment repealed.—[Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), S. 2 and Sch.]

1. Mohur Sing v Ghuriba, (1870) 6 Beng LR 495, 499 PC : 15 WR (PC) 8; Dwijesh Chandra Ray

Choudhuri v Naresh Chandra Gupta, (1946) 1 Cal 149 .
2. Reg v Navroji Dadabhai, (1872) 9 BHC 358, 374.
3. Imperatrix v Pitamber Jina, (1877) 2 Bom 61, 65; Queen v Hurribole Chunder Ghose, (1876) 1

Cal 207 , 216; Emperor v Panchu Das, (1920) 47 Cal 671 (FB).
4. Womesh Chunder Chatterjee v Chundee Churn Roy Chowdhry, (1881) 7 Cal 293 , 296.
5. Palakdhari Rai v Manners, (1895) 23 Cal 179 .
6. Devidas Jagjivan v Pirjada Begam, (1884) 8 Bom 377; Talewar Singh v Bhagwan Das, (1907) 12

Cal WN 312 : 8 Cal LJ 147.
7. Moni Lal Bandopadhya v Khiroda Dasi, (1893) 20 Cal 740 .
8. Babulal v Mohammed Sharif, AIR 1996 MP 147 .
9. HS Sadashiva v MS Muthappa, 1992 Cr LJ 2424 (Kant).
10. Queen v Hurribole Chunder Ghose, (1876) 1 Cal 207 ; Imperatrix v Pitamber Jina, (1877) 2

Bom 61; Emperor v Narayen, (1907) 9 Bom LR 789 : 32 Bom 111 (FB). See Emperor v Panchu Das,
(1920) 47 Cal 671 (FB).
11. Queen-Empress v Ramchandra Govind Harshe, (1895) 19 Bom 749, 762.
12. Per WESTROPP CJ, in Imperatrix v Pitamber Jina, (1877) 2 Bom 61, 65.
13. Queen v Hurribole Chunder Ghose, (1876) 1 Cal 207 , 217.
14. Ibid
15. Pradip Buragohain v Pranati Phukan, (2010) 11 SCC 108 approving Sarju Pershad case, AIR

1951 SC 120 ; Gajanan Krishnaji Bapat, (1995) 5 SCC 347 ; and PC. Thomas v PM Ismail, (2009)
10 SCC 239 .
16. State of Rajasthan v Islam, (2011) 6 SCC 343 , at p 348.
17. State of UP v Sahai, (1981) 1 SCC 352 at paras 20-22; AIR 1981 SC 1442 at paras 19-21.
18. State of MP v Bacchudas, (2007) 9 SCC 135 at SCC para 10; State of Punjab v Parveen

Kumar, (2005) 9 SCC 769 at SCC para 9.
19. Rajesh Kumar v Dharamvir, (1997) 4 SCC 496 at SCC para 5.
20. State of UP v Abdul, (1997) 10 SCC 135 ; State of UP v Premi, (2003) 9 SCC 12 at SCC para

15.
21. State of TN v Suresh, (1998) 2 SCC 372 at SCC paras 31 and 32; State of MP v Paltan Mallah,

(2005) 3 SCC 169 at SCC para 8.
22. Arunachalam v PS.R. Sadhanantham, (1979) 2 SCC 297 at SCC para 4.
23. Gauri Shanker Sharma v State of UP, (1990) Suppl. SCC 656.
24. State of Maharashtra v Narsingrao Gangaram Pimple, (1984) 1 SCC 446 at para 45 : AIR 1984

SC 63 at para 45.
25. State (Delhi Admn.) v Laxman Kumar, (1985) 4 SCC 476 at para 45 and Dharma v Nirmal

Singh, (1996) 7 SCC 471 at para 4.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
SUMMARY

The law of evidence is the most important branch of adjective law. It is to legal practice
what logic is to all reasoning. Without it, trials might be inﬁnitely prolonged to the great
detriment of the public and the vexation and expense of suitors. It is by this that the
Judge separates the wheat from the chaff among the mass of facts that are brought
before him, decides upon their just and mutual bearing, learns to draw correct
inferences from circumstances, and to weigh the value of direct testimony. It is by this
guide that he is able to tread his way with comparative safety among the burning
ploughshares of perjury, forgery and fraud that beset his footsteps, and to rest his
judgment on a basis of probabilities at least comparatively satisfactory to his own
mind.1
The Indian Evidence Act codiﬁes the rules of English law of evidence with such
modiﬁcation as are rendered necessary by the peculiar circumstances of this country.
But the Act is not exhaustive, and cases do arise for the solution of which principles of
common law are resorted to. The Act, though chieﬂy drawn upon the lines of the
English law of evidence, was not intended to be a servile copy of it.
The object of codiﬁcation is that, on any point speciﬁcally dealt with by an Act, the law
should be ascertained by interpreting its language, instead of, as before, roaming over
a vast number of authorities to discover what the law is, and extracting it by a critical
examination of the prior decisions.2
One great object of the Evidence Act was to prevent laxity in the admissibility of
evidence, and to introduce a more correct and uniform rule of practice than was
previously in vogue. The Evidence Act is not intended to do more than prescribe rules
for the admissibility or otherwise of evidence on the issues as to which the courts have
to record ﬁndings.
The main principles which underlie the law of evidence are—
(1) evidence must be conﬁned to the matters in issue;
(2) hearsay evidence must not be admitted; and
(3) the best evidence must be given in all cases.

The following tabular scheme3 suﬃciently explains the general arrangement of the
Indian Evidence Act—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

The Evidence Act is divided into three Parts comprising eleven Chapters—
Part I consists of two Chapters dealing with deﬁnitions and relevancy of facts.
Part II comprises Chapters III to V which provide for proof of facts by oral or
documentary evidence.
Part III embodies Chapters VI to XI which contains rules for the production of evidence
in court, the effect of presumptions and the duties of the court in dealing with the
evidence produced before it.
PART I
RELEVANCY OF FACTS
The Evidence Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, and applies to all judicial proceedings and Courts-martial. Though not
applicable to disciplinary proceedings and domestic inquiries, the provisions of the Act
and judgments delivered under them are all helpful in the appreciation of evidence and
standards of proof, etc. in those proceedings also.
Chapter I deals with deﬁnitions of various terms.
"Evidence" means and includes—
(1) Oral evidence, i.e., all statements which the court permits or requires to be made
before it by witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry.
(2) Documentary evidence, i.e., all documents including electronic records produced for
the inspection of the court.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Tape recordings can be legal evidence but the court must be satisﬁed beyond
reasonable doubt that the record has not been tampered with. Similarly, if the court is
satisﬁed that there is no trick photography and the photograph is above suspicion, it
may allow the photograph to be received in evidence. Evidence of dog-tracking, even if
admissible, is not of much weight. The deﬁnition of the term evidence is not complete.
There are many other things, not included in this deﬁnition, on which judicial decisions
may rest. In rare cases, evidence may include statements of a witness who has not
been cross-examined. An FIR is not substantive evidence. But it can be used for
contradicting or corroborating statements. Bhimappa Janappa Naguna v State of
Karnataka, AIR 1993 SC 1469 .
The mode of obtaining evidence, that is to say, whether by lawful or unlawful means
has nothing to do with the intrinsic value of the evidence obtained. Wrongs committed
by the investigating oﬃcer were not allowed to affect that part of the evidence which
was trustworthy.
Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding.
(1) of every fact in issue, and
(2) of relevant facts (section 3).
(1) "Fact."—It means and includes—
(i) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived

by the senses;
(ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious (section 3).

The expression "facts in issue" means and includes any fact from which, either by itself
or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any
right, liability, or disability asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily
follows (section 3).
(2) "Relevant fact."—One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is
connected with the other in any of the ways relating to the relevancy of facts as
provided in sections 6 to 55 of the Act. (section 3).
Presumptions.—The topic of "presumptions" has been referred to in section 4. A
presumption means a rule of law that courts and Judges shall draw a particular
inference from a particular fact, or from particular evidence, unless and until the truth
of such inference is disproved. Presumptions are divided into presumptions of fact
("may presume" under the Evidence Act) and presumptions of law. Presumptions of law
are again sub-divided into presumptions of law absolute or conclusive ("conclusive
proof") and presumptions of law disputable or rebuttable ("shall presume").
Whenever it is provided by the Evidence Act that the court—
"may presume" a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved unless and until it is
disproved, or may call for proof of it:
"shall presume" a fact, it must regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved.
When one fact is declared by this Act to be "conclusive proof" of another, the court
shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence
to be given for the purpose of disproving it (section 4).
Chapter II.—Evidence may be given—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(1) of the existence or non-existence of every fact in issue, and
(2) of such other facts as are declared under the Act to be relevant, and of no others
(section 5).
No evidence can be given of a fact which a person is disentitled from proving under the
Civil Procedure Code (section 5). There is a difference between relevancy of evidence
and admissibility of evidence.
What facts are relevant.—The following facts are relevant—
1. Facts so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction
(section 6). This section receives evidence of all acts and statements connected with a
happening in such-wise as to form an integral part of the happening. It is based upon
the doctrine of res gestae.
2. Section 7 admits evidence of facts which provide the occasion, constitute the cause
or show the effect, immediate or otherwise of either the relevant facts or of the facts in
issue. It also admits evidence of facts showing the state of things or affording the
opportunity for the happening of the facts in issue or the facts relevant to such facts.
(section 7)
3. Facts showing motive or preparation for, or previous or subsequent conduct in
relation to, any fact in issue or relevant fact (section 8). Motive plays an important part
in the setting of circumstantial evidence, e.g., dowry-death cases which depend upon
circumstantial evidence. Kundula Bala Subramaniam v State of AP, 1993 AIR SCW 1321 :
(1993) 2 SCC 684 : 1993 Cr LJ 1635 . The conduct declared relevant is that of the
parties to the case, the accused person and the injured person. The conduct should
have such connection with the facts in issue or relevant facts as inﬂuences them or is
inﬂuenced by them. The word "conduct" for the purposes of section 8 does not include
statements except when the statement in question accompanies or explains the
relevant conduct or affects such conduct. If such connection is there, the conduct will
be relevant whether it is previous or subsequent to the happening. (section 8)
4. Section 9 deals with facts (i) necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or
relevant fact or (ii) which support or rebut an inference suggested by such a fact, or (iii)
which establish the identity of anything or person whose identity is relevant, or (iv)
which ﬁx the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or (v)
which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted (section 9).
It is under this section that test identiﬁcation parades are conducted and in the matter
of their evidentiary value, they have generated much literature through Supreme Court
decisions. All factors which can bring about identiﬁcation are allowed, e.g.,
identiﬁcation by voice, gait, foot-prints, ﬁnger-impressions, photographs, etc. Time
factor is of crucial value in identiﬁcation. Evidence of identiﬁcation is of corroborative
nature. It is not substantive evidence. Identiﬁcation in court is substantive evidence. An
adverse inference is drawn from refusal to appear in TI parade. Identiﬁcation is also
possible by voice, gait, footprints, etc.
5. Anything said, done, or written, by a conspirator in reference to the common intention
of all the conspirators (section 10). The section comes into play only when there is a
reasonable ground to believe that a conspiracy exists. For an act of one conspirator to
be regarded as an act of all, it is necessary that the act was done at a time when the
person in question was a party to the conspiracy and was related with the common
intention of the parties. If this is so, it is not necessary to know that the conspirators
knew or met each other or at what stages they joined.
6. Facts (i) that are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact, or (ii) which
make the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
probable or improbable (section 11). It is under this section that the plea of alibi, that is
to say, the presence of the accused elsewhere than at the place of the crime, is allowed
and this plea has brought about a number of court decisions.
7. Facts which will enable the court to determine the amount of damages which ought
to be awarded (section 12). Every fact that would help the court to quantify the amount
of compensation that ought to be awarded in a particular case can be taken into
account. Naturally, relevant facts are likely to be different from case to case. Even
where the claimant fails to produce the best possible evidence, the court has to
perform its duty to awarding and ﬁxing the ﬁgure of damages.
8. Where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom (i) any transaction
by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed, modiﬁed, recognised,
asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence; (ii) particular instance
in which the right or custom was (a) claimed, recognised or exercised, or (b) disputed,
asserted, or departed from (section 13). Judgments of courts of law and wills have
been regarded by the courts as very important facts affecting rights.
9. Facts showing the existence of any state of (1) mind (e.g., intention, knowledge,
good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will, good-will) or (2) body or (3) bodily feeling,
when such state of mind or body is relevant (section 14). It is necessary that the
evidence produced must relate to the speciﬁc state of mind which is in question in the
case and not to a general state of mind or tendency of the person in question. A
previous conviction can be cited only if it will prove a speciﬁc state of mind.
10. When the question is whether an act was accidental or intentional—the fact that it
formed part of a series of similar occurrences in which the same person was again and
again involved (section 15). This section provides exceptions to the popular rule of
excluding the evidence of similar facts.
11. Existence of any course of business according to which the act in question must
have been done (section 16).
Relevancy : Admissibility.—The word "relevant" is not co-extensive with the word
"admissible." A relevant fact is a fact that has a certain degree of probative force.
Certain facts are relevant under sections 5-55, but all such facts are not admissible in
evidence. There may arise restrictions as to their admissibility under sections 91-99
(exclusion of oral evidence by documentary evidence), 115-117 (parties estopped from
proving certain facts) and 121-130 (communications and witnesses enjoying certain
privileges). All admissible evidence is therefore relevant, but all relevant evidence is not
necessarily admissible. Thus, admissibility includes relevancy, but not vice versa.
Sections 17-55 deal with statements which are relevant under certain circumstances.
These include—
I. Admissions
II. Confessions
III. Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses
IV. Statements under special circumstances
V. Judgments of courts
VI. Opinions of third persons
VII. Character of parties

I. Admissions.—The Indian Evidence Act deals with admissions as follows:—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1. An admission is a statement, oral or documentary, or contained in electronic form
which suggests any inference, as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is
made by—
(i) a party to the proceedings;
(ii) an agent authorised by such party;
(iii) a party suing or sued in a representative character making admissions while

holding such character;
(iv) a person who has a proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject-matter of the

suit during the continuance of such interest;
(v) a person from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the

subject-matter of the suit during the continuance of such interest (section 18);
(vi) a person whose position it is necessary to prove in a suit, if such statements

would be relevant in a suit brought by or against himself (section 19);
(vii) a person to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for information in

reference to a matter in dispute (section 20).
2. An admission is relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes it or
his representative in interest. It cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who
makes it or by his representative, except in the following three cases—
(a) when it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be

relevant as between third persons under section 32;
(b) when it consists of a statement as to the existence of any state of mind or body

and made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed and is
accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(c) if it is relevant otherwise than as an admission (section 21).

3. Oral admissions as to contents of a document are not relevant unless—
(a) the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary

evidence of the contents of such documents, or
(b) the genuineness of the document or an electronic record produced is in

question (section 22 and section 22A).
4. An admission is not relevant in a civil case if it is made—
(a) upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, this category

cover cases of communications made "without prejudice", or
(b) under circumstances from which the court can infer that the parties agreed

together that evidence of it should not be given (section 23).
A barrister, pleader, attorney, or vakil, is not exempted from giving evidence of any
matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under section 126 (section 23,
Explanation).
5. An admission is not conclusive proof of the matter admitted, but it may operate as
estoppel (section 31).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
II. Confessions.—A "confession" is an admission made at any time by any person
charged with a crime stating or suggesting an inference that he committed that crime.
A brief view of the provisions dealing with confessions is as follows:
1. A confession is irrelevant.
(a) If it is obtained by any (a) inducement, (b) threat, or (c) promise;
(b) referring to the charge in question;
(c) proceeding from a person in authority; and
(d) suﬃcient to give the accused grounds for supposing that by making the

confession he would gain an advantage or avoid an evil of a temporal nature in
reference to the proceedings against him (section 24).
But a confession made after the removal of the impression caused by such
inducement, threat, or promise, is relevant (section 28).
2. A confession made to a police oﬃcer is not admissible (section 25). A confession
made to police in Departmental proceedings was held to be relevant because section
25 does not apply to such proceedings.
3. A confession made by a person in police custody is not admissible, unless it is made
in the presence of a Magistrate (section 26).
But when any fact connected with the crime is discovered in consequence of
information received from such person, so much of the information as relates to the
facts discovered is admissible whether it amounts to confession or not (section 27).
4. A confession does not become irrelevant only because it is made—
(i) under a promise of secrecy; or
(ii) in consequence of a deception practised on the accused; or
(iii) when the accused was drunk; or
(iv) in answer to questions which the accused need not have answered; or
(v) when the accused was not warned that he was not bound to make it (section

29).
5. When more persons than one are tried jointly for an offence, and one of them makes
a confession affecting himself and some other of such persons, the confession may be
taken into consideration against such other person as well as against the person
making it (section 30).
As to the difference between an "admission" and a "confession," see notes under
section 24.
III. Statements by a witness who cannot be produced.—A statement of a relevant fact
made by a person—
(i) who is dead;
(ii) who cannot be found;
(iii) who has become incapable of giving evidence; or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(iv) whose attendance cannot be procured without unreasonable delay or expense is
relevant under the following circumstances:—
(1) When it relates to the cause of his death (known as dying declaration).
(2) When it is made in the course of business; such as an entry in books, or

acknowledgment of the receipt of any property, or date of a document.
(3) When it is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making it

or when it would have exposed him to a criminal prosecution.
(4) When it gives opinion as to a public right or custom or matters of general

interest and it was made before any controversy as to such right or custom had
arisen.
(5) When it relates to the existence of any relationship between persons as to

whose relationship the maker had special means of knowledge and was made
before the question in dispute arose.
(6) When it relates to the existence of any relationship between persons deceased

and is made in any will or deed or family pedigree, or upon any tombstone or
family-portrait, and was made before the question in dispute arose.
(7) When it is contained in any deed, will or other document. This clause, however,

does not allow introduction of parole evidence.
(8) When it is made by a number of persons and expresses feelings relevant to the

matter in question (section 32).
Admissibility of depositions in former trials in subsequent trials.—Evidence given by a
witness (i) in a judicial proceeding, or (ii) before any person authorised by law to take it,
is relevant in a subsequent judicial proceeding or at a later stage of the same
proceeding when—
(i) the witness is dead,
(ii) he cannot be found,
(iii) he is incapable of giving evidence,
(iv) he is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or
(v) his presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense which

the court considers unreasonable.
Such evidence will only be admissible—
(1) if the proceeding was between the same parties, or their representatives in interest;
(2) if the adverse party in the ﬁrst proceeding had the right and opportunity to crossexamine; and
(3) if the questions in issue were substantially the same in the ﬁrst as in the second
proceeding (section 33).
Evidence given on a different occasion is also admissible to contradict a witness
(section 155) or to corroborate him (section 157).
IV. Statements made under special circumstances.—There are statements which are
relevant under special circumstances. These are—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
1. Entries in books of account including those maintained in electronic form regularly
kept in the course of business. Such entries are not alone suﬃcient evidence to charge
any person with liability (section 34).
2. Entries in public or oﬃcial books or records or electronic records made by a public
servant or by a person enjoined by law in the discharge of his duty (section 35).
3. Statements made in maps or charts offered for public sale or in maps or plans made
under the authority of the Central Government or any State Government (section 36).
4. Statements of facts of public nature made in—
(1) an Act of Parliament;
(2) an Act of the Central Legislature or any other legislative authority in a State; and
(3) Notiﬁcations in the Oﬃcial Gazette or the Government Gazette of any Dominion or
Colony or Possession of Her Majesty or the London Gazette (section 37).
5. Statements of the law of any country contained in—
(1) a book published under the authority of the Government of that country, and
(2) published reports or rulings of the courts of such country (section 38). Opinions of
persons skilled in foreign law may be invited by the court (section 45).
When the evidence to be given forms part of a statement, conversation, document,
book, or in electronic record, or series of letters or papers, then so much of the
statement, etc., as the court considers necessary to the full understanding of the
nature and effect of the statement, shall only be given (section 39).
V. Judgments.—Judgments are relevant facts of great importance. Judgments in civil
cases do not preclude any one but parties to the suit or their representatives from
contesting the subject-matter upon which they are pronounced. There are four
exceptions to this principle.
1. The existence of a judgment, decree or order is a relevant fact if by law it has the
effect of preventing any court from taking cognizance of a suit, or holding a trial (the
doctrine of res judicata) (section 40).
2. A ﬁnal judgment of a court exercising (1) probate, (2) matrimonial, (3) admiralty, (4)
insolvency jurisdiction which—
(i) confers upon or takes away from any person any legal character, or
(ii) declares any person to be entitled to (a) any such character, or (b) any speciﬁc

thing absolutely,
is relevant when (a) the existence of any such legal character, or (b) the title of any such
person to any thing, is relevant.
Such judgments are known as judgments in rem.
Such judgment is conclusive proof:
(1) that any legal character, which it confers, accrued at the time when such judgment
came into operation;

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(2) that any legal character to which it declares any person to be entitled accrued at the
time mentioned in the judgment;
(3) that any legal character which it takes away from any person ceased at the time
mentioned in the judgment;
(4) that any thing to which it declares a person to be entitled was that person's property
at the time at which the judgment declares it to be his (section 41).
There are two other sections dealing with conclusive proof:
(1) birth during marriage is conclusive proof of legitimacy (section 112);
(2) notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette that a portion of British territory is ceded to an
Indian State before the commencement of Pt III of the Government of India Act, 1935,
is conclusive proof of cession of that territory (section 113).
3. Judgment relating to matters of a public nature are relevant though such judgments
are not conclusive proof of that which they state (section 42).
4. Judgments, the existence of which is a fact in issue or is relevant under some other
provision of the Evidence Act (section 43).
Any party to a suit may show that a judgment which is relevant was delivered by a
Court not competent to deliver it or was obtained by fraud or collusion (section 44).
VI. Opinions.—The court has often to form an opinion on technical matters. In such
cases, extraneous assistance may become necessary. The Act allows such assistance
in the following cases—
(1) Opinion of experts, i.e. persons specially skilled in (i) foreign law, (ii) matters of
science, (iii) matters of art, (iv) handwriting, and (v) ﬁnger impressions (section 45)
(2) Opinion of Examiner of Electronic Evidence (as deﬁned by section 79A of the
Information Technology Act 2000) (section 45A).
2. Any fact which supports or is inconsistent with the opinion of experts (section 46).
3. Opinion of a person acquainted with the handwriting of the person by whom a
document is written when the court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom it
was written (section 47). When the court has to form an opinion as to the electronic
signature of any person, the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the
electronic signature certiﬁcate is a relevant fact. (section 47A)
A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another person when—
(i) he has seen that person write;
(ii) he has received documents purporting to be written by that person in answer to

documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to that
person; or
(iii) in the ordinary course of business documents purporting to be written by that

person have been habitually submitted to him (section 47).
4. Opinions as to the existence of a right or custom of a person who knows of its
existence (section 48).
5. Opinions of persons having special means of knowledge regarding—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(i) usages and tenets of a body of men or family;
(ii) the constitution and government of any religious or charitable foundation;
(iii) the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular

classes of people (section 49).
6. Opinion of a person, expressed by his conduct, who as a member of the family had
special means of knowledge as to the relationship of one person to another, (section
50).
Whenever the opinion of a person is relevant, the grounds on which such opinion is
based are also relevant (section 51).
VII. Character.— "Character" includes both reputation and disposition. Relevancy of
character may arise both in (1) civil and (2) criminal cases.
(1) In civil cases the fact that the character of any person is such as to render probable
or improbable any conduct imputed to him is irrelevant, except in so far as such
character appears from facts otherwise relevant (section 52).
But the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the amount of
damages which he ought to receive is relevant (section 55).
(2) In criminal cases the fact that the accused is of good character is relevant (section
53). But the fact that he is of bad character is irrelevant unless—
(i) evidence has been given that he has a good character (section 54); or
(ii) the bad character is itself a fact in issue (section 54, Explanation 1).

A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character (ibid., Explanation 2)
(3) In a prosecution for an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B,
section 354C, section 354D, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376, section
376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA,
section 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any
such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of
the victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not be
relevant on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent. (section 53A)
Part II—On Proof
Chapter III.—Facts which need not be proved.—These are:—
1. Facts of which the court will take judicial notice (section 56). Section 57 gives
thirteen item list of facts of which the court is bound to take judicial notice.
2. Facts which the parties or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before
the hearing, they agree to admit by any writing under their hands, or which, by any rule
of pleading, they are deemed to have admitted by their pleadings (section 58).
3. Facts which are presumed to exist. Presumptions as to documents are drawn under
sections 79-90; as to survivorship and death under sections 107-108; as to ﬁduciary
relations under sections 109 and 111; as to ownership under section 110; as to certain
offences under section 111-A; as to legitimacy under section 112; as to cessation of
territory under section 113; as to abetment of suicide by married woman under section
113-A; as to dowry death under section 113-B; as to the existence of certain facts,

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
under section 114 and as to absence of consent in certain rape cases, under section
114-A.
Chapter IV.—Oral evidence.—All facts, except the contents of documents, and of
electronic records may be proved by oral evidence (section 59). Oral evidence must be
direct, that is to say,
(1) if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness, who
says he saw it;
(2) if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness, who
says he heard it;
(3) if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other
manner, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or
in that manner;
(4) if it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds (section 60).
"Circumstantial evidence" is opposed to "direct evidence". It means a set of
circumstances from which some other fact is inferred. "Direct evidence" means
testimony given by a man as to what he has himself perceived by his own senses. It is
the testimony of a witness (called eye-witness) to the existence or non-existence of the
fact or fact in issue. As regards admissibility, direct and circumstantial evidence stand
on the same footing.
Any other evidence would be hearsay evidence, that is, an evidence of a person who
has not himself perceived the thing to which he testiﬁes but has come to know of it
from those who perceived it. Such evidence is excluded generally and is allowed only
exceptionally. One of the exceptions is opinions on matters requiring special skill
expressed in published books.
Opinion of an expert expressed in a book commonly offered for sale may be proved by
the production of such book, if the author—
(1) is dead, or
(2) cannot be found, or
(3) has become incapable of giving evidence, or
(4) cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense, which the
court regards as unreasonable (ibid).
Chapter V.—Documentary evidence.—The contents of documents may be proved either
by (1) primary evidence, or (2) secondary evidence (section 61).
(1) Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the
court (section 62).
Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence. Where a
document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart is primary evidence as against
the parties executing it (ibid., Explanation 1).
Where a number of documents are made by uniform process, such as printing,
lithography, or photography, each one is primary evidence of the contents of all the rest.
(2) Secondary evidence means and includes—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(i) certiﬁed copies given under provisions of this Act;
(ii) copies made from the original by mechanical processes, which in themselves

ensure accuracy of the copy and, copies compared with such copies;
(iii) copies made from or compared with the original;
(iv) counterparts of documents, as against the parties who did not execute them;
(v) oral account of the contents of a document, given by some person who has

himself seen it (section 63).
Documents must be proved by primary evidence (section 64).
Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition or contents of a
document in the following cases:—
(1) When the document is in the possession of—
(i) the person against whom it is to be proved, or
(ii) any person out of the reach of, or not subject to, the process of the court, or
(iii) any person who is legally bound to produce it but does not produce it after

notice to produce the same.
(2) When the existence or contents of the original have been proved to have been
admitted in writing by the person against whom it is to be proved or his representative.
In such a case the written admission is admissible.
(3) When the original has been destroyed or lost or when the party offering evidence of
its contents cannot, for any other reason, not arising from his own neglect or default,
produce it in reasonable time. In such a case any secondary evidence of its contents is
admissible.
(4) When the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable. In such a case
any secondary evidence of its contents is admissible.
(5) When the original is a public document.
(6) When the original is a document of which a certiﬁed copy is permitted by this Act or
any law in force in India, a certiﬁed copy is admissible.
(7) When the original consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot
conveniently be examined in court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the
whole collection. Such result may be proved by the evidence of any person skilled in the
examination of such documents (section 65).
Contents of electronic records [section 65A].—The contents of electronic record may
be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 65-B Under this section a
computer output is deemed to be a document subject to the conditions as to the
maintenance and working of the computer machines from which the output has been
taken.
When notice to produce a document is not required.—Notice under section 65 to
produce a document is not required—
(1) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(2) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be
required to produce it;
(3) when the adverse party has obtained possession of the original by fraud or force;
(4) when the adverse party, or his agent, has the original in court;
(5) when the adverse party, or his agent, has admitted the loss of the document;
(6) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not subject to,
the process of the court (section 66).
Signature and handwriting.—If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been
written by any person, the signature or handwriting of so much of the document, as is
alleged to be in that person's writing, must be proved to be in his handwriting (section
67).
Handwriting can be proved in the following ways:
(1) By the evidence of the writer himself.
(2) By the opinion of experts who can compare handwritings (section 46).
(3) By the evidence of a person who is acquainted with the handwriting of a person by
whom the writing in question is supposed to have been written and signed (section
47).
(4) By the court comparing the writing or signature in question with any others proved
to the satisfaction of the court to be genuine (section 73).
(5) The court may direct any person present to write any words or ﬁgures to enable the
court to compare them with any words or ﬁgures alleged to have been written by him
(ibid).
Where the electronic signature of any subscriber is alleged to have been aﬃxed to an
electronic record, the fact that such electronic signature is that of the subscriber has to
be proved. This does not apply to the case of a secure electronic signature (section
67A).
Documents requiring attestation.—Documents required by law to be attested can be
used in evidence as follows:—
1. One attesting witness at least must be called for proving its execution, if such
witness is—
(i) alive,
(ii) subject to the process of the court, and
(iii) capable of giving evidence (section 68).

But, if the document is a registered one and is not a will, then it is not necessary to call
an attesting witness unless its execution is denied by the person who has executed it
(ibid, proviso).
2. If such witness cannot be found, or if the document is executed in the UK, it must be
proved—
(i) that the attestation of a witness is in his handwriting, and

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(ii) that the signature of the person executing the document is in the handwriting of

that person (section 69).
3. The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself is
suﬃcient proof of its execution as against him (section 70).
4. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document,
the execution may be proved by other evidence (section 71), i.e., it may be proved
under sections 69 and 70.
An attested document, not required by law to be attested, may be proved as if it was
unattested (section 72).
In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by whom
it purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing or seal, proved to have
been written or made by that person, may be compared with the one which is to be
proved (section 73).
For the veriﬁcation of a digital signature, the court may direct the person concerned, or
the Controller, or the Certifying Authority to provide the digital signature certiﬁcate. The
court may direct any other person to apply the public key listed in the certiﬁcate and to
verify the signature (section 73-A).
Public documents.—These are (1) documents forming the acts or records of the acts—
(i) of the sovereign authority,
(ii) of oﬃcial bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public oﬃcers, legislative, judicial and executive of any part of India or of the

Commonwealth, or of a foreign country.
(2) Public records kept in any State of private documents (section 74).
All other documents are private (section 75).
Certiﬁed copies of public documents will be given by every public oﬃcer having the
custody of them on payment of legal fees (section 76). Such copies may be produced
in proof of the contents of the public documents of which they purport to be copies
(section 77). Certain public documents are proved in special ways, and not by certiﬁed
copies. These are Acts or Notiﬁcations of the Central Government or of the Crown
Representative, or of any State Government; proceedings of Legislatures;
proclamations issued by Her Majesty or by the Privy Council; Acts or proceedings of
the Legislature of a foreign country. As to how they are to be proved, see section 78.
Presumptions as to documents.—Sections 79-85 and section 89 provide for cases in
which the court shall presume to be genuine certain facts about documents, that is, the
court is bound to accept those facts as proved until they are disproved.
1. As to a certiﬁed copy or other document which is declared by law to be admissible
as proof of any fact, and which purports to be certiﬁed by an oﬃcer of the Central
Government or State Government or by an oﬃcer in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
who is duly authorised by the Central Government, the court shall presume that it is
genuine. It shall also presume that the oﬃcer who signed or certiﬁed it held at the time
the oﬃcial character which he claims in it (section 79).
2. As to (1) a record of evidence in a judicial proceeding, or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(2) a confession taken is accordance with law and purporting to be signed by a Judge
or Magistrate or other oﬃcer authorized by law, the court shall presume—
(i) that the document is genuine;
(ii) that any statement as to the circumstances under which it was taken is true; and
(iii) such evidence or confession was duly taken (section 80).

3. As to the London Gazette, or any Oﬃcial Gazette or the Government Gazette of any
colony, dependency or possession of the British Crown, or a newspaper, or private Act
of Parliament printed by the Queen's Printer, or a document coming from proper
authority, the court shall presume that it is genuine (section 81).
The court has to presume the genuineness of every electronic record purporting to be
the oﬃcial Gazette or purporting to be the electronic record directed by any law to be
kept by any person, if the electronic record has been kept substantially in the form
required by law and has been produced from proper custody (section 81A).
4. As to a document which would be admissible in an English or Irish Court without
proof of (a) its seal or stamp or signature, or
(b) the oﬃcial character of the person signing it, the court shall presume (i) that the
seal, etc., is genuine, and (ii) that the person signing it held that oﬃcial position which
he claims in it (section 82).
5. As to maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority of Central Government or
State Government, the court shall presume that they were so made and are accurate
(section 83). The section concludes by providing that maps, etc., made for any
particular cause must be proved to be accurate.
6. As to (1) authorized law-books containing laws of any country, and
(2) books purporting to contain reports of decisions of courts of such country, the
court shall presume that they are genuine (section 84).
7. As to powers-of-attorney executed before, and authenticated by, a notary public, or
any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or representative of the Central
Government, the court shall presume that they were so executed and authenticated
(section 85). For creating the presumption about a foreign power of attorney, the
document has to be authenticated by the Indian Counsel or relevant Indian Authority.
The court has to presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement
containing the electronic signatures of the parties was concluded by aﬃxing the
electronic signatures of the parties (section 85-A).
In any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the court has to presume that
the record has not been altered since the speciﬁc point of time to which the secured
status relates (section 85B(1)).
In a proceeding involving a secure electronic signature the court has to presume that
(a) the secure electronic signature was aﬃxed by the subscriber with the intention of
signing or approving the electronic record; (b) apart from the secure electronic record
or secure electronic signature, the section does not create any presumption relating to
authenticity and integrity of the electronic record or electronic signature (section 85B(2)).
The court has to presume that the information listed in an electronic signature
certiﬁcate is correct, if the certiﬁcate was accepted by the subscriber. This does not

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
apply to information speciﬁed as subscriber information and which has not been
veriﬁed (section 85-C).
8. As to a document called for and not produced after notice to produce, the court shall
presume that it was duly attested, stamped and executed (section 89).
Sections 86-88 and 90 provide for cases in which the court may presume certain facts
about documents, that is, the court is at liberty to accept those facts as proved until
they are disproved, or to call for proof of them in the ﬁrst instance.
1. As to a certiﬁed copy of any judicial record of a foreign country, certiﬁed by a
representative of Her Majesty or of the Central Government, the court may presume
that it is genuine and accurate (section 86).
2. As to (1) any book to which the court may refer on a matter of public or general
interest, and
(2) any published chart or map produced for its inspection, the court may presume that
it was written and published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at
which it purports to have been written or published (section 87).
3. As to a message forwarded from a telegraph oﬃce, the court may presume that it
corresponds with the message for transmission at the oﬃce from which it purports to
be sent.
But it shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was
delivered for transmission (section 88).
The court may presume that an electronic message forwarded by the originator
through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to
be addressed corresponds with the message which was fed into his computer. But
there is no presumption as to the person by whom the message was sent (section 88A).
4. As to a document proved to be 30 years old and produced from proper custody, the
court may presume—
(i) that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in

the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and
(ii) that it was duly executed and attested by the person by whom it purports to be

executed and attested (section 90).
Documents are said to be in proper custody if they are (i) in the place in which, and
under the care of the person with whom, they would naturally be (ibid).
Where an electronic record which is ﬁve years old and is produced from a proper
custody, the court may presume that the electronic signature appearing on the record
was aﬃxed by the person whose signature it purports to be or was aﬃxed by the
person authorised by him (section 90-A).
Chapter VI.—Exclusion of oral by documentary evidence.—When—
(i) the terms of a contract, grant, or other disposition of property have been reduced

to the form of a document, or
(ii) any matter is required by law to be in the form of a document—

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(I) no evidence shall be given of the terms of (a) such contract, grant, or disposition of
property, or (b) of such matter, except
(i) the document itself, or
(ii) secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence would

be admissible (section 91);
(II) no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between the
parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest, for the purpose of (i)
contradicting, (ii) varying, (iii) adding to, or (iv) subtracting from, its terms (section 92).
To this rule (I) there are two exceptions:—
(1) When a public oﬃcer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is
shown that any particular person has acted as such oﬃcer, the writing by which he is
appointed need not be proved (section 91, Exception 1).
(2) Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate (section 91,
Exception 2).
The statement, in any document, of a fact other than the terms of a contract, grant or
disposition of property, or which is not required by law to be in writing, does not
preclude proof of such fact by any other means (ibid, Explanation 3).
To the rule (II) there are six exceptions. Oral evidence is admissible in the following
cases:—
(1) Any fact which would (i) invalidate any document, or (ii) entitle any person to any
decree or order relating thereto, may be proved, i.e., fraud, intimidation, illegality, failure
of consideration, mistake of fact or law.
(2) Any separate oral agreement as to any matter on which the document is silent, and
which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved.
(3) Any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition precedent to the attaching of
any obligation under the document, may be proved.
(4) A subsequent oral agreement to rescind or modify any such contract, grant or
disposition of property, may be proved, except where such contract or grant is required
to be in writing, or has been registered.
(5) Any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned in any contract
are usually annexed to such contracts, may be proved if they are not inconsistent with
its express terms.
(6) Any fact which shows in what manner the language of the document is related to
existing facts may be proved.
Persons who are not parties to a document or their representatives in interest may give
evidence of facts tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of
the document (section 99).
Construction of documents.—Latent and patent ambiguities.—Sections 93-100
embody the rules as to the admissibility of extraneous evidence to interpret
documents. Such evidence is inadmissible in the following cases:—
1. When the language is, on its face ambiguous or defective, evidence cannot be given
of facts which would show its meaning or supply its defects (section 93).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
2. When the language is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately to existing facts,
evidence cannot be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such facts (section
94).
Such evidence is admissible in the following cases:—
1. When the language is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing facts,
evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense (section 95).
2. When the language is meant to apply to any one, but not to more than one, of several
persons or things, evidence may be given to show to which of those persons or things
it was intended to apply (section 96).
3. When the language applies partly to one set of facts and partly to another, but the
whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence may be given to show to which
of the two it was meant to apply (section 97).
4. Evidence may be given as to the meaning of illegible, foreign, obsolete, technical,
local and provincial expressions, abbreviations and words used in a peculiar sense
(section 98).
Part III—Production and Effect of Evidence
This Part deals with the production and effect of evidence. It comprises of—
(a) the question of burden of proof;
(b) the rules as to who is to give evidence and under what circumstances;
(c) the rules as to examination of witnesses; and
(d) the effect of improper reception or rejection of evidence.

Chapter VII.—Burden of proof.—Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any
legal right or liability dependent on facts, which he asserts, must prove that those facts
exist. The burden of proof lies on that person who is bound to prove any fact (section
101). The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if
no evidence were given on either side (section 102). During the course of the trial the
burden may shift from one side to the other.
Sections 103-113 lay down the rules as to burden of proof.—
1. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the
court to believe it unless the law has provided that its proof shall lie on any particular
person (section 103).
2. The burden of proving any fact in order to enable any person to give evidence of any
other fact is on the person who wishes to give such evidence (section 104).
3. When a person is accused of an offence, the burden of proving that his case falls
within any exception in the Penal Code or any other law lies on him (section 105).
4. When a fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving
it lies on him (section 106).
5. When it is shown that a man was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that
he is dead is on the person who aﬃrms it (section 107).
6. When it is proved that a man has not been heard of for seven years by those who
would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
alive lies on the person who aﬃrms it (section 108). The presumption is as to the fact
of death and not the time of death. The probability of the time of death may, however,
be taken into account when it is necessary to meet the ends of justice.
7. When persons have acted as partners, or as landlord and tenant, or as principal and
agent, the burden of proving that such relationship has ceased, lies on the person who
aﬃrms it (section 109).
8. When a person is in possession of any thing as owner, the burden of proving that he
is not the owner is on the person who aﬃrms that he is not the owner (section 110).
9. When a person stands towards another in a position of active conﬁdence, the burden
of proving the good faith of any transaction between them lies on the person in active
conﬁdence (section 111).
10. In reference to disturbed areas certain persons are presumed to have committed
the offences stated in sections 121-123 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (section 111A).
11. The fact that a person is born during a valid marriage between his mother and any
man, or within 280 days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, then
unless non-access is proved, it shall be conclusive proof of the legitimacy of the child
(section 112).
12. A notiﬁcation in the Oﬃcial Gazette of a cession of British territory before the
commencement of Pt III of the Government of India Act, 1935, to any Indian State is
conclusive proof that a valid cession took place at the date mentioned in the
notiﬁcation (section 113).
Three sections deal with "conclusive proof" as deﬁned in section 4, viz., sections 41,
112, 113.
Section 113-A deals with presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
Where the question is whether suicide by a married woman was abetted by her
husband or in-laws, the fact that the suicide has taken place within seven years of
marriage and she was subjected to cruelty would create the presumption that the
suicide was the result of abetment. Thus the burden of proof would be shifted to inlaws to show that they had no role to play in the episode and it was the result of her
own voluntary act. The word "cruelty" has the same meaning as in section 498-A of IPC.
Section 113-B creates a presumption as to dowry death. Where the question is whether
a person has committed a "dowry death", the fact that such person "soon before her
death" had subjected her to cruelty or harassment for dowry, he would be presumed to
have caused the death. "Dowry death" here means the same as in section 113-B.
Section 114 lays down certain cases in which the court may presume the existence of
any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had (i) to the common
course of natural events, (ii) human conduct, and (iii) public and private business, in
their relation to the fact of the particular case (section 114). See the illustrations to the
section as to those cases. These illustrations deal with matters like receiving stolen
property, testimony of an accomplice, bigamy, consideration, continuity of things,
judicial and oﬃcial acts, functioning of legislature and Government oﬃcer, common
course of business, withholding of evidence, refusal to answer questions, etc.
Section 114-A deals with presumption as to absence of consent in prosecution for rape
under clause (a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (e), clause (f), clause (g),
clause (h), clause (i), clause (j), clause (k), clause (l), clause (m) or clause (n) of subsection (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal Code. Where sexual intercourse by the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
accused is proved and the victim woman says in the court that she had not consented,
the court would presume that there was no consent. This shifts the burden of proving
consent on to the accused and, on his failure to do so, there would be a ﬁnding that he
was guilty. In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts mentioned in
clauses (a) to
(d) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code.
Chapter VIII.—Estoppel.—When one person has by his (a) declaration, (b) act, or (c)
omission,
(1) intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true, and
(2) to act upon such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed in any suit
or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth
of that thing. The kinds of estoppel which have evolved through judicial process are
equitable estoppel, promissory estoppel, including promissory estoppel against
Government and its agencies, against universities and institutions, issue estoppel, etc.
The Evidence Act specially provides for the following estoppels:—
1. A tenant of immovable property or person claiming through such tenant cannot,
during the continuance of the tenancy, deny that the landlord had, at the beginning of
the tenancy, a title, to such property (section 116).
2. A person, who came upon immovable property by the license of the person in
possession thereof, cannot deny that the person so in possession had a title at the
time when such license was given (ibid).
3. An acceptor of a bill of exchange cannot deny that the drawer had authority to draw
or endorse (section 117).
But the acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really drawn by the
person by whom it purports to have been drawn (ibid, Explanation 1).
4. A bailee or a licensee cannot deny that his bailor or licensor had, when the bailment
or license commenced, authority to make such bailment or grant such license (ibid.).
But if a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the bailor, he may prove
that such person had a right to them as against the bailor if he is sued by the bailor
(ibid, Explanation 2).
Difference between estoppel and admission.—(1) Estoppel binds only parties and
privies thereto. It cannot be taken advantage of by strangers. (2) Estoppel being a rule
of evidence, an action cannot be founded on it. An action may be founded on an
admission.
Difference between estoppel and presumption.—An estoppel is a personal
disqualiﬁcation laid upon a person peculiarly circumstanced from proving particular
fact; whereas a presumption is a rule that particular inferences shall be drawn from
particular facts, whoever proves them. Estoppel is that species of presumption where
the fact presumed is taken to be true, not as against all the world, but as against a
particular party, and that only by reason of some act done.
Difference between estoppel and res judicata.—(1) Estoppel is part of the law of
evidence and proceeds upon the equitable principle of altered situation; res judicata
belongs to procedure and is based on the principle that there must be an end to
litigation.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
(2) Estoppel prohibits a party from proving anything which contradicts the previous
declarations or acts, to the prejudice of a party who, relying upon them, altered his
position; res judicata prohibits the court from enquiring into a matter already
adjudicated.
(3) Estoppel shuts the mouth of a party; res judicata ousts the jurisdiction of the court.
Estoppel against Government and its agencies.—Government and its agencies are
precluded by the doctrine of estoppel from going back upon their schemes of aid,
subsidy, rebate, allowances, tax holidays etc. when once any such scheme has brought
about some action in the desired direction on the part of a certain person. Such
schemes may be reversed for the future.
Estoppel against educational institutions.—The doctrine of estoppel does not permit
educational institutions to play hide and seek with the careers or prospects of students
where there is no fraud in them, and admissions or results have been brought about by
their own working errors.
Promissory estoppel.—Persons holding out promises intended to be acted upon and
which have in fact been acted upon are not permitted to resile from their promises only
because there was no consideration for the promise.
Difference between estoppel and waiver.—Estoppel being a rule of evidence may, if
established, assist a plaintiff in enforcing a cause of action, but it is not a cause of
action. Waiver on the other hand, is contractual, and may constitute a cause of action.
Chapter IX.—Witnesses.—All persons are competent to testify unless the court
considers that they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or
from giving rational answers to those questions (a) by tender years, (b) extreme old
age, or (c) disease (section 118). No particular number of witnesses is required for the
proof of any fact (section 134). The court has to apply its mind and restrict the number
of witnesses to an extent which should cater to the requirements of the case and
should not leave the number to the whims and fancies of the parties. In criminal cases
in which the conviction rests solely on the testimony of one witness, it is necessary to
make sure that he is wholly reliable. Kathi Oudhubhai Bhimabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR
1993 SC 1193 : 1993 Cr LJ 187 .
The courts have to take special care of the testimony of a child witness, that of a
person of unsound mind, partisan witnesses.
Dumb witnesses.—A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any
manner in which he can make it intelligible, e.g., by writing or signs. Such writing must
be written and the signs made in open Court. Provided that if the witness is unable to
communicate verbally, the court shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special
educator in recording the statement and such statement shall be videographed.
(section 119).
Husband and wife.—Husband or wife (i) of any party to a civil suit, or (ii) of the accused
in criminal proceedings, is a competent witness (section 120).
Privileged communications.—Certain witnesses cannot be compelled to disclose
certain facts. The law excludes this evidence on the ground of public policy.
1. Judge and Magistrate.—A Judge or Magistrate cannot, except on the special order of
some Court to which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any question,
(i) as to his own conduct, or
(ii) as to anything which came to his knowledge, as such Judge or Magistrate.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
He may be examined as to matters which occurred in his presence while he was so
acting (section 121).
2. Communications during marriage.—A person cannot be compelled to disclose any
communications made to him or her during marriage by any person to whom he or she
is or has been married. He will not be permitted to disclose any such communication
unless the person who made it or his representative in interest consents—except
(i) in suits between married persons, or
(ii) in proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for a crime against

the other (section 122).
3. Affairs of State.—No person can give evidence derived from unpublished oﬃcial
records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the oﬃcer at the
head of the department concerned (section 123). This should be read with S. 162
which requires a witness who has been called upon to produce a document to actually
produce notwithstanding his objections and then the court will decide whether he
ought to be given the privilege or not.
The privilege is a narrow one and must be sparingly used. Production of documents
without any objection and without claim of privilege amounts to waiver and there would
nothing to debar the court from examining the documents. Chaudhary v Governor of
Bihar, AIR 1980 SC 383 .
4. Oﬃcial communications.—No public oﬃcer can be compelled to disclose
communications made to him in oﬃcial conﬁdence, if public interest would suffer by
the disclosure (section 124).
5. Information as to crimes.—A Magistrate or a police or revenue oﬃcer cannot be
compelled to say whence he got any information as to the commission of an offence
(section 125). A police oﬃcer may be compelled to disclose the source of his
information when the police power is being abused. R v Agar, (1990) 2 All ER 442 (CA).
6. Professional communications.—A barrister, attorney, pleader, or vakil, cannot disclose,
without the client's consent,
(i) any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of his

employment;
(ii) the contents or condition of any document with which he became acquainted in

the course and for the purpose of his employment, or
(iii) any advice given by him to his client (section 126). Such protection from

disclosure does not extend to—
(i) any communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(ii) any fact observed by a barrister, attorney, pleader, or vakil in the course

of his employment, showing that a crime or fraud has been committed,
since the commencement of his employment.
The principle of non-disclosure of professional communications applies also to the
clerks or servants of barristers, attorneys, pleaders, or vakils (section 127).
If a party to a suit gives evidence at his own instance he is not to be deemed thereby to
have consented to a disclosure of professional communications by his legal adviser;
and if he calls any barrister, attorney, pleader, or vakil, as a witness he is only deemed to
have consented to such disclosure if he questions him regarding it (section 128). A

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
person cannot be compelled to disclose any conﬁdential communication which has
taken place between him and his legal adviser unless he offers himself as a witness, in
which case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as the court
thinks necessary, in order to explain any evidence he has given (section 129).
Production of documents by witness.—A witness who is not a party to a suit cannot be
compelled to produce—
(1) his title-deeds or any documents which might tend to criminate him unless he has
agreed in writing to produce them (section 130);
(2) documents or electronic records in his possession which any other person would
be entitled to refuse to produce if they were in his possession (section 131).
Criminating questions to a witness.—A witness cannot be excused from answering any
relevant question upon the ground that the answer will tend (i) to criminate him, or (ii)
to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture. But such answer cannot
(a) subject him to arrest or prosecution, or
(b) be proved against him in any criminal proceedings except a prosecution for

giving false evidence (section 132).
Accomplice.—Illustration (b) to section 114 says that the court may presume that an
accomplice is unworthy of credit unless he is corroborated in material particulars.
Section 133 provides that an accomplice shall be a competent witness against an
accused, and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice (section 133). A Judge has to keep in
mind the practical rule of caution that an accomplice is unworthy of credit unless
corroborated in material particulars and he has also to mention this fact in his
judgment. In England, there is jury trial and, therefore, the Judge has to give the warning
to the jury. In sexual offences the need for this warning has been abolished. See
Comment under section 133 on this topic.
Chapter X.—Examination of witnesses.—The order of production and examination of
witnesses is regulated by the Civil and Criminal Procedure Codes or by the discretion of
the court (section 135). The Judge may ask how a particular fact is relevant and admit
the evidence if he thinks the fact would be relevant. If the relevancy of a fact depends
on the proof of some other fact, such latter fact must be proved ﬁrst unless the party
undertakes to prove it subsequently and the court is satisﬁed with such undertaking
(section 136).
The examination of a witness by the party who calls him is called examination-in-chief.
The examination of a witness by the adverse party is called cross-examination.
The examination of a witness subsequent to the cross-examination by the party who
called him, is called re-examination (section 137).
Witnesses are ﬁrst examined-in-chief, then cross-examined, and then re-examined. The
examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but the crossexamination need not be conﬁned to the facts to which the witness testiﬁed on his
examination-in-chief. The re-examination must be directed to the explanation of
matters referred to in cross-examination. If any new matter is introduced in reexamination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter (section
138). A party must be given a fair chance to cross-examine the witness procedure
cannot take away the right of a party to cross-examine the other side.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
A person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness and cannot
be cross-examined unless he is called as a witness (section 139).
Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined (section 140).
The court may permit the person who calls a witness to put any questions to him,
which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party (section 154). This is
only allowed if the witness proves to be a "hostile witness," i.e., one who from the
manner in which he gives evidence shows that he is not desirous of telling the truth to
the court.
Leading questions.—Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it
wishes or expects to receive is called a leading question (section 141). Such questions
must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an examination-in-chief or in a
re-examination, except with the permission of the court (section 142).
The court will permit such questions—
(1) as to matters which are (i) introductory, or (ii) undisputed, or (iii) already suﬃciently
proved (section 142), or
(2) in cross-examination (section 143).
The prosecution cannot put leading questions on the material part of the evidence
which the witness intends to give against the accused. Such leading questions offend
the right of the accused to fair trial enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. It is not a
curable irregularity. Varkey Joseph v State of Kerala, AIR 1993 SC 1992 : 1993 Supp (3)
SCC 745 : 1993 Cr LJ 2010 .
Evidence as to matters in writing.—Section 144 enables the parties to put in force the
provisions of sections 91 and 92. Any witness may be asked whether any (a) contract,
(b) grant or (c) other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not
in writing, and if he says that it was, the adverse party may object to such evidence
being given until the document is produced or facts proved for the admission of
secondary evidence. The same principle applies if a witness is about to make any
statement as to the contents of a document, which, in the opinion of the court, ought to
be produced (section 144).
A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him and reduced
into writing, without such writing being shown to him or proved; but, if it is intended to
contradict him by the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be
called to those parts of it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him
(section 145).
Questions lawful in cross-examination.—When a witness is cross-examined he may be
asked any questions which tend—
(1) to test his veracity;
(2) to discover who he is and what is his position in life; or
(3) to shake his credit by injuring his character, although the answer to such questions
might criminate him or expose him to a penalty or forfeiture
Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 376, 376A, section 376AB,
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section
376E of the Indian Penal Code or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the
question of consent is an issue, it shall not be permissible to adduce evidence or to put
questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to the general immoral character, or

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
previous sexual experience, of such victim with any person for proving such consent or
the quality of consent. (section 146).
Questions as to character.—Where the question put to a witness is on a matter relevant
to the inquiry, the court may compel the witness to answer the question
notwithstanding the fact that the answer may involve him into some liability. section
147 read with section 132. If a question in cross-examination is irrelevant, except in so
far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the court may compel
the witness to answer it or warn him that he is not obliged to answer it. The court in
deciding whether a particular question is proper or not will have regard to the following
considerations:—
(1) Such questions are proper if the imputation conveyed by them would seriously
affect the opinion of the court as to the credibility of the witness.
(2) Such questions are improper—
(i) If the imputation which they convey relates to matters so remote in time, or such

character, that it would not affect, or affect in a slight degree, the opinion of the
court as to the credibility of the witness;
(ii) If there is a great disproportion between the importance of the imputations

made against the witness's character and the importance of his evidence
(section 148).
Such questions ought not to be asked unless the person asking it has reasonable
grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys is well founded (section 149).
If the court thinks that any question was asked without reasonable grounds, it may, if it
was asked by any barrister, attorney, pleader, or vakil, report his conduct to the High
Court or other authority to which he is subordinate (section 150).
The court may draw from the witness's refusal to answer, the inference that the answer
if given would be unfavourable (section 148).
Questions that will be forbidden by the Court.—The court will forbid,
(1) any question which it regards as indecent or scandalous unless it refers to facts in
issue or to matters necessary to be known in order to determine the facts in issue
(section 151);
(2) any question which appears to the court (i) to be intended to insult or annoy, or (ii)
to be offensive in form (section 152).
Answers to questions as to character cannot be contradicted.—When a witness
answers any question which is relevant in so far as it shakes his credit, no evidence can
be given to contradict him; but if he answers falsely he may be charged with giving
false evidence (section 153). Evidence, however, may be given (i) of a previous
conviction if a witness denies it, or (ii) of facts tending to impeach his impartiality if he
denies them (section 153, Exceptions).
Hostile witness.—When a witness turns hostile to the very party who called him, such
party may, with the permission of the court, put him such questions as might have been
asked in cross-examination by the opposite party (section 154). The court is not
precluded from taking into account the statements of a hostile witness altogether and
it is not necessary to discard the same in toto. His statements can be relied upon
partly.
Impeaching the credit of witness.—The credit of a witness may be impeached by the
adverse party, or, with the consent of the court, by the party who calls him in the

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
following ways:—
(1) By the evidence of persons who testify that they believe him to be unworthy of
credit.
(2) By proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or
has received any other corrupt inducement to give evidence.
(3) By proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is
liable to be contradicted.
(4) When a man is prosecuted for rape or attempt to ravish, it may be shown that the
prosecutrix was of generally immoral character (section 155).
Evidence in corroboration.—When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives
evidence of a relevant fact—
(i) he may be questioned as to the circumstances which he observed at or near the

time or place at which such relevant fact occurred (section 156).
(ii) any former statement made by such witness relating to the same fact at or

about the time when the fact took place, or before any authority competent to
investigate the fact, may be proved (section 157).
When a statement relevant under section 32 or section 33 is proved, evidence may be
given—
(1) to contradict or corroborate it, or
(2) to impeach or conﬁrm the credit of the person by whom it was made, as if he had
been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the
matter suggested (section 158).
Refreshing memory.—A witness may refresh his memory by referring to—
(1) any writing made by himself—
(i) at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned, or
(ii) so soon afterwards that the transaction was fresh in his memory;

(2) any such writing made by another person and read by the witness and known by
him to be correct, while his memory was still fresh;
(3) professional treatises if he is an expert.
A witness may, with the court's permission, refer to a copy of any document to which
he might refer if it were produced, provided there is suﬃcient reason for the nonproduction of the original (section 159). He may also testify to facts mentioned in any
such document, although he has no recollection of them, if he is sure that the facts
were correctly recorded in the document (section 160). Any document to refresh
memory must be shown to the adverse party, who may, if he pleases, cross-examine
the witness upon it (section 161).
Production of document by witness.—A witness summoned to produce a document
must, if it is in his possession or power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection
which there may be to its production or admissibility. The validity of such objection will
be decided by the court. The court may inspect the document unless it refers to
matters of State or take evidence to determine its admissibility (section 162).

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs
Notice to produce document.—Notice to produce a document is necessary, except in
the six cases provided in section 66, in order to make secondary evidence of its
contents admissible. When a party gives notice to produce a document, and it is
produced and inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as
evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so (section 163). If a party refuses
to produce a document after notice, he cannot use it as evidence (i) without the
consent of the other party, or (ii) the order of the court (section 164).
Court's power to put questions.—The Judge may, in order to ascertain relevant facts,
(1) ask any question (a) at any time, (b) of any witness or parties, (c) about relevant or
irrelevant facts—though the judgment must be based on relevant facts only;
(2) order the production of any document or thing.
The parties cannot object to this course, nor can they cross-examine a witness upon
any answer given in reply.
The Judge, however, cannot
(1) compel a witness to answer a question or produce a document which such witness
would be entitled to refuse to answer or to produce under sections 121 to 132 at the
instance of the adverse party;
(2) ask any question as to credit which it would be improper for any other person to ask
under section 148 or section 149;
(3) dispense with primary evidence of any document, except where secondary evidence
is admissible (section 165).
Power of jury to put questions.—A juror or assessor may put any question to a witness,
through or by leave of the Judge, which the Judge might put and which he considers
proper (section 166).
Chapter XI.—Improper admission or rejection of evidence.—The improper admission or
rejection of evidence is not a ground—
(1) for a reversal of the judgment, or
(2) for a new trial of the case,
if the court thinks
(i) that independently of the evidence admitted, there was suﬃcient evidence to

justify the decision, or
(ii) that if the rejected evidence had been received it ought not to have varied the

decision (section 167).

1 Norton on Evidence.
2 Bank of England v Vagliano Bros, (1891) AC 107 .
3 Stephen's Introduction, p 12.

https://t.me/LawCollegeNotes_Stuffs

