     MEDIA LAWS OF INDIA




                                          CA Rajkumar S. Adukia
B. Com. (Hons.), FCA, ACS, AICWA, LL.B, Dip.IFR (UK), MBA, DIPR, DLL&LP

                           Mobile +91 98200 61049/+91 93230 61049

                                                 Fax +91 22 26765579

                                        Email rajkumarfca@gmail.com

                                                          www.caaa.in




                                                                     1
Index

  1. Introduction

  2. Media Industry

  3. History of Media Laws in India

  4. Media laws of India – an overview

  5. Laws applicable for Information

  6. Laws applicable for Broadcasting

  7. Laws applicable for Films

  8. Other laws applicable to media

        8.1. FDI in media sector

        8.2. Labour related legislations

        8.3. IPR

        8.4. Telegraph Act & Wireless Telegraphy Act

  9. Authorities regulating the media industry

  10.         Case laws

  11.         Professional opportunities in the media industry

  12.         Useful websites

  13.         About the Author




                                                                 2
                                        1. INTRODUCTION

“One of the objects of a newspaper is to understand the popular feeling and give
expression to it, another is to arouse among the people certain desirable sentiments,
and the third is the fearlessness to expose popular defects.” – Mahatma Gandhi

Communication is the procedure, which we use to exchange information by various
methods and media is the medium or instrument of storing or communicating
information. ‘Media’ the popular term inter-alia used as ‘Press’ denotes the print &
electronic information carriers –the News Papers & Magazines, Radio, Television and
currently includes Internet as new Media. Hailed as the ‘Fourth Estate’, media is the
watchdog of the public affairs, informing the society and vice versa, acts as the forum
to advocate the views of the society at large to those at the helm of public affairs.

The word medium comes from the Latin word medius (middle). The word
communication is derived from the Latin root communicate.

Media law covers an area of law which involves media of all types (TV, film, music,
publishing,   advertising,   internet    &   new   media,   etc.),   and   stretches   over
various legal fields, including but not limited to corporate, finance, intellectual
property, publicity and privacy.

Media law is a legal field that refers to the following:

   •   Advertising

   •   Broadcasting

   •   Censorship

   •   Confidentiality

   •   Contempt

   •   Copyright


                                                                                          3
•   Corporate law

•   Defamation

•   Entertainment

•   Freedom of information

•   Internet

•   Information technology

•   Privacy

•   Telecommunications




                             4
                                   2. MEDIA INDUSTRY

According to a recent news, Indian Media & Entertainment Industry is to touch
Rs.1,457 billion by 2016.

In 2011, the Indian Media & Entertainment (M&E) Industry registered a growth of 12
percent over 2010, to reach INR 728 billon. The growth trajectory is backed by strong
consumption in Tier 2 and 3 cities, continued growth of regional media, and fast
increasing new media business. Overall, the industry is expected to register a CAGR of
15% to touch INR 1,457 billion by 2016.

While television continues to be the dominant medium, sectors such as animation &
VFX, digital advertising, and gaming are fast increasing their share in the overall pie.
Radio is expected to display a healthy growth rate after the advent of Phase 3. Print,
while witnessing a decline in growth rate, will continue to be the second largest
medium in the Indian M&E industry. Also, the film industry had a reason to cheer,
with multiple movies crossing the INR 100 crore mark in domestic theatrical
collections, and INR 30 crore mark in C&S rights.

Advertising spends across all media accounted for INR 300 billion in 2011, contributing
to 41 percent of the overall M&E industry’s revenues. Advertising revenues witnessed
a growth of 13 percent in 2011, as against 17 percent observed in 2010.

In terms of performance, 2011 proved to be a year with mixed results in terms of
growth across different sub sectors. The traditional media businesses experienced a
slow down compared to last year, especially in the second half of the year. However,
the new media segments like Animation and VFX, Online and Gaming businesses
witnessed phenomenal growth rates.

The media industry in 2011 in a nutshell –

   •   Print: The print industry grew by 8.3 percent from INR 193 billion in 2010 to
       INR 209 billion in 2011. The growth was slightly lower than the expectation of


                                                                                      5
    9.5 percent last year due to the challenging macroeconomic environment and
    reduced advertising spends.

•   Television: The over-all television industry is estimated to be INR 329 billion
    in 2011, and is expected to grow at a CAGR of 17 percent over 2011-16, to
    reach INR 735 billion in 2016. The share of subscription to the total industry
    revenue is expected to increase from 65 percent in 2011 to 69 percent in 2016.
    The TV industry continues to have headroom for further growth as television
    penetration in India is still at approximately 60% of total households.

•   Films: With several high budget Hindi releases lined up across the year, 2012 is
    expected to sustain the growth momentum witnessed in 2011. The Indian film
    industry is projected to grow at a CAGR of 10.1 percent to touch INR 150 Billion
    in 2016. The industry is estimated to be INR 93 billion in 2011 indicating a
    growth of 11.5 percent vis-à-vis 2010.

•   Music: While 2010 was the year of structural shift from physical formats to
    digital ones, 2011 provided users’ viable options of music consumption through
    different digital platforms. The Indian music industry achieved revenues of INR
    9 billion in 2011, registering a growth of 5% over 2010.

•   Radio: Overall the industry grew at 15 percent in CY 2011 to reach INR 11.5
    billion compared to INR 10 billion in CY 2010.

•   New Media: Digital advertising is expected to grow at a CAGR of 30% from
    2011-16; digital ads spend reached approximately 4 percent of total M&E
    industry advertising revenue in 2011. Growth is largely driven by increase in
    internet penetration and proliferation of new age devices.

•   Animation & VFX: Animation, VFX (visual effects) and Post Production industry
    achieved estimated revenues of INR 31 billion in 2011, a robust growth of 31
    percent over 2010. Growth was achieved on the back of increased contract
    work, higher VFX content in movies, 2D/3D conversion projects.

                                                                                   6
                          3. HISTORY OF MEDIA LAWS IN INDIA

When Europeans write on the history of the media, they refer to the Acta diurna of
the Roman Empire as closely akin to the newspaper of today. In India the Rock Edicts
of Emperor Ashok (c.273-236 BC) engraved on the rocks contain in abundance
measures adopted and regulations issued by him. This is not very different from the
news content of modern media. In that era when Ashok, the Great, used this
technology for communicating his message throughout his vast empire, there is no
reference to restrictions on communication imposed by law. However, the
Arthashastra written originally in the reign of Chandragupta Maurya (c. 324-300 BC) by
Kautilya mentions punishment for spreading false rumours. The Arthashastra and the
Rock Edicts also speak of spies and reporters.

Akhbar is the word used for newspapers today in Hindi and Urdu languages and Babur
mentions it in such a way as if it is something routine. It was meant to communicate
an official announcement by Babur that a tax would be waived on all Muslims if he
won the battle and he himself had given up drinking and banned liquor in his
dominions. However, there is no reference to any regulation on akhbar. The earliest
mention of pre-typographic newspapers is to be found in a contemporary historical
work (Muntakhals-ul-Lubab by Khafi Khan) of the later Mughul times. Colonel James
Tod (1782-1835) sent hundreds of original manuscript newspapers of the court of
Aurangzeb, sixth of the Great Mughuls to the Royal Asiatic Society in London. The size
of these seventeenth-century papers, written in different hands, was 8 inches by 4½
inches. These were considerably free and could report even personal affairs of the
emperor. There is no record of any law governing these newspapers. Perhaps, there
was neither pre-censorship nor licensing, both being Western institutions.

It was sheer accident, however, that brought printing press to India on 6th September
1556. Granting a request from Emperor of Abyssinia, the King of Portugal dispatched
in 1556 a printing press and technicians via the Cape route. But the patriarch
accompanying the press halted en route at Goa from where his onward journey to
Abyssinia was first delayed and later abandoned. He died on 22nd December 1562. The
                                                                                    7
press, intended for missionary work in Abyssinia never left Goa, instead, it printed
literature for Abyssinia from Goa.

However, there was no press regulation until the British East India Company started
ruling a part of India after the Battle of Plassey in 1757. William Bolts, an ex-
employee of the British East India Company attempted to start the first newspaper in
India in 1766 but was deported. Later a collection of papers on the affairs of India
“particularly respecting the state of Bengal and its dependencies” was published in
1773 by J. Almon, London as “Considerations on Indian Affairs” in two volumes with
maps and survey reports. In this publication he has been identified as former Judge of
the Mayor’s Court of Calcutta.

When newspapers in India were published by only Europeans expulsion of the editor
(printer) was ultimate penalty. The Supreme Court of Judicature upheld this power.
Every foreigner was required to obtain a licence for his residence in the territories of
the Company and if any one incurred the displeasure of the officials by writing or
publishing something which was not palatable to them, the licence was cancelled. It
appears that growing importance of the Fourth Estate in England and the desire of
missionaries to start newspapers in India ultimately led to abolition of pre-censorship
in 1818 by Lord Hastings as missionaries of Serampore started the first Indian language
journal Samachar Darpan on 23rd May 1818. It became bilingual carrying news in
Bengali and English in parallel columns in 1829.

Like censorship, licensing was also a European institution to control the press. It was
introduced in Bengal in 1823 through Adam’s regulations. The East India Company also
issued instruction that no servant of the company should have any connection with a
newspaper. This decision was the result of an incident in Bombay (now Mumbai)
where a member of the Council of the Governor owned a newspaper. Licensing
regulations were replaced by Metcalfe’ Act which was applicable to entire territory of
the East India Company and required that the printer and publisher of every
newspaper declare the location of the premises of its publication.


                                                                                      8
Licensing was, however, reintroduced in 1857 by Lord Canning and was applied to all
kinds of publications. This was the year when Indians fought their war of
independence against the East India Company after which the British Crown took over
the territories of the Company. In 1860 Indian Penal Code was passed as a general law
but laid down offences which any writer, editor or publisher must avoid - the offences
of defamation and obscenity.

The next important event in the field of media laws was the enactment of the Press
and Registration of Books Act (25 of 1867). This Act is still in force, of course with
amendments from time to time. The object of this Act was to provide for the
regulation of the printing presses and of periodical containing news, for the
preservation of copies of books and for the registration of books. It contains rules for
the registration of books. It contains rules for the making of declaration by the
keepers of presses and publishers of newspapers (part II); rules regulations for the
delivery of books (Part III); penalties (Part IV); registration of book (Part V). Part VI of
this Act gave powers to the government to make rules and to exempt books or
newspapers from the provisions of this Act. The Act 55 of 1955 added Part VA to
provide for appointment of Registrar of Newspapers.

The role of the press during the Wahabi Conspiracy of 1869-70 led to the amendment
of the Indian Penal Code (27 of 1870) to incorporate a section on sedition (124-A).
This dealt with a person who “excites or attempts to excite feeling of disaffection to
the government established by law in British India.” It came handy to send many
freedom fighters to jail for their writings in newspapers. Shortly afterwards, the
restrictions imposed by the East India Company prior to 1841 returned to the
government officers, though in a milder tone. In 1875, the government passed orders
that no officer in the service of the government should be permitted without previous
sanction to become the proprietor of any periodical or to edit or manage a periodical.
Officers were advised to remain within the limits of ‘temperate and reasonable’
discussion. No document or information should be revealed to the press, which they
might come to posses in their official capacity. In cases where doubts, may arise as to

                                                                                          9
whether any engagements of officers with the press were consistent with the
discharge of their duties to the government, the decision to that effect would lie with
the government.

For the purpose of ascertaining the character of any intended public dramatic
performance the Dramatic Performances Act (19 of 1876) was passed as it was
suspected that such performances may provoke people against the Government.

When the Indian language press became very bold the Vernacular Press Act 1878 was
introduced. It was comprehensive and rigorous, aimed at “better control” of the
language press. It empowered any magistrate of a district or a commissioner of police
in a presidency town to call upon the printer and publisher of a newspaper to enter
into a bond undertaking not to publish certain kind of material, to demand security,
and to forfeit, if it was thought fit, such presses and confiscate any printed matter as
it deemed objectionable. No printer or publisher against whom such action had been
taken could have recourse to a court of law. It was particularly meant to crush Amrit
Bazar Patrika, which was bilingual before this Act. But the smart owner foiled this
attempt by turning it into an English language paper overnight. The main role in
persuading Lord Lytton for the Vernacular Press Act was played by Sir Ashley Eden
(1831-1887), the then Lieutenant Governor of Bengal. He was in a fit to crush the
Amrita Bazar Patrika. Sir Ashley called the editor of the Amrita Bazar Patrika, Babu
Shishir Kumar, and offered: “Let us three, I, you and Kristo Das, govern the province.
Kriso Das has agreed to conduct his paper according to my direction... You will have
to do the same thing. I shall contribute to your paper as I do to the Hindoo Patriot.
And when you write an article criticizing the government you will have to submit the
manuscript to me before publication. In return the government will subscribe to a
considerable number of your paper and I shall consult you as I consult Kristo Das in
carrying on the administration of province.” Babu Shishir Kumar thanked him and
quietly remarked, “Your Honor, there ought to be at least one honest journalist in the
land”. Sir Ashley himself remarked, “If there had been only one week’s delay on the
part of the proprietors to convert the Patrika into English we would have dealt a

                                                                                     10
deadly blow at it by demanding a heavy bail-bond from them.” When Gladstone who
had criticized the Vernacular Press Act, became the prime minister and Lord Ripon
the governor-general, and even before the retirement of Sir Ashley Eden the repeal of
Vernacular Press Act had become a foregone conclusion. The repealing bill was passed
without discussion, on December 7, 1881.

In India telegraph was introduced in 1851 and was very useful to East India Company
during 1857. However, the Indian Telegraph Act was passed in 1885. The Government
had exclusive privilege under this Act in respect of telegraph and power to grant
licenses. The definition of telegraph in this Act is very wide as it later covered all
other means of communication depending on electromagnetic waves, thus including
teleprinter, telephone, fax, radio and television. It provides for interception of
messages and takeover of licensed establishments by the Government in any public
emergency or in the interest of public safety.

Section 19 of the Sea Customs Act 1878 gave power to the central government of
prohibit or restrict the importation or exportation of goods into or out of India.
Section 5 of the Telegraph Act 1885 gave power to the central government or
provincial governments of an official specially authorized by the government to take
possession of licensed telegraphs and to order interception of telegraphic messages
which include as per section 3(1) of the Act telephone messages also. Section 25 of
the Indian Post Office Act 1898 confers power on an officer of the post office to
intercept during transmission by post goods which have been notified under section 19
of the Sea Customs Act or the import or export of which is otherwise prohibited.
Section 26 of the Post Office Act provides power of interception of postal articles on
the same lines as section 5 of the Telegraph Act. Thus by the turn of the century the
government had wide ranging powers to intercept anything anywhere along all the
possible channels.

With Swadeshi Movement and partition of Bengal the opposition of the Government
reached its zenith, both in the press and the public. In June 1908 the government
passed the Newspaper (Incitement to Offences) Act, which gave power to local
                                                                                   11
authorities to take judicial action against the editor of any newspaper, which indulges
in writings calculated to incite rebellion. Nine prosecutions were instituted under this
Act and as a result seven presses were confiscated. Then came the Press Act of 1910,
which empowered the government to demand security from any newspaper, a
provision similar to what existed in the Vernacular Press Act.

British Parliament passed the Copyright Act in 1911. Similar provisions came to India
by Indian Copyright Act, 1914 (3 of 1914). It was replaced by a comprehensive
legislation only in 1957 by the new Copyright Act (14 of 1957).

In 1918 Government passed the Cinematograph Act (2 of 1918), which was replaced by
the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952).

In 1921, the government appointed a committee, with Sir Tej B Bahadur Sapru (1875-
1949) as chairman, to look into the then existing press laws. The committee
unanimously recommended the repeal of the Newspaper (Incitement of Offences) Act
1908 and the India Press Act 1910. In regard to the Press and Registration of Books
Act, the committee recommended that the name of the editor should be inscribed on
every issue of the newspaper and the editor should be subjected to the same
liabilities as the printer and publisher as regards criminal and civic responsibility, that
a person registering under this Act should be a major, that the term of imprisonment
in part IV of the Act should be reduced from two years to six months, and that
provision should be made for delivery to government of copies of newspapers printed
in British India. The committee advocated the retention of powers to seize and
confiscated seditious leaflets and literature. It recommended that the ancillary
powers of preventing importation and postal transmission of such literature should be
retained. The requisite amendments were carried out by the Press Law (Repeal and
Amendment) Act of 1922 (14 of 1922).

In 1922, on the request of the Chamber of Princes, the Princes Protection Bill was
introduced in the Legislative Assembly. The Assembly rejected the bill. But the
Governor-General, invoking treaty obligations and exercising his special powers under

                                                                                        12
section 67B of the Government of India Act 1919, certified the Bill which became the
Indian States (Proection against Disaffection) Act 1922. This Act provided punishment
of imprisonment up to 5 years for any person editing, printing or publishing any
document which brings into hatred or contempt or excites disaffection towards any
prince or chief of a state in India, or the government or administration established in
any such state. For material of this nature, the powers of forfeiture under sections
99-A to 99-C of the Criminal Procedure Code and of postal interception under sections
27-B to 27-D of the Indian Post Offices Act were made applicable.

In 1923 the Official Secrets Act was passed in order to update and consolidate the
existing provisions of Indian Official Secrets Act of 1889, along the lines of the British
Acts of 1911 and 1920. The earlier Act was repealed. Section 5 of this Act, which
affects the Press deals with “official secrets” and relates to “wrongful communication
of information.”

To meet the situation posed by the civil disobedience movement of 1930, the
government promulgated the Indian Press Ordinance to provide for “better control of
the press”. This revived the stringent provisions of the repealed Press Act of 1910.
Some 130 newspapers had to deposit securities, nine refused to do so and suspended
publications. In 1931, the Indian Press (Emergency Powers) Act was passed.

In 1932 the Foreign Relations Act was passed with the object of providing against the
publication of statements likely to prejudice the maintenance of friendly relations
between the British government and the governments of certain foreign states. The
powers of forfeiture under sections 99A-99G of the Criminal Procedure Code and the
postal interception under sections 27B-27D of the Indian Post Offices Act were
extended by section 3 of this Act to documents containing matter defamatory of such
ruler or his consort of son or principal minister of a state outside but adjoining India.

Indian States (Protection) Act was passed in 1934 to protect the administrations of
states in India, which were under the suzerainty of the British crown from activities,
which tended to subvert or excite disaffection towards or to obstruct such

                                                                                        13
administration. Section 3 of this Act extended to Press Emergency Act Powers 1931 to
protect these states.

Before Independence, the Interim Government appointed the Press Laws Enquiry
Committee in March 1947 to examine the press laws. The Committee gave its report
on 22 May 1948 after Independence and partition of India. After the report of this
committee the Act of 1931 was replaced by Press (Objectionable Matter) Act 1951.
However, the mood was so much for freedom of press that it was allowed to lapse in
February 1956 and was repealed in 1957. The Indian Constitution gives every citizen
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression and the courts have
interpreted that it includes freedom of the press.

Major setback to the freedom of press in India was when Emergency was imposed in
June 1975 and censorship was introduced. However, after the defeat of the then
ruling party in 1977 General Elections it has not been possible for anybody to follow
the example. Press Council advised the Government not to put curbs on the press
even in disturbed areas like Jammu and Kashmir. This policy appears to be better
than the curbs on the press by Government.

Liberal ethos reinforced after 1977 has affected broadcasting as well. While demand
for autonomous corporation to control All India Radio and Doordarshan was accepted
and finally Prasar Bharti, an autonomous corporation came into existence from 15
September 1997 after the notification of the Prasar Bharti Act. It has not been
possible to come up with a regulator for broadcasting content despite several bills
that came to Parliament over the years and private satellite and cable channels are
having a field day enjoying more freedom than in any other part of the world.

Though the Government has not allowed news on private radio outfits yet, freedom of
print and television channels make India one of the most liberal countries in the world
as far as the freedom of media goes. Right to Information Act 2005 has been
implemented and this has further extended freedom of media in India.



                                                                                    14
                        4. MEDIA LAWS OF INDIA – AN OVERVIEW

There are many laws that regulate the performance of media in India. Laws related to
the mass media have been there since the very beginning. In the time of the British
Raj, many laws related to the Press were enacted. In the post-Independence time,
the various Governments have enacted many more media related laws.

Media being a very powerful influence on the society is regulated and controlled by
various legislations enacted from time to time.

Constitutional Provisions

The Indian Constitution does not provide freedom for media separately. But there is
an indirect provision for media freedom. It gets derived from Article 19(1) (a). This
Article guarantees freedom of speech and expression. The freedom of mass media is
derived indirectly from this Article. Article 19 of our Constitution deals with the right
to freedom and it enumerates certain rights regarding individual freedom of speech
and expression etc. These provisions are important and vital, which lie at the very
root of liberty.

Article 19 of the Indian constitution lays down -

"All citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, to assemble
peaceably, and without arms, to form associations or unions, to move freely
throughout the territory of India, to reside in any part of the territory of India, to
acquire hold and dispose of property and to practice any profession or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business.

However the right to freedom of speech and expression shall not affect the operation
of any existing law or prevent the state from making any law insofar as such law
imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of that right in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign states, public decency or morality or In relation to contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to offence”.
                                                                                      15
List of Acts and Rules applicable to the media industry -

   1. The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867

   2. Registration of Newspapers (Central) Rules, 1956

   3. The Press and Registration Appellate Board (Practice and Procedure) Order,
      1961

   4. The Press Council Act, 1978

   5. The Press Council Rules, 1979

   6. The Press Council (Procedure for Nomination of Members) Rules, 1978

   7. The Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) (Amendment) Regulations, 2006

   8. The Press Council (Procedure for Conduct of Meetings and Business)
      Regulations, 1979

   9. The Press Council of India (Grant of Certified Copies) Regulations, 1999

   10. The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of
      Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955

   11. The Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions
      Rules, 1957

   12. The Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees Tribunal Rules, 1979

   13. The Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958

   14. The Newspaper (Prices and Pages) Act, 1956

   15. The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954

   16. The Right to Information Act, 2005

   17. The Right to Information (Regulation of Fee and Cost) Rules, 2005
                                                                                    16
18. The Central Information Commission (Appeal Procedure) Rules, 2005
19. The Central Information Commission (Management) Regulations, 2007
20. The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954
21. The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Rules, 1955
22. The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950
23. The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Rules, 1982
24. State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005
25. State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use) Rules, 2007
26. The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1977

27. The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956

28. The Punjab Special Powers (Press) Act, 1956 (Relevant Provisions)

29. Copyright Act, 1957

30. The Dramatic Performances Act, 1876 (Relevant Provisions)
31. The Cinematograph Act, 1952
32. The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983
33. The Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment)
   Act, 1981
34. The Cine-Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment)
   Rules, 1984
35. The Cine-Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981
36. The Cine-workers Welfare Cess Rules, 1984
37. The Cine-Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981
38. The Cine-Workers Welfare Fund Rules, 1984
39. The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India ) Act, 1990
40. The Sports Broadcasting Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act,
   2007
41. The Sports Broadcast Signals (Mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Rules,
   2007

                                                                              17
42. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995
43. The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994
44. The Radio, Television and Video Cassette Recorder Sets (Exemption from
   Licensing Requirements) Rules, 1997
45. The Standards of Quality of Service (Broadcasting and Cable services) (Cable
   Television – CAS Areas) Regulation, 2006
46. The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (Relevant Provisions)
47. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
48. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Miscellaneous) Rules, 1999
49. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Period for Filing of Application to
   Authority) Rules, 1999
50. The Telecommunication Interconnection (Port Charges) Regulation, 2001
51. The TRAI (Levy of Fees and Other Charges for Tariff Plans) Regulations, 2002
52. The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (Form, Verification
   and the Fee for Filing an Appeal) Rules, 2003
53. The Telecommunication Interconnection (Charges and Revenue Sharing)
   Regulation, 2001
54. The Telecommunication Interconnection Usage Charges Regulation, 2003
55. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Salaries, Allowances and Other
   Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Whole-time Members) Rules, 2000
56. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Procedure for Conducting Inquiry
   Against a Member) Rules, 1999
57. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Annual Report and Returns) Rules,
   1999
58. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Form of Annual Statement of
   Accounts and Records) Rules, 1999
59. The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Services) Interconnection
   Regulations, 2004
60. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Access to Information) Regulations,
   2005

                                                                                   18
61. The Common Charter of Telecom Services, 2005
62. The Regulation on Quality of Service of Basic and Cellular Mobile Telephone
   Services, 2005
63. Quality of Service (Code of Practice for Metering and Billing Accuracy)
   Regulation, 2006
64. The Standards of Quality of Service (Broadcasting and Cable Services) (Cable
   Television – CAS Areas) Regulation, 2006
65. The Quality of Service of Broadband Service Regulations, 2006
66. The Telecom Consumers Protection and Redressal of Grievances Regulations,
   2007
67. The Telecom Unsolicited Commercial Communications Regulations, 2007
68. The International Telecommunication Access to Essential Facilities at Cable
   Landing Stations Regulations, 2007
69. The Telecommunication Consumers Education and Protection Fund Regulations,
   2007
70. The Direct to Home Broadcasting Services (Standards of Quality of Service and
   Redressal of Grievances) Regulations, 2007
71. Domestic Leased Circuits Regulations, 2007
72. The Register of Interconnect Agreements Regulations, 1999
73. The Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (Relevant Provisions)
74. The Information Technology Act, 2000 (Relevant Provisions)
75. The Information Technology (Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000




                                                                              19
                           5. LAWS APPLICABLE FOR INFORMATION

The list of legislations applicable for Information –

   i.     Press & Registration of Books Act 1867

  ii.     Delivery of Books 'and Newspapers' (Public Libraries) Act, 1954

 iii.     Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Rules, 1955

 iv.      Registration of Newspapers (Central) Rules 1956

  v.      The Newspaper (Prices and Pages) Act, 1956

 vi.      The Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956

vii.      The Press and Registration Appellate Board (Practice and Procedure) Order,
          1961

viii.     The Parliamentary Proceedings (Protection of Publication) Act, 1977

 ix.      Press Council Act, 1978

  x.      The Press Council (Procedure for Nomination of Members) Rules, 1978

 xi.      The Press Council Rules, 1979

xii.      The Press Council (Procedure for Conduct of Meetings and Business)
          Regulations, 1979
xiii.     The Press Council of India (Grant of Certified Copies) Regulations, 1999
xiv.      Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) (Amendment) Regulations, 2006

The following guidelines and policies are applicable for Information –

       1) Central Newsmedia Acredition Guidelines, 1999

       2) Guidelines for publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing with
          news and current affairs

                                                                                      20
   3) Guidelines for syndication arrangements by newspapers

   4) Advertisement Policy

   5) Electronic Media Advertisement Policy

   6) Guidelines for Empanelment of Audio-Video Producers with DAVP

   7) Policy guidelines for empanelment of private C&S TV Channels for government
      advertisements by DAVP and Other duly authorised agencies of the ministry of
      I&B

   8) Citizens Charter of Registrar of Newspapers for India

   9) Guidelines for foreign investment in Indian entities publishing Scientific
      /Technical /Specialty Magazines/Journals/Periodicals

   10) Guidelines for foreign investment in print media news sector/facsimile
      editions.

   11) The Press Council of India's Norms of Journalistic Conduct




Press & Registration of Books Act, 1867 & The Registration of Newspapers
(Central) Rules 1956

The earliest surviving enactment specifically directed towards the press was passed in
1867, the Press and Registration of Books Act (PRB Act) (XXV of 1867). The objective
was however not to establish governmental control over the freedom of the Press. It
was a regulatory law which enabled Government to regulate printing presses and
newspapers by a system of registration and to preserve copies of books and other
matter printed in India. A number of minor amendments were made in the Act from
time to time to make the Sections/Clauses compatible with the changing situation,
more particularly after Independence. But major amendments were carried out in

                                                                                   21
1955 following the recommendations of the First Press Commission in 1953,
consequent upon which the Office of the Registrar of Newspapers of India (RNI) was
created and started functioning in 1956.

Printing and publishing of newspapers and periodicals within India are governed by
the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 and the Registration of Newspapers
(Central) Rules, 1956.

Section 3 of the Act requires every book or paper printed within India to have the
name of the printer and the place of printing, the name of the publisher and the
place of publishing printed legibly on it.

Section 4 of the Act stipulates that the keeper of the printing press (someone who
possesses a press that prints newspapers/books) has to make and subscribe a
declaration before the District, Presidency or sub-divisional Magistrate within whose
local jurisdiction the press is situated. A new declaration is to be made when the
place where a press is kept is changed. The Declaration is to be made in Form I as
given in the Schedule to the Registration of Newspapers (Central) Rules, 1956.

Before making the declaration, Title Verification Letter should be obtained from the
Press Registrar.

No new declaration is necessary when:-

1) The change is for a period not exceeding 60 days

2) The place where the press is kept after change is within the local jurisdiction of
the Magistrate.

Section 5 lays down the following rules for newspapers published in India:-

   1) Every copy must have the names of the publisher and the editor along with the
      date of publication printed clearly on it.




                                                                                  22
2) The printer and the publisher of the newspaper must appear in person or by an
   authorised agent before a District, Presidency or Sub-divisional Magistrate
   within whose local jurisdiction the newspaper is published to make a
   declaration.

3) The declaration must specify the title, the language and the periodicity of the
   newspaper.

4) If the printer or the publisher is not the owner of the publication then the
   declaration must specify the name of the owner and an authority in writing
   from the owner authorising the printer/publisher to make the declaration.

5) A new declaration must be made if the title, periodicity or language of the
   newspaper changes.

6) A new declaration is also to be made when the owner of the newspaper or the
   place of printing/publishing is changed.

7) When a printer/publisher concerned with the declaration leaves India or is
   incapable of rendering his/her duties for more than 90 days, a new declaration
   is to be made.

8) A declaration is considered void when the newspaper does not commence
   publication –

      a. Within 6 weeks of the authentication of the declaration for a weekly (or
         more often published newspaper)

      b. Within 3 months of authentication for any other newspaper

9) A declaration ceases to have effect when a daily, tri-weekly, bi-weekly weekly
   or fortnightly publishes half the number of issues it is supposed to in a period
   of 3 months; the same happens for any other newspaper if it has ceased
   publication for more than 12 months


                                                                                23
Section 6 of the Act requires two originals of the declaration to be authenticated by
the Magistrate. Any person who wishes to see the declaration can do so by obtaining a
copy of the declaration (attested by the Seal of Court) from the officer in-charge. One
of the said originals should be deposited among the records of the office of the
Magistrate, and the other deposited among the records of the High Court of
Judicature, or other principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction for the place where
the said declaration should have been made.

According to Section 7, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, the copy of the
above mentioned declaration can be held as sufficient evidence against the person
whose name is subscribed to it.

Section 8 requires a new declaration by persons who have previously signed a
declaration and have ceased to printers or publishers. It is also to be authenticated by
a magistrate. The latter declaration will be held as evidence (as in Section 7) over a
former declaration in legal proceedings.

Under Section 8A of the Act, if a person’s name is published incorrectly as the editor
he may make a declaration that says so within two weeks of him/her realizing that
his/her name is published. The person must appear before the District, Presidency or
sub-divisional Magistrate, and if the magistrate is satisfied that the declaration is true
on making an enquiry he/she shall certify accordingly.

Section 8B provides for the cancellation of the declaration if the Magistrate is of the
opinion that any declaration made in respect of a newspaper should be cancelled; an
opportunity must be given to the concerned person to show cause against the action
taken.

A cancellation is ordered under the following circumstances:

1) The newspaper is published in contravention of the Act.

2) The newspaper has the same/ similar title to another newspaper of the same
language or in the same state.
                                                                                       24
3) The printer or publisher has ceased to be so.

4) The declaration was made on false representation or on the concealment of any
material.
It is possible to appeal against the order of the Magistrate. The aggrieved person must
appeal to the Press and Registration Appellate Board within sixty days of the
cancellation of the declaration.

Section 9 of the Act is about the delivery of books. Printed copies of the whole book
along with the maps, prints and other engravings belonging to the book must be
delivered by the printer for free of expense to the Government.

a) Every book must be delivered to the State Government within one calendar month
after the book is delivered out of the press.

b) The State Government can require from the printer not more than two copies one
calendar year.

Under Section 11, the State Government should transmit the copy of the book
mentioned in Section 9 Clause (b) to the Central Government. Section 11A requires
the publisher of every newspaper in India to deliver one copy of every issue to the
Press Registrar as soon as it published.

Section 18 of the Act requires the maintenance of a catalogue of all books delivered
to the Government called the Memoranda of Books. It is to be maintained by an
officer the State Government appoints. The memoranda should contain the following
particulars:-


1) The title of the book, the contents of the title page (with the translation of the
title and contents in English if it is any other language).

2) The language in which it is written.

3) Name of the author, translator and editor.

                                                                                    25
4) The subject.

5) Place of printing and place of publishing.

6) Name of the firm of the printer and publisher.

7) Date of issue from the press.

8) Number of sheets/leaves/pages.

9) The size.

10) The edition.

11) The Price.

12) The number of copies of an edition.

13) Whether printed/cyclostyled or lithographed.

14) The name and residence of the proprietor of the copyright or of any portion of
such copyright.

Section 19A provides for the appointment of the Registrar of Newspapers i.e. the
Press Registrar and other officers by the Central Government.

The Press Registrar should maintain a register of newspapers that will contain the
following particulars of all newspapers:-

1) The title

2) The language

3) The periodicity of publication

4) Names of the editors, publisher and printer

5) Average number of pages per week

6) Number of days of publication in a year
                                                                                26
7) Retail selling price per copy

8) Average number of copies printed, sold to the public and distributed for free

9) Name and address of the owner

Section 19D prescribes the duty of the publisher of every newspaper to furnish to the
Press Registrar, an annual statement in Form II containing the above mentioned
particulars in respect of the newspaper. Penalty for failure to furnish annual
statement is fine upto five hundred rupees. Section 14 of the Act also provides that
any publisher making false statement on conviction before a Magistrate, may be
punished by fine up to Rs. 2000/- and imprisonment for a term, which may extend to
six months.

The Press Registrar should prepare an Annual Report containing a summary of the
information obtained by him during the previous year in respect of the newspapers in
India and give an account of the working of such newspapers and a copy of the report
should be forwarded to the Central Government.


Procedure for registration of newspaper
After publication of the first issue of the newspaper as provided under Section 5(5) of
the Press and Registration of Books Act, the Registrar of Newspapers (RNI) must be
requested to issue a certificate of registration to the newspaper. The check
list/guidelines for registration of newspapers/periodicals are as under:-

     1. Documents required:

              a. Photocopy of title verification letter issued by RNI.

              b. Attested copy of Declaration authenticated by the DM/ADM/DCP
                 /CMM/SDM as prescribed in form-I.

              c. First issue indicating Volume - I and Issue-I.

                                                                                    27
            d. An affidavit from the publisher for "No Foreign Tie-up" in the
                prescribed form

     2. Separate declaration should be filed in case the printer and publisher are
        different or the place of publication and place of printing come under the
        jurisdiction of two different magistrates.

     3. The first issue should indicate Volume-I and Issue-I, date line, page number
        and the title in full prominently on the cover.

     4. The publication should be brought out within six weeks (in case of
        daily/weekly) and three months (in case of other periodicity) from the date
        of authentication of Declaration.

     5. The imprint line should contain the name of the Publisher, Printer, Owner,
        Printing press with complete address, Place of publication with complete
        address and the name of the editor.

 If the documents are found to be complete in all respects and the publication is in
 order, the Press Registrar will enter the particulars of the newspaper in the register
 maintained by him and issue a Certificate of Registration to the publisher.

 RNI does not accept incomplete applications for registration or issuing of revised
 registration certificate.     All pending applications for registration or revised
 registration will be processed only when all the complete and correct documents are
 submitted.

Check List for the required documents:-

For the Certificate of Registration:

a) Copy of title verification letter


                                                                                    28
b) Attested copy of the declaration duly filled in and authenticated by the District
Magistrate /Addl. District Magistrate etc.

c) Affidavit for 'No foreign tie up' duly filled in and notarized.

d) First Issue of publication brought out within 42 days in case of dailies and weeklies
and 90 days for fortnightly and above.

e) Copy of the latest issue of the publication.

For Revised certificate of registration:

Following documents are required on the basis of which Revised Registration
Certificate is issued:

a) Original Certificate of Registration issued by the O/o Registrar of Newspapers for
India and in case it is lost, he/she is required to submit the affidavit for loss of
certificate duly filled in and notarized along with the IPO of Rs.5/-.

b) Attested copy of the latest declaration, duly filled in and authenticated by DM/ADM
concerned.

c) Affidavit for No foreign tie up, duly filled in and notarized.

d) Latest issue of the publication.

 Fresh/Revised Certificates -

 A fresh declaration is to be made in the case of any change in (a) title (b) language
 (c) periodicity (d) ownership (e) place of publication (f) place of printing (g)
 publisher and (h) printer. It will be necessary to apply to the Press Registrar for a
 revised certificate of registration. A revised certificate will not be necessary if the
 fresh declaration has been made under other circumstances.


                                                                                     29
 The documents required are given below:

 (a)    An attested photocopy of the fresh declaration duly authenticated by the
        magistrate concerned etc. indicating the change(s).

 (b)    A copy of the latest issue of the publication with correct imprint line, title
        and date line printed on each page of the publication.

 (c)    Original Certificate of registration issued by the office of RNI.

 (d)    If Original Certificate of Registration is lost, damaged, stolen etc., an
        affidavit duty signed by a magistrate, with a five rupee Indian Postal Order in
        favour of RNI has to be furnished.

 (e)    In case of change of ownership, attested photocopy of the transfer deed in
        respect of ownership, duly authenticated by the magistrate concerned, is also
        to be submitted.

 (f)     In case of change of title/language, a copy of the title verification letter is
        to be submitted.

 (g)     An affidavit for no foreign tie-up.

Duplicate Certificates

When the original certificate of registration is lost, damaged, or stolen, and if none of
the circumstances requiring a fresh declaration as noted above exist, an application
may be submitted to the Press Registrar for issue of a duplicate certificate of
registration with full details given on a separate sheet of paper. Please note that if
the certificate has been lost or stolen, adequate documentary proof of having
reported the matter to the concerned police authorities, such as a copy of the FIR or
a copy of the complaint bearing their stamp/seal, would be necessary. The
documents required are as under:

                                                                                      30
         (a)     An affidavit to this effect duly authenticated by Notary or the
         Magistrate concerned under his signature and office seal.

         (b) Attested photocopy of the latest declaration authenticated by the
               magistrate concerned.

         (c)    A copy of the latest issue of the publication with correct imprint line.

         (d) An Indian Postal Order of Rs.5/- in favour of RNI.

         (e)     An affidavit for "No Foreign Tie Up"



Duties of a Publisher

   a) According to the Registration of Newspaper (central) Rules, 1956, within 48
      hours of the publication of a newspaper, one copy of the issue is to be sent to
      the Press Registrar, either by post or by a messenger. In the case of multi-
      edition newspapers published under the same declaration, one copy of each
      edition is required to be sent if the retail selling price or the number of pages
      in an edition is different from another edition.
   b) Every publisher should furnish to the Press Registrar an annual statement
      regarding the newspaper. The statement is to be in the format given as in
      Form II in the Schedule to the Registration of Newspapers (Central) Rules,
      1956. The statement will be on financial year basis, and it should reach the
      Press Registrar on or before the last day of May of the following year. Where
      the circulation of newspaper exceeds 2000 copies per publishing day, a
      certificate from a chartered accountant or a qualified auditor as given below
      Part B of the prescribed format is to be furnished along with the annual
      statement.
   c) Every year, in the first issue after the last day of February, a statement
      regarding the ownership and other details of the newspaper should be

                                                                                       31
      published, in the format given as Form IV in the Schedule to the Registration of
      Newspapers (Central) Rules, 1956.
   d) In the event a person ceases to be the printer or a publisher of the newspaper,
      he/she should appear before any Magistrate (District, Presidency, or Sub-
      Divisional) and make a declaration. The Magistrate will authenticate the
      declaration and an attested copy of the same is to be forwarded to Press
      Registrar by the printer/publisher.
   e) The publisher/owner of a newspaper should submit half-yearly returns for the
      period ending 30th September by 31st October of the same year and annual
      returns for the period ending 31st March by 30th April, indicating the quantity
      of imported newsprint purchased and consumed during the relevant
      periods. The half-yearly return is to be certified by the publisher/owner and
      the annual return is to be certified by a Chartered Accountant. Failure to
      submit the returns in time or submission of false information will disqualify the
      newspaper for authentication of Certificate of Registration for import of
      newsprint.

The Newspaper (Price and Page) Act, 1956

The Newspaper (Prices and Pages) Act, 1956 has been enacted to provide for the
regulation of the prices charged for newspapers in relation to their pages and of
matters connected therewith for the purpose of preventing unfair competition among
newspapers so that newspapers can have fuller opportunities of freedom of
expression. The Act empowers the central government to make orders providing for
the regulation of the prices charged for newspapers in relation to their maximum or
minimum number of pages, sizes or areas and for the space to be allotted for
advertising and other related matters for the purpose of preventing unfair
competition among newspapers so that newspapers generally and in particular,
newspapers with smaller resources and those published in Indian languages can have
fuller opportunities of freedom of expression. The Act also provides that the Central
Government should before making any order, consult associations of publishers and
                                                                                    32
such publishers likely to be affected by the order. The Act prohibits publication and
sale of newspapers in contravention of any order made under the provisions of this
Act.

The Press Council Act, 1978

The Press Council Act, 1978 was enacted to establish a Press council for the purpose
of preserving the freedom of the Press and for maintaining the standards of
newspaper and news agencies in India. The Act established the Press Council of India
which is a body corporate having perpetual succession, with effect from 1st March
1979. The Press Council of India is empowered to make observations in respect of
conduct of any authority including Government, if considered necessary for
performance of its functions under the Act. The Council can warn, admonish or
censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist or disapprove
the conduct of the editor or the journalist if it finds that a newspaper or a news
agency has not complied with the standards of journalistic ethics or public taste or
that an editor or a working journalist has committed any professional misconduct.

Complaints against the Press

It is open to any person to lodge a complaint with the Press Council against a
newspaper for a breach of the recognized ethical canons of journalistic propriety and
taste. The complainant need not necessarily be the person aggrieved or directly
involved. The alleged breach may be in the publication or non-publication of a news-
item or statement, or other material, like cartoons, pictures, photographs, strips or
advertisement which are published in a newspaper. Cases can also be initiated by any
member of the public against any professional misconduct by an editor, working
journalist, staff of a newspaper or engaged in freelance work. There can also be a
complaint against any matter transmitted by a news agency by any means
whatsoever. By virtue of the Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations, 1979,
complaint shall be lodged with the Council within the following periods:

             (i)    Dailies, News agencies and Weeklies - within 2 months
                                                                                    33
             (ii)    In all other cases - within 4 months
             Provided that a relevant publication of an earlier date may be
             referred to in the complaint
Write to the editor first
It is a requirement of the Inquiry Regulations that the complainant should
initially write to the editor of the newspaper drawing his attention to what the
complainant considers being a breach of journalistic ethics or an offence against
public taste. Such prior reference to the editor affords him an opportunity to
deal with the matter in the first instance and thus allows the respondent to take
such remedial action as he might consider appropriate before the complaint is
lodged with the Council. This rule is necessary because it acquaints the editor
with the identity of his accuser and the details of the complaint.          It is
conceivable that in some instance the complainant has been wrongly informed or
has misinterpreted the facts. In others, it may be a case of inadvertent error
which the editor is only too ready to admit and correct. If the would-be-
complainant is satisfied, that would be the end of the matter.
Where, after reference to the newspaper, the person desires to proceed with the
complaint, he should enclose with his complaint copies of correspondence with
the editor, if no reply has been received from the editor, the fact should be
mentioned in the complaint.
The complainant has, in his complaint, to give the name and address of the
newspaper, editor or journalist against whom the complaint is directed. A
clipping of the matter or news-items complained of, in original or self attested
copy (English translation, if the news item(s) is in vernacular) should accompany
the complaint. The complainant has to state in what manner the passage or
news-items or the material complained of is objectionable. He should also supply
other relevant particulars, if any.
In case of a complaint against non-publication of material the complainant will,
of course, say how that constitutes a breach of journalistic ethics.


                                                                                    34
The Council cannot deal with any matter which is sub-judice in the court of law.
The complainant has to declare that “to the best of his knowledge and belief he
has placed all the relevant facts before the Council and that no proceedings are
pending in any court of law in respect of any matter alleged in the complaint.” A
declaration that “ he shall notify the Council forthwith if during the pendency of
the inquiry before the Council any matter alleged in the complaint becomes the
subject matter of any proceedings in a court of law" is also necessary.


Complaints regarding oppression to Press freedom
A newspaper, a journalist or any institution or individual can complain against
Central or State Government or any organization or person for interference with
free functioning of the press or encroachment on the freedom of the press. Such
complaints should contain full particulars of the alleged infringement whereupon
the Council shall follow the procedure of inquiry set out herein above so far as
may be.
The opinion expressed by the Council serves two useful purposes, namely (i) that
any abuse of press freedom does not pass without anybody noticing it or raising a
finger of protest, and (ii) that the press should not in its own interest indulge in
scurrilous or other objectionable writings-writings such as have been considered
below the level of recognized standards of journalistic ethics by a fair minded
jury like the Council constituted of the press itself, for it would lead to the very
loss of the much prized freedom of the press.


Address of the respondent
It is a requirement of the Inquiry Regulations that the complainant should draw
the attention of the respondent(s)/authorities towards the grievances, state how
the action/inaction of the respondent authorities amounts to curtailment of the
freedom of the press, mention the possible reason for the action/inaction of the
respondent(s)/authorities duly supported by documentary evidence and furnish a
copy of the letter written to the respondent(s)/authorities.

                                                                                       35
In case the action of the respondent(s)/authorities is a reprisal measure for
writings in the newspaper, critical of the respondent(s), the cuttings of such
reports be furnished in original or as self attested copies (English translation, if
the news item(s) is in vernacular.
Furnish a copy of the reply, if any received from the respondent(s)/authorities,
provided that the Chairman may waive this requirement in his discretion.
By virtue of the Press Council(Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations, 1979,
limitation of time is four months from the      date of cause of action, provided
that the Chairman may condone the delay if he is satisfied that there exist
sufficient reasons for such condonation.
The Council cannot deal with any matter which is sub-judice in the court of law.
The complainant has to declare that “to the best of his knowledge and belief he
has placed all the relevant facts before the Council and that no proceedings are
pending in any court of law in respect of any matter alleged in the complaint.” A
declaration that “ he shall notify the Council forthwith if during the pendency of
the inquiry before the Council any matter alleged in the complaint becomes the
subject matter of any proceedings in a court of law" is also necessary.


Delivery of Books 'and Newspapers' (Public Libraries) Act, 1954
The Delivery of Books 'and Newspapers' (Public Libraries) Act, 1954 has been enacted
to regulate delivery of Books to the National Library, Calcutta, and other public
libraries. The Act provides that subject to any rules that may be made under the Act,
but without prejudice to the provisions contained in Section 9 of the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867, the publisher of every book published in the
territories to which this Act extends after the commencement of this Act should,
despite any agreement to the contrary, deliver at his own expense a copy of the book
to the National Library at Calcutta and one such copy to each of the other three
public libraries within thirty days from the date of its publication. Regarding the
delivery of newspapers to public libraries, the Act provides that subject to any rules
that may be made under this Act, but without prejudice to the provisions contained in

                                                                                       36
the Press and Registration of Books Act,1867, the publisher of every newspaper,
published in the territories to which this Act extends, should deliver at his own
expense one copy of each issue of such newspaper as soon as it is published, to each
such public library as may be notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the
Official Gazette.

Guidelines for publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing with
news and current affairs dated 4.12.2008

Publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines publishing news and comments on
public news i.e., periodicals falling in the news and current affairs category, by Indian
entity(ies), with or without foreign investment is allowed. Entities/publishers of such
editions would be eligible for attracting 26% foreign investment. The ceiling of total
Foreign Direct Investment {which includes foreign direct investments by Non-Resident
Indians (NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and portfolio investments by recognized
Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs), together} is up to 26%, as per the consolidated
FDI policy.
‘Magazine’ has been defined as ‘a periodical publication brought out on non-daily
basis containing public news or comments on public news’.
Eligibility
Any Indian entity, with or without foreign investment, will be permitted to publish an
Indian edition of a foreign magazine falling in the news and current affairs sector.
Entities/Publishers of such editions would be eligible for attracting 26% foreign
investment as per FDI Guidelines issued by this Ministry from time to time.
Verification of Title of the Publication and its Registration
The title of the magazine should be got verified and subsequently registered by the
Indian entities/publishers from the Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) under the
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 and as per the prescribed procedure.
Conditions
   •   The publisher/owner of the foreign magazine of which Indian edition is
       proposed to be published should have sound credentials.

                                                                                         37
•   Permission to publish such editions would be granted only to those
    entities/publishers which are registered as an Indian company with the
    Registrar of Companies under the provisions of the Indian Companies Act, 1956.
•   The Indian companies would be allowed to enter into financial arrangements
    (such as royalty payment arrangements, etc.) with the owners of the foreign
    magazines subject to the rules and regulations of the Government of India
    issued on the matter from time to time.
•   At least 3/4th of the Directors on the Board of Directors of the Applicant Indian
    Company and all key executives and editorial staff should be resident Indians.
•   The applicant Indian company should frame its Articles/Memorandum of
    Association to ensure compliance with the prescribed eligibility criteria.
•   100% identical content of the foreign magazine concerned would be allowed
    and the Indian publisher would be free to add local content and
    advertisements.
•   That permission may be granted for publication of only such magazines which
    are being published in the country of their origin with the approval of the
    regulatory authority of the respective Governments of those countries in cases
    where such approvals are granted by the Governments.
•   That the proposed publication should have been published continuously for a
    period of at least 5 years, and the publication must have had a circulation of at
    least 10,000 paid copies in the last financial year in the country of its origin.
    The period of continuous publication and circulation must be certified by the
    respective Governmental authority of the country, and if there is no such
    Governmental authority regulating such matters, the certificate should be from
    respected and recognized agencies engaged in the business of certification.
•   Any Indian company publishing Indian edition of foreign magazines in India will
    be subject to all the relevant laws and guidelines applicable to Indian news
    magazines and their publishers.
•   The applicant entity should make full disclosure, at the time of application, of
    the Licence Agreement/ Financial Arrangement with the foreign entity for
                                                                                  38
    publishing such Indian editions. Any subsequent change, should be disclosed to
    the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting within fifteen days of such a change.
•   The applicant company should inform the Ministry of Information &
    Broadcasting within 15 days of effecting any changes in the composition of
    resident Indian Directors or key executives and editorial staff. Such a change
    would be subject to post facto approval of the Ministry of Information &
    Broadcasting.
•   The applicant company will be liable to intimate the names and details of any
    foreigners/NRIs/PIOs proposed to be employed/engaged in the Entity for more
    than 60 days in a year, either as Consultant or as regular employees or in any
    other capacity. The Entity will be liable to dispense with the services of such
    persons if subsequently not found security cleared.
•   The applicant company should obtain prior clearance from the Ministry of
    Information & Broadcasting of all persons not being resident Indians who are
    proposed to be inducted in the Board of Directors/Key Executives/Editorial
    Staff of the company.
•   The applicant company should permit the Government agencies to inspect the
    facilities required for publishing Indian edition of foreign magazine, as and
    when required.
•   The Government of India, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting will have the
    right to suspend/ withdraw/ cancel the permission of the company for a
    specified period or for whole time, if the conditions specified in the grant of
    permission is violated or in public interest or in the interest of national
    security. The company should immediately comply with the directives issued in
    this regard.
•   The company should stop publication of the Indian edition of the magazine
    whenever approval for such publication is suspended/ withdrawn/ cancelled by
    the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.




                                                                                 39
Procedure for application

   •   Eleven copies of the prescribed application form, duly filled in, along with the
       requisite documents should be submitted to the Ministry of Information &
       Broadcasting.

   •   Application fee of Rs.20,000/- (Rupees Twenty thousand only) will have to be
       deposited through demand draft made in favour of Pay & Accounts Officer,
       Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, payable at New Delhi.

   •   In case the original foreign magazine is in a language other than English/Hindi,
       the certified/ authenticated English transcripts of the magazine, one issue
       each for the last five years along with the original copy may be provided with
       the application.

   •   Certification/ authentication should be done by the publisher of the original
       foreign magazine.

All new applications for publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing in
news and current affairs sector, will be processed and decided in the Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting on the basis of inter-ministerial consultation with the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Industrial Policy
& Promotion, Ministry of Corporate Affairs and other Ministries/Departments, as may
be required.




                                                                                    40
                             6. LAWS APPLICABLE FOR BROADCASTING

The list of legislations applicable for Cable Network –

   i.        Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995

  ii.        Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994

The list of legislations related to Prasar Bharati –

       i.    Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990

       ii.   Prasar Bharati Investment of Money Rules, 2007

The list of legislations related to Sports Broadcasting –

       i.    Sports Broadcasting Signals (mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Act, 2007

       ii.   Sports Broadcasting Signals (mandatory Sharing with Prasar Bharati) Rules, 2007

The following guidelines and policies are applicable for Broadcasting –

   i.        Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) Guidelines

  ii.        Direct to Home (DTH) Service Guidelines

 iii.        CRS (Community Radio Stations) Guidelines

 iv.         Uplinking guidelines

  v.         Policy guidelines for Downlinking of TV Channels

 vi.         FM Radio Phase-II

vii.         Conditional Access System (CAS)

viii.        Content Regulation on Private TV Channels

 ix.         Guidelines for providing Headend-in-the-Sky (HITS) broadcasting service in India
                                                                                             41
   x.    Advertisement of Political Nature on Radio

  xi.    Policy guidelines for Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) service in India

  xii.   Certification of film songs, film promos etc. for cable service

 xiii.   TRAI’s DTH Regulation

 xiv.    The Code of advertising Practice of the Advertising Standards Council of India

  xv.    FM phase II Policy

 xvi.    Policy Guidelines for expansion of FM Radio broadcasting services through
         Private Agencies (Phase-III)

xvii.    Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio Stations in India

xviii.   Guidelines to regulate child participation in TV serials, reality shows and
         advertisements

 xix.    Protection of identity of Children in Need of Care and Protection and juveniles
         in conflict with Law




 The Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995

 The principal purpose of the Act was to introduce regulatory certainty to the cable
 market that had emerged in the early 1990s. The statement of objects and reasons
 declared that cable TV constituted a ‘cultural invasion’ as cable programmes were
 predominantly western and alien to Indian culture and way of life. It declared that
 the lack of regulation had resulted in undesirable programmes and advertisements
 being shown to Indian viewers without any censorship.

 The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 was enacted for the purpose of
 regulating the operations of cable television networks in the country so as to bring
 uniformity in their operations, avoid undesirable programmes from being made
                                                                                          42
available to the viewers as well as to enable the optimal exploitation of the
technology which had the potential of making available to the subscribers a vast pool
of information and entertainment.

Section 3 of the Act mandates that a cable television network can be operated only by
a registered cable operator. In order to register, an entity could be

   -   an Indian citizen
   -   an association of individuals whose members are Indian citizens
   -   a company in which not less than 51 per cent of paid up equity share capital is
       held by Indian citizens
The Cable Networks Act empowers and authorizes a government officer to seize a
cable operator’s equipment if the officer has reason to believe that the cable
operator is functioning without proper registration.

The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 were enacted under the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Ordinance, 1994. The programme code under Rule 6 lays down
restrictions on the content of both programmes and advertisements that can be shown
on cable TV. No programme can be shown that:
   §   Offends against good taste or decency
   §   Contains criticism of friendly countries
   §   Contains attack on religions or communities or visuals or words contemptuous
       of religious groups or which promote communal attitudes
   §   Contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive
       innuendos and half truths
   §   Is likely to encourage or incite violence or contains anything against
       maintenance of law and order or which promote-anti-national attitudes
   §   Contains anything amounting to contempt of court
   §   Contains aspersions against the integrity of the President and Judiciary
   §   Contains anything affecting the integrity of the Nation
   §   Criticises, maligns or slanders any individual in person or certain groups,
       segments of social, public and moral life of the country
                                                                                   43
   §   Encourages superstition or blind belief
   §   Denigrates women through the depiction in any manner of the figure of a
       women, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the
       effect of being indecent, or derogatory to women, or is likely to deprave,
       corrupt or injure the public morality or morals
   §   Denigrates children
   §   Contains visuals or words which reflect a slandering, ironical and snobbish
       attitude in the portrayal of certain ethnic, linguistic and regional groups
   §   Is not suitable for unrestricted public exhibition


Rule 7 deals with restrictions on advertisements. The Advertising Code in the Cable
Network Rules says that all advertising carried in the cable service have to conform to
the laws of the country and should not offend morality, decency and religious
susceptibilities of the subscribers. The code says that no advertisement shall be
permitted which:


   •   Derides any race, caste, colour, creed and nationality
   •   Is against any provision of the Constitution of India
   •   Tends to incite people to crime, cause disorder or violence, or breach of law or
       glorifies violence or obscenity in any way
   •   Presents criminality as desirable
   •   Exploits the national emblem, or any part of the Constitution or the person or
       personality of a national leader or a State dignitary
   •   In its depiction of women violates the constitutional guarantees to all citizens.
   •   Projects a derogatory image of women. The Rules say that women should not
       be portrayed in a manner that emphasises passive, submissive qualities and
       encourages them to play a subordinate, secondary role in the family and
       society. The cable operator is supposed to ensure that the portrayal of the
       female form, in the programmes carried in his cable service, is “tasteful and
       aesthetic, and is within the well-established norms of good taste and decency”.
                                                                                       44
   •   Exploits social evils like dowry, child marriage.
   •   Promotes directly or indirectly production, sale or consumption of cigarettes,
       tobacco products, wine, alcohol, liquor or other intoxicants, infant milk
       substitutes, feeding bottle or infant food.


       The Rules prohibit advertisements that
   •   Are wholly or mainly of a religious or political nature or directed towards any
       religious or political end.
   •   Contain references that hurt religious sentiments.
   •   Contain references that are likely to lead the public to infer that the product
       advertised or any of its ingredients has some special or miraculous or super-
       natural property or quality, which is difficult of being proved.
   •   Contain pictures and audible matter of the advertisement that are excessively
       loud
   •   Endanger the safety of children or creates in them any interest in unhealthy
       practices or shows them begging or in an undignified or indecent manner
   •   Contain indecent, vulgar, suggestive, repulsive or offensive themes or
       treatment
   •   Contain advertisements that violate the standards of practice for advertising
       agencies as approved by the Advertising Agencies Association of India, Bombay,
       from time to time.



The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2011

The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI), in its recommendations dated the
5th August, 2010 on "Implementation of Digital Addressable Cable Systems in India"
had, inter alia, recommended that "digitalization with addressability be implemented
on priority in cable TV services in Non-CAS areas" and, accordingly, recommended a
time-frame comprising four phases for switch over from analog system to the digital
addressable system (DAS) in the cable TV sector. In view of the above-mentioned
                                                                                   45
recommendations of the TRAI, the Central Government decided to introduce
digitalization with addressability in the cable TV services in a phased time bound
manner on a pan India basis, leading to complete switch off of analog TV services by
the 31st December, 2014.

For the implementation of DAS, certain amendments were required to be made in the
aforesaid Act mandating all cable operators to provide programmes of all channels,
including free-to-air (FTA) channels, in an encrypted form through DAS in a phased
manner at specified areas from specified dates to be notified by the Central
Government. It is also mandatory that any such notification should give at least six
months time to the cable operators for being able to install the necessary digital
equipments for migration and educate the subscribers in this area. In order to protect
the interest of consumers, it has been proposed to empower TRAI to specify a package
of free-to-air channels, called basic service tier, which shall be offered by every cable
operator to the consumers. It is also necessary that every cable operator should offer
channels in the basic service tier on a la carte (individual) basis to consumers at a
tariff fixed by TRAI.

It has also been considered necessary to carry out certain amendments in the Act for
rectifying certain deficiencies noticed during the operation of the Act for the last
fifteen years.    These, inter alia, include systemization of registration of cable
operators, providing right of way to cable operators and permission by public
authorities, compulsory transmission of certain channels, inspection of cable network
services, prescription of interference standards by the Central Government and
empowering the TRAI to specify basic service tier and its tariff.

The Act has come into force from 25th day of December 2011.

Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990

The introduction of the Prasar Bharati Bill in Parliament in May 1979 was the direct
result of the recommendations of the B. G. Verghese Committee set up in 1977 after

                                                                                      46
the Internal Emergency declared by the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi (1975-77).
The Bill was allowed to lapse after the Janata party government elected to form the
government after the Emergency collapsed and the Congress party returned to power.

The victory of the National Front government in 1989 saw the revival of the Prasar
Bharati Bill in a somewhat modified form; the Bill was passed by Parliament and
received presidential assent on September 12, 1990. The Act provided for the
formation   of   an   autonomous   Broadcasting    Corporation   that   would   manage
Doordarshan and AIR, discharging all powers previously held by the Information and
Broadcasting Ministry. The corporation would inherit the capital assets of Doordarshan
and AIR and would be managed by a 15-member Prasar Bharati Board, including the
Directors-General of the two organisations and two representatives from amongst the
employees. The Chair and other members of the Board would be appointed on the
recommendations of the selection committee headed by the Vice President. A fifteen-
member Broadcasting Council would address public complaints.

The primary duty of the Broadcasting Corporation was to ‘organize and conduct public
broadcasting services to inform, educate, and entertain the public’ and to ensure ‘a
balanced development’ of broadcasting of radio and television. The Corporation was
to be guided by a set of objectives while discharging its functions. These include:

   •   Upholding the unity and integrity of the country and the values enshrined in
       the Constitution
   •   Safeguarding the citizen’s right to be informed freely, truthfully and
       objectively on all matters of public interest, national or international, and
       presenting a fair and balanced flow of information including contrasting views
       without advocating any opinion or ideology of its own
   •   Paying special attention to the fields of education and spread of literacy,
       agriculture, rural development, environment, health and family welfare and
       science and technology.
   •   Providing adequate coverage to the diverse cultures and languages of the
       various regions of the country by broadcasting appropriate programmes.
                                                                                      47
•   Providing adequate coverage to sports and games so as to encourage healthy
    competition and the spirit of sportsmanship.
•   Providing appropriate programmes keeping in view the special needs of the
    youth.
•   Informing and stimulating the national consciousness in regard to the status and
    problems of women and paying special attention to the upliftment of women.
•   Promoting social justice and combating exploitation, inequality and such evils
    as untouchability and advancing the welfare of the weaker sections of the
    society.
•   Safeguarding the rights of the working classes and advancing their welfare
•   Serving the rural and weaker sections of the people and those residing in
    border regions, backward or remote areas.
•   Providing suitable programmes keeping in view the special needs of the
    minorities and tribal communities.
•   Taking special steps to protect the interests of children, the blind, the aged,
    the handicapped and other vulnerable sections of the people.
•   Promoting national integration by broadcasting in a manner that facilitates
    communication in the languages in India; and facilitating the distribution of
    regional broadcasting services in every State in the languages of that State.
•   Providing comprehensive broadcast coverage through the choice of appropriate
    technology and the best utilisation of the broadcast frequencies available and
    ensuring high quality reception.
•   Promoting research and development activities in order to ensure that radio
    and television broadcast technology are constantly updated.
•   Expanding broadcasting facilities by establishing additional channels of
    transmission at various levels.
•   Ensuring that broadcasting is conducted as a public service to provide and
    produce programmes.
•   Establishing a system for the gathering of news for radio and television;


                                                                                    48
•   Negotiating for the purchase of, or otherwise acquire, programmes and rights
    or privileges in respect of sports and other events, films, serials, occasions,
    meetings, functions or incidents of public interest, for broadcasting and to
    establish procedures for the allocation of such programmes, rights or privileges
    to the services.
•   Establishing and maintain a library or libraries of radio, television and other
    materials. Conducting or commissioning, from time to time, programmes,
    audience research, market or technical service, which may be released to such
    persons and in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as the
    Corporation may think fit.




                                                                                 49
                                7. LAWS APPLICABLE FOR FILMS

The list of legislations applicable for films -

   i.    The Cinematograph Act, 1952
   ii.   The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983

The following guidelines and policies are applicable for Films –

   1.    Guidelines for import of films

   2.    Policy for import of Cinematograph films and other films.

   3.    Revised guidelines for shooting feature films in India by foreign nationals/co-
         productions.

   4.    Guidelines to certify Films (CBFC)

   5.    Policy for certification of films for Film festivals




Cinematograph Act, 1952

The Cinematograph Act of 1952 has been passed to make provisions for certification
of cinematographed films for exhibition by means of Cinematograph. Under this Act,
the Board of Film Censor (i.e. Central Board of Film Certification) with advisory
panels at regional centres is empowered to examine every film and sanction it
whether for unrestricted exhibition or for exhibition restricted to adults. The Board is
also empowered to refuse to sanction a film for public exhibition.

The Certification process is in accordance with The Cinematograph Act, 1952, The
Cinematograph (certification) Rules, 1983, and the guidelines issued by the Central
government u/s 5 (B). At present films are certified under 4 categories –

                                                                                     50
     •         U - Unrestricted Public Exhibition

     •         UA - Unrestricted Public Exhibition - but with a word of caution that Parental
               discretion required for children below 12 years

     •         A - Restricted to adults

     •         S - Restricted to any special class of persons

The Cinematograph Act lays down that a film should not be certified if any part of it
is against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or involves
defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite commission of any offence.
Under section 5B(2) the Central Government has issued the following guidelines.


A film is judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact and is
examined in the light of the period depicted in the film and the contemporary
standards of the country and the people to whom the film relates, provided that the
film does not deprave the morality of the audience. Guidelines are applied to the
titles of the films also.
1.         Objectives of Film Certification
     i)        the medium of film remains responsible and sensitive to the values and
               standards of society;
     ii) artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed;
     iii) certification is responsible to social changes;
     iv) the medium of film provides clean and healthy entertainment; and
     v) as far as possible, the film is of aesthetic value and cinematically of a good
               standard.
2.         In pursuance of the above objectives, the CBFC shall ensure that


          i)      anti social activities such as violence are not glorified or justified


                                                                                           51
ii)       the modus operandi of criminals, other visuals or words likely to incite the
         commission of any offence are not depicted;
iii)      scenes -
         a. showing involvement of children in violence as victims or perpetrators or
            as forced witnesses to violence, or showing children as being subjected
            to any form of child abuse.
         b. showing     abuse    or       ridicule   of   physically   and   mentally
            handicapped persons; and
         c. showing cruelty to, or abuse of animals, are not presented needlessly
  iv)      pointless or avoidable scenes of violence, cruelty and horror, scenes of
  violence primarily intended to provide entertainment and such scenes as may
  have the effect of de-sensitising or de-humanising people are not shown;
  v)       scenes which have the effect of justifying or glorifying drinking are not
          shown;
  vi)      scenes tending to encourage, justify or glamorise drug addiction are not
          shown;
            a. scenes tending to encourage, justify or glamorise consumption of
  tobacco or smoking are not shown;
  vii)     human sensibilities are not offended by vulgarity, obscenity or depravity;
  viii) such dual meaning words as obviously cater to baser instincts are not
          allowed;
  ix)      scenes degrading or denigrating women in any manner are not presented;
  x)       scenes involving sexual violence against women like attempt to rape,
          rape or any form of molestation or scenes of a similar nature are avoided,
          and if any such incidence is germane to the theme, they shall be reduced
          to the minimum and no details are shown
  xi)      scenes showing sexual perversions shall be avoided and if such matters
          are germane to the theme they shall be reduced to the minimum and no
          details are shown


                                                                                    52
      xii)      visuals or words contemptuous of racial, religious or other groups are not
              presented
      xiii)     visuals or words which promote communal, obscurantist, anti-scientific
              and anti-national attitude are not presented
      xiv)      the sovereignty and integrity of India is not called in question;
      xv)       the security of the State is not jeopardized or endangered
      xvi)      friendly relations with foreign States are not strained;
      xvii) public order is not endangered
      xviii) visuals or words involving defamation of an individual or a body of
              individuals, or contempt of court are not presented


      EXPLANATION: Scenes that tend to create scorn, disgrace or disregard of rules
      or undermine the dignity of court will come under the term ''Contempt of
      Court'' : and


      xix) national symbols and emblems are not shown except in accordance with
      the provisions of the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act,
      1950 (12 of 1950)


3.    The Board of Film Certification shall also ensure that the film
      i)      Is judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact; and
      ii) Is examined in the light of the period depicted in the films and the
      contemporary standards of the country and the people to which the film
      relates provided that the film does not deprave the morality of the audience.

4.    Films that meet the above – mentioned criteria but are considered unsuitable
for exhibition to non-adults shall be certified for exhibition to adult audiences only.

5.
      i)      While certifying films for unrestricted public exhibition, the Board shall
             ensure that the film is suitable for family viewing, that is to say, the film
                                                                                            53
           shall be such that all the members of the family including children can view
           it together.
        ii) If the Board, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film is
           of the opinion that it is necessary to caution the parents / guardian to
           consider as to whether any child below the age of twelve years maybe
           allowed to see such a film, the film shall be certified for unrestricted public
           exhibition with an endorsement to that effect.
        iii) If the Board having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film, is
           of the opinion that the exhibition of the film should be restricted to
           members of any profession or any class of persons, the film shall be
           certified for public exhibition restricted to the specialized audiences to be
           specified by the Board in this behalf.


   6.   The Board shall scrutinize the titles of the films carefully and ensure that they
        are not provocative, vulgar, offensive or violative of any of the above-
        mentioned guidelines.


The Central Board of Film Certification is responsible for certifying films. The
enforcement of compliance to the provisions of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 is
entrusted to the State Governments /Union Territory Administrations, since exhibition
of films is a State subject.
The following are the major violations that agitate the minds of the public:

   •    exhibition of an ''''A'''' certified film to a non-adult;

   •    exhibition of an ''''S'''' certified film to persons other than those for whom it is
        meant;

   •    exhibition of a film in a form other than the one in which it was certified. Such
        violations are known as interpolations. Interpolations can be described as
        follows –


                                                                                         54
          o re-insertion in the prints of a film, those portions which were deleted by
              the Board while certifying the film

          o insertion in prints of a film, portions which were never shown to the
              Board for certification

          o exhibition of ''''bits'''' unconnected with the certified film

   •   exhibition of a film which was refused a certificate (or ''''banned'''' in common
       parlance)

   •   exhibition of uncertified films with forged certificates of other films

   •   exhibition of films without CBFC certificate

Violations of Cinematograph act and penalties –

Section 7 of the Cinematograph Act provides penalties for violation of censorship
provisions. Penalty can also be imposed for failure to comply with section 6A which
requires that any person delivering a film to an exhibitor or a distributor will also give
to him details of all cuts, certification, title, length and conditions of certification.

A person guilty of violation while exhibiting celluloid films is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to Three years, or with fine which may
extend to Rs.1/-lakh, or with both, and with a further fine up to Rs.20,000 for each
day for a continuing offence. Similarly, Showing of video films which violate the rules
in the manner prescribed in this section will attract imprisonment of not less than
three months but which may extend to three years and a fine of not less than
Rs.20,000 but which may extend to Rs.1/-lakh and a further fine up to Rs.20,000 for
each day for a continuing offence.

Furthermore, the trial court can direct that the offending film be forfeited to the
Government. Under Section 7A, any police officer can enter a hall where an offending
film is being screened, search the premises and seize the print. Films can also be
seized when they are likely to be exhibited in violation of Cinematograph Act.
                                                                                            55
                              8. OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE TO MEDIA

    8.1.    FDI in media sector

Foreign direct investment (FDI) is that investment, which is made to serve the
business interests of the investor in a company, which is in a different nation distinct
from the investor's country of origin.

FDI in India is governed by the Consolidated FDI Policy issued by the Department of
Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Government of India.

Print Media

Sl.No.     Activity                               % of FDI cap/equity Entry route

1          Publishing    of    Newspaper    and 26%       (FDI     and Government
           periodicals dealing with news and investment             by
           current affairs                        NRIs/PIOs/FII)
2          Publication of Indian editions of 26%          (FDI     and Government
           foreign magazines dealing with investment                by
           news and current affairs               NRIs/PIOs/FII)
3          Publishing/printing of Scientific 100%                        Government
           and        Technical     Magazines/
           specialty journals/ periodicals,
           subject to compliance with the
           legal framework as applicable
           and guidelines issued in this
           regard from time to time by
           Ministry     of    Information   and
           Broadcasting.
4          Publication of facsimile edition 100%                         Government
           of foreign newspapers

                                                                                      56
FDI should be made by the owner of the original foreign newspapers whose facsimile
edition is proposed to be brought out in India. Publication of facsimile edition of
foreign newspapers can be undertaken only by an entity incorporated or registered in
India under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. Foreign investment would also
be subject to the Guidelines for Publication of Indian editions of foreign magazines
dealing with news and current affairs issued by the Ministry of Information &
Broadcasting on 4.12.2008. Publication of facsimile edition of foreign newspaper
would also be subject to the Guidelines for publication of newspapers and periodicals
dealing with news and current affairs and publication of facsimile edition of foreign
newspapers issued by Ministry of Information & Broadcasting on 31.3.2006, as
amended from time to time.


Broadcasting


Sl.No.   Activity                          % of FDI cap/equity Entry route

1        Terrestrial Broadcasting FM (FM 26% (FDI, NRI & PIO Government
         Radio) subject to such terms and investments      and
         conditions as specified from time portfolio
         to time by Ministry of Information investment)
         and Broadcasting for grant of
         permission for setting up of FM
         Radio Stations
2        Cable Network, subject to Cable 49% (FDI, NRI & PIO Government
         Television Network Rules, 1994 investments        and
         and other conditions as specified portfolio
         from time to time by Ministry of investment)
         Information and Broadcasting
3        Direct–to-Home subject to such 49% (FDI, NRI & PIO Government

                                                                                  57
        guidelines/terms and conditions investments                       and
        as specified from time to time by portfolio
        Ministry    of      Information        and investment)               -
        Broadcasting                                  Within     this   limit,
                                                      FDI component not
                                                      to exceed 20%
4       FDI limit in (HITS) Broadcasting 74%               (total       direct Automatic        up   to
        Service     is     subject     to      such and indirect foreign 49%;
        guidelines/terms and conditions investment                                Government      route
        as specified from time to time by including                portfolio beyond 49% and up
        Ministry of Information and                   and FDI)                    to 74%
        Broadcasting.

5       Setting up of Up-linking HUB/ 49% (FDI & FII)                             Government
        Teleports
6       Up-linking a Non-News & Current 100%                                      Government
        Affairs TV Channel
7       Up-linking a News & Current 26% (FDI & FII)                               Government
        Affairs TV Channel subject to the
        condition        that   the     portfolio
        investment from FII/ NRI shall
        not   be         persons      acting     in
        concert     with FDI investors, as
        defined in the SEBI(Substantial
        Acquisition        of      Shares      and
        Takeovers) Regulations


Headend-In-The-Sky        (HITS)     Broadcasting      Service     refers    to    the     multichannel
downlinking and distribution of television programme in C-Band or Ku Band wherein
all the pay channels are downlinked at a central facility (Hub/teleport) and again
uplinked to a satellite after encryption of channel. At the cable headend these
                                                                                                     58
encrypted      pay   channels   are     downlinked     using   a   single   satellite    antenna,
transmodulated and sent to the subscribers by using a land based transmission system
comprising of infrastructure of cable/optical fibres network.
All the activities related to uplinking will be further subject to the condition that the
Company permitted to uplink the channel should certify the continued compliance of
this requirement through the Company Secretary at the end of each financial year.
FDI for Up-linking TV Channels will be subject to compliance with the Up-linking
Policy notified by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.



   8.2.   Labour related legislations

Generally all labour related legislations are applicable for people working in the
media sector. But there are certain specific labour legislations that regulate the
conditions of employment in this sector. A few of them have been discussed
hereunder –

The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service)
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 & The Working Journalists (Conditions of
Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Rules, 1957

The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 provides for regulation of certain conditions of
service   of    working   journalists    and   other    persons    employed     in      newspaper
establishments. The Act provides that for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of
wages in respect of working journalists, the Central Government shall constitute
Wage Board as and when necessary. The Central Government has set up a central-
level monitoring committee in the Ministry of Labour to oversee the implementation
of wage board's recommendations. After receipt of the recommendations of the
Board, the Central Government is required to make an order in terms of
recommendations and this order becomes applicable on the class of newspaper
establishments for which the Board has recommended.
                                                                                               59
All the Assistant Labour Commissioners of the Labour Department have been
appointed Inspectors for carrying out the enforcement work under the Act for their
respective districts. Deputy Labour Commissioners have been authorized for the
recovery of the amount due to the newspaper employees under the provisions of the
Act. The amount can be recovered by issue of a certificate for the amount to the
Collector, for recovery of the amount as arrears of land revenue. The penalty
provided for violation of any of the provisions of the Act or any rule made there under
is punishment with a fine which may extend to Rs. 200/- and Rs. 500/- for subsequent
violation.

Working Journalist is a person whose principal avocation is that of a journalist and
who is employed either wholetime in one or more newspaper establishments and
includes an editor, a leader-writer, newseditor, sub-editor, feature writer, copy
tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news photographer, and proof reader,
but does not include any such person who -- (i) is employed mainly in a managerial or
administrative capacity; or (ii) being employed in a supervisory capacity, performs,
either by the nature of the duties attached to his office or by reason of the powers
vested in him, function mainly of a managerial nature. (Section 2 (f))

Newspaper means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on
public news and includes such other class of printed periodical work as may, from
time to time, be notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette. (Section 2(b))
Newspaper establishment means an establishment under the control of any person or
body of persons, whether incorporated or not, for the production or publication of
one or more newspaper or for conducting any news agency or syndicate; and includes
newspaper establishments specified as one establishment under the Schedule.
Explanation: - For the purposes of this clause-
(a) different departments, branches and centres of newspaper establishments shall be
treated as parts thereof,-



                                                                                    60
(b) a printing press shall be deemed to be a newspaper establishment if the principal
business thereof is to print newspaper. (Section 2(d)


Important provisions of the Act
The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act will apply to the working journalist with
some modifications. The period of notice referred in the ID Act in relation to the
retrenchment has been enhanced to six months in the case of editor and three months
in the case of other working journalists. (Section 3)
The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 is made applicable to every
newspaper establishment wherein twenty or more newspaper employees are
employed. (Section 14)
Gratuity is payable to working journalists who has put in a minimum service of three
years. (Section 5)

The Employees’ Provident Fund Act 1952 is applicable to every newspaper
establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed on any day. (Section 15)

No working journalist will be required or allowed to work more than 144 hours in four
consecutive weeks. The total working hours in a day should not exceed six hours and
in the case of night shift shall be 5½ hours only. They shall be given one day off in a
week. These provisions will not be applicable to editors, or to correspondents,
reporters or news photographers. (Section 6 & Rule 7)

A working journalist is entitled to 10 holidays in a year and is also entitled to for a
compensatory holiday within a period of 30 days in lieu of attending on a holiday.

A working journalist is entitled to 15 days casual leave and one month earned leave.
The earned leave can be accumulated upto 90 days in every year. A female working
journalist is entitled to three months maternity leave on full wages on production of
medical certificate. The leave and other service conditions in respect of non-
journalists are regulated as per the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948.



                                                                                     61
The following registers and records are liable to maintain by the employer in respect
of the working journalists –

   •      Register of employees in Form-D

   •      Service register of all working journalists, in Form-E

   •      Leave register of working journalist in Form-F

   •      Muster roll in form-G




The Cine-workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act,
1981      &   the   Cine-workers     and    Cinema    Theatre      Workers   (Regulation   of
Employment) Rules, 1984

The Cine Workers and Cinema Theatre Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1981
provides for the regulation of the conditions of employment of certain cine-workers
and cinema theatre workers and related matters thereto.

‘Cinema theatre’ means a place which is licensed under Part III of the Cinematograph
Act, 1952, or under any other law for the time being in force in a State for the
exhibition of a cinematograph film.

A cine-worker is an individual who is employed, directly or through any contractor or
other person, in or in connection with the production of a feature film to work as an
artiste
(including actor, musician or dancer) or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual,
supervisory, technical, artistic or otherwise and whose remuneration with respect to
such
employment in or in connection with the production of such feature film does not
exceed, where such remuneration is by way of monthly wages, a sum of one thousand
six hundred rupees per month, and where such remuneration is by way of a lump sum,
a sum of fifteen thousand rupees.
                                                                                           62
Producer, in relation to a feature film, means the person by whom the arrangements
necessary for the making of such film (including the raising of finances and engaging
cine-workers for the making of such film) are undertaken.


The Act prohibits the employment of any cine-worker without an agreement in writing
with the producer of the film or where any cine-worker is employed through a
contractor or other person, with the producer of such film and such contractor or
other person. Such agreement should be registered with the competent authority
notified under the law by the producer of the film. The Agreement should be in Form
A as given under the Rules. Whoever contravenes this provision will be punishable
with fine not less than Rs.10,000 but which may extend to Rs.50,000.

The Act provides safeguards to low paid artistes and technicians engaged in the
production of feature films with regard to their terms and conditions of employment,
payment of wages and provision of other amenities.

The provisions of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1952 will apply to every cinema theatre in which five or more workers are employed
on any day.

The provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 will apply to every worker
employed in a cinema theatre in which five or more workers are employed or were
employed on any day of the preceding twelve months.

In case of any dispute regarding breach of the terms and conditions of the agreement,
a cine-worker may approach the Conciliation Officer for mediation. The Conciliation
Officer will investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the merits and the right
settlement and induce the parties to come to a fair and amicable settlement.




                                                                                    63
   8.3.    IPR

The IPR issues relating to content for all media segments are very vast and cover a
wide range from the rights of content creators to the issue of difficulty of licensing of
content.

The main Intellectual Property Rights legislation related to media sector is the
Copyright Act of 1957 and Copyright Rules, 1958 and the International Copyright
Order, 1999.

Copyright is the set of exclusive rights granted to the author or creator of an original
work, including the right to copy, distribute and adapt the work. Copyright ensures
certain minimum safeguards of the rights of authors over their creations, thereby
protecting and rewarding creativity.

What is Copyright?
According to Section 14 of the Act, “copyright” means “the exclusive right subject to
the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise the doing of any of the following acts in
respect of a work or any substantial part thereof, namely:-
(a) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, not being a computer
programme, -
      (i) to reproduce the work in any material form including the storing of it in any
      medium by electronic means;
      (ii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;
      (iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate it to the public;
      (iv) to make any cinematograph film or sound recording in respect of the work;
      (v) to make any translation of the work;
      (vi) to make any adaptation of the work;
      (vii) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation of the work, any of the
      acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (vi);
(b) in the case of a computer programme,-

                                                                                      64
       (i) to do any of the acts specified in clause (a);
       (ii) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or for commercial
       rental any copy of the computer programme:
       Provided that such commercial rental does not apply in respect of computer
       programmes where the programme itself is not the essential object of the
       rental.
(c) in the case of an artistic work,-
       (i) to reproduce the work in any material form including depiction in three
       dimensions of a two dimensional work or in two dimensions of a three
       dimensional work;
       (ii) to communicate the work to the public;
       (iii) to issue copies of the work to the public not being copies already in
circulation;
       (iv) to include the work in any cinematograph film;
       (v) to make any adaptation of the work;
       (vi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of the acts specified in
       relation to the work in sub-clauses (i) to (iv);
(d) In the case of cinematograph film, -
       (i) to make a copy of the film, including a photograph of any image forming
part thereof;
       (ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the film,
       regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier
       occasions;
       (iii) to communicate the film to the public;
(e) In the case of sound recording, -
       (i) to make any other sound recording embodying it;
       (ii) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any copy of the sound
       recording regardless of whether such copy has been sold or given on hire on
       earlier occasions;
       (iii) to communicate the sound recording to the public.

                                                                                    65
Explanation : For the purposes of this section, a copy which has been sold once shall
be deemed to be a copy already in circulation.”


Classes of works for which copyright protection is available
Indian Copyright Act affords separate and exclusive copyright protection to the
following 7 clauses of work:

1. Original Literary Work

2. Original Dramatic Work

3. Original Musical Work

4. Original Artistic Work

5. Cinematograph Films

6. Sound recording

7. Computer Programme

Copyright will not subsist in any cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film is
an infringement of the copyright in any other work or in any sound recording made in
respect of a literary, dramatic or musical work, if in making the sound recording,
copyright in such work has been infringed.

Ownership of Copyright
The author of the work will be the first owner of the copyright in the following
instances:

 i.   In the case of a literary, dramatic or artistic work made by the author in the
      course of his employment by the proprietor of a newspaper, magazine or
      similar periodical under a contract of service or apprenticeship, for the purpose
      of publication in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, the said
      proprietor will, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first

                                                                                      66
       owner of the copyright in the work in so far as the copyright relates to the
       publication of the work in any newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, or to
       the reproduction of the work for the purpose of its being so published, but in
       all other respects the author will be the first owner of the copyright in the
       work.
 ii.   In the case of a photograph taken, or a painting or portrait drawn, or an
       engraving or a cinematograph film made, for valuable consideration at the
       instance of any person, such person will, in the absence of any agreement to
       the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein.
iii.   In the case of a work made in the course of the author’s employment under a
       contract of service or apprenticeship, the employer will, in the absence of any
       agreement to the contrary, be the first owner of the copyright therein.
iv.    In the case of any address or speech delivered in public, the person who has
       delivered such address or speech or if such person has delivered such address
       or speech on behalf of any other person, such other person will be the first
       owner of the copyright therein notwithstanding that the person who delivers
       such address or speech, or, as the case may be, the person on whose behalf
       such address or speech is delivered, is employed by any other person who
       arranges such address or speech or on whose behalf or premises such address or
       speech is delivered.
 v.    In the case of a government work, government in the absence of any
       agreement to the contrary, will be the first owner of the copyright therein.
vi.    In the case of a work made or first published by or under the direction or
       control of any public undertaking, such public undertaking in the absence of
       any agreement to the contrary, will be the first owner of the copyright therein.
vii.   In case of any work which is made or first published by or under the directions
       or control of any international organisation, such international organisation will
       be the first owner of the copyright therein.




                                                                                      67
Term of copyright
Copyright generally lasts for a period of sixty years.
   ü In the case of literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works, the sixty year period
      is counted from the year following the death of the author.
   ü In the case of cinematograph films, sound recordings, photographs, posthumous
      publications, anonymous and pseudonymous publications, works of government
      and public undertakings and works of international organisations, the 60-year
      period is counted from the date of publication.
   ü In case of Broadcast reproduction right - 25 years from the beginning of the
      calendar year next following the year in which the broadcast is made.
   ü In case of Performers right - 25 years from the beginning of the calendar year
      next following the year in which the performance is made.


Rights of Broadcasting Organisation and of Performers
Every broadcasting organisation will have a special right to be known as 'broadcast
reproduction right' in respect of its broadcasts. The broadcast reproduction right will
subsist until twenty-five years from the beginning of the calendar year next following
the year in which the broadcast in made. This would prevent any person other than
the broadcasting organisation from:

      i) Re-broadcasting what has already been broadcasted

      ii) Causing the broadcast to be seen or heard by the public on payment of
      charges

      iii) Making any sound/visual recording of the broadcast

      iv) Making any reproduction of such sound recording ro visual recording where
      such initial recording was done without licence or, where it was licensed, for
      any purpose not envisaged by such licence

      v) Selling or hiring or offering to sell or hire sound/visual recordings.
                                                                                     68
Where any performer appears or engages in any performance, he will have a special
right known as the 'performer's right' in relation to such performance. The performer's
right will subsist until fifty years from the beginning of the calendar year next
following the year in which the performance is made. These rights are:

       i) No person may make a sound/visual recording of the performer’s
       performances

       ii) Reproduce a sound/visual recording

       iii) Broadcast the performance

       iv) Communicate to the public otherwise than by broadcast

No broadcast reproduction right or performer's right will be deemed to be infringed
by:-

          •   The making of any sound recording or visual recording for the private use
              of the person making such recording, or solely for purposes of bona fide
              teaching or research; or

          •   The use, consistent with fair dealing, of excerpts of a performance or of
              a broadcast in the reporting of current events or for bona fide review,
              teaching or research; or

          •   Such other acts, with any necessary adaptations and modifications,
              which do not constitute infringement of copyright under the Act.

Copyright Societies
Collective administration of copyright by societies is a concept where management
and protection of copyright in works are undertook by a society of owners of such
works. Obviously no owner of copyright in any work can keep track of all the uses
others make of his work. When he becomes a member of a national copyright society,

                                                                                    69
that society, because of its organisational facilities and strength, is able to keep a
better vigil over the uses made of that work throughout the country and collect due
royalties from the users of those works. Because of the country’s membership in
international conventions, the copyright societies are able to have reciprocal
agreements with similar societies in other countries for collecting royalties for the
uses of Indian works in those countries. From this it can automatically be inferred
that it will be in the interests of copyright owners to join a collective administration
organisation to ensure better protection to the copyright in their works and for
reaping optimum economic benefits from their creations. Users of different types of
works also find it easy to obtain licences for legal exploitation of the works in
question, though the collective administrative society.
A copyright society is a registered collective administration society under Section 33
of the Copyright Act, 1957. Such a society is formed by copyright owners. The
minimum membership required for registration of a society is seven. Ordinarily, only
one society is registered to do business in respect of the same class of work. A
copyright society can issue or grant licences in respect of any work in which copyright
subsists or in respect of any other right given by the Copyright Act.
The following are the registered copyright societies in India:
i. For cinematograph and television films : Society for Copyright Regulation of Indian
Producers for Film and Television (SCRIPT) 135 Continental Building, Dr. A.B. Road,
Worli, Mumbai 400 018;
ii. For musical works: The Indian Performing Right Society Limited (IPRS), 208,
Golden Chambers, 2nd Floor, New Andheri Link Road, Andheri (W), Mumbai- 400 058
(Website: http://www.iprs.org/);
iii. For sound recording: Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL) Flame Proof
Equipment Building, B.39, Off New Link Road, Andheri (West), Mumbai 400 053
(Website: http://www.pplindia.org/);
iv. For reprographic (photo copying) works: Indian Reprographic Rights Organization
(IRRO), 18/1-C, Institutional Area, Near JNU Campus, New Delhi – 110067, (Website:
http://www.irro.in/)

                                                                                     70
   8.4.   Telegraph Act & Wireless Telegraphy Act

Broadcasting in India is governed by the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and by the Indian
Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933.

The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 gives the Government of India (GOI) exclusive rights
for the establishment and working of telegraphy using electro-magnetic waves.
Governance of broadcasting has its basis in the powers bestowed on the GOI by this
Act.
According to the Act, "telegraph" means any appliance, instrument, material or
apparatus used or capable of use for transmission or reception of signs, signals,
writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, visual or other
electro-magnetic emissions, Radio waves or Hertzian waves, galvanic, electric or
magnetic means. "Radio waves" or "Hertzian waves" means electro-magnetic waves of
frequencies lower than 3,000 giga-cycles per second propagated in space without
artificial guide. Judicial decisions have also held that the term ‘telegraph’ includes
the term telephone, television, radio, wireless, mobile and video equipment.

Section 4(1) of the Telegraph Act states that the Central Government has the
exclusive privilege of establishing, maintaining, and working telegraphs within India.
Section 5(1) of the Telegraph Act authorizes the Central Government to take
temporary possession of a telegraph in cases involving public emergencies or public
safety. Section 5 (2) enables the government to lawfully intercept telegraph messages
on certain grounds. These include India’s sovereignty and integrity, state security,
friendly relations with foreign states, public order, and preventing the commission of
an offence. Section 8 of the Telegraph Act empowers the government to revoke a
telegraph license for breach of any terms and conditions or for a default in making
license-fee payments.




                                                                                   71
Broadcasting means “the dissemination of any form of communication like signs,
signals, writing, pictures, images, and sounds of all kinds, by transmission of
electromagnetic waves through space or through cables intended to be received by
the general public either directly or indirectly through the medium of relay stations
and all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed
accordingly.

To offer most forms of broadcasting, a broadcaster must have two licenses: 1) a
general license from the MIB to offer telegraph services (under the Telegraph Act),
and 2) a wireless operating license from the Wireless Planning and Communication
(WPC) Wing of the Department of Telecom, (under the Wireless Telegraphy Act).

Most radio and television services are also regulated by the Indian Wireless Telegraphy
Act (No 17 of 1933), as they constitute ‘wireless communications’. Section 2(2) and
Section 3 regulate wireless communication by requiring users of various types of
wireless equipment to obtain wireless licenses for possessing and using the
equipment. These licenses are granted by the WPC (Wireless Planning & Coordination
Authority) Wing of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT).

Therefore, to offer most kinds of broadcasting services, a broadcasting company must
obtain two types of licenses:

   •   A Grant of Permission (GOPA) to offer broadcast services issued by the Ministry
       of Information and Broadcasting under the Telegraph Act, 1885.

   •   A wireless operating license from the WPC (Wireless Planning & Coordination
       Authority) Wing of the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology
       under the Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933.




                                                                                    72
                   9. AUTHORITIES REGULATING THE MEDIA INDUSTRY

   i)      Ministry of Information and Broadcasting - Government Of India

            http://www.mib.nic.in/default.aspx

The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, through the mass communication media
consisting of radio, television, films, the press, publications, advertising and
traditional mode of dance and drama plays a significant part in helping the people to
have access to free flow of information. It also caters to the dissemination of
knowledge and entertainment to all sections of society, striking a careful balance
between public interest and commercial needs, in its delivery of services. Ministry of
Information & Broadcasting is the apex body for formulation and administration of the
rules and regulations and laws relating to information, broadcasting, the press and
films. This Ministry is responsible for international co-operation in the field of mass
media, films and broadcasting and interacts with its foreign counterparts on behalf of
Government of India. The mandate of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting is:

   •    News Services through All India Radio (AIR) and Doordarshan (DD) for the
        people
   •    Development of broadcasting and television.
   •    Import and export of films.
   •    Development and promotion of film industry.
   •    Organisation of film festivals and cultural exchanges for the purpose.
   •    Advertisement and visual publicity on behalf of the Government of India.
   •    Handling of press relations to present the policies of Government of India and
        to get feed-back on the Govt. policies.
   •    Administration of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 in respect of
        newspapers.
   •    Dissemination of information about India within and outside the country
        through publications on matters of national importance.

                                                                                     73
   •   Research, Reference and Training to assist the media units of the Ministry to
       meet their responsibilities.
   •   Use of interpersonal communication and traditional folk art forms for
       information/ publicity campaigns on public interest issues.
   •   International co-operation in the field of information & mass media.

The following comes under the purview of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting –

   1) Broadcasting policy and administration

   2) Cable television policy

   3) Radio

   4) Doordarshan

   5) Films

   6) Advertising and visual publicity

   7) Press

   8) Publications

   9) Research and reference

   10) Various subordinate, autonomous organisations, public sector undertakings




   ii) Press Information Bureau

The Press Information Bureau (PIB) is the nodal agency of the Government to
disseminate information to the print and electronic media on government policies,
programmes, initiatives and achievements. It functions as an interface between the


                                                                                   74
Government and the media and also provides feedback to the Government on people's
reaction as reflected in the media.

PIB has its Headquarters in New Delhi. It is headed by the Principal Director General
(Media & Communication) who is assisted by a Director General and eight Additional
Director Generals. Besides, the Bureau has Officers in the ranks of Director, Joint
Director, Dy. Director, Assistant Director and Media & Communication Officer who are
attached with different Ministries in order of their rank and Ministry's size, importance
and sensitivity.

PIB has a dedicated unit for the publicity and media support to the Prime Minister's
Office (PMO). The unit functions on 24X7 basis and compiles media reports on all days
including holidays for PMO and Cabinet Secretariat.

   iii)   Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity

The Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP), established in 1955, is the
nodal multi-media advertising agency of the Government of India. Over the past 56
years, it has been catering to the communication needs of almost all central
Ministries/Departments, autonomous bodies and PSUs by providing them single-
window cost-effective service. It informs and educates the people, both rural and
urban, about the government's policies and programmes and motivates them to
participate   in   developmental      activities,   through   its   various   vehicles   of
communication, viz, Print media advertising, Audio Visual            advertising, printed
publicity, exhibitions, outdoor publicity and mass mailing.

The DAVP is headed by Director General who is assisted by 2 Additional Director
Generals and other officials. At it’s headquarter it consists of a Campaign Wing.
Advertising Wing, Printed Publicity Wing, Exhibition Wing, Electronic Data Processing
Center, Mass Mailing Unit, Audio-Visual Cell, a Design Studio and Administration and
Accounts Wings.




                                                                                         75
   iv) Registrar of Newspapers for India

The Office of the Registrar of Newspapers for India, more popularly known
as RNI came into being on 1st July, 1956, on the recommendation of the First
Press Commission in 1953 and by amending the Press and Registration of Books
Act 1867. The Press and Registration of Books Act contain the duties and
functions of the RNI. On account of some more responsibilities entrusted upon
RNI during all these years, the office is performing both statutory as well as
some non-statutory functions. Some of the functions are –

   •   Compilation and maintenance of a Register of Newspapers containing
       particulars about all the newspapers published.
   •   Issue of Certificate of Registration to the newspapers published under
       valid declaration;
   •   Scrutiny and analysis of annual statements sent by the publishers of
       newspapers every year under Section 19-D of the Press and Registration of
       Books Act containing information on circulation, ownership etc;
   •   Informing the District Magistrates about availability of titles, to intending
       publishers for filing declaration;
   •   Ensuring that newspapers are published in accordance with the provisions
       of the Press and Registration of Books Act 1867 and the Rules made there
       under.
   •   Verification under Section 19-F of the PRB Act, of circulation claims
       furnished by the publishers in their Annual Statements; and
   •   Preparation   and    submission      to   the   Government   on   or   before
       31st December each year, a report containing all available information
       and statistics about the press in India with particular reference to the
       emerging trends in circulation and in the direction of common ownership
       units etc.



                                                                                       76
   •   Formulation of Newsprint Allocation Policy - Guidelines and issue of
       Eligibility Certificate to the newspapers to enable them to import
       newsprint and to procure indigenous newsprint.
   •   Assessing and certifying the essential need and requirement of newspaper
       establishments to import printing and composing machinery and allied
       materials.

   v) Directorate of Field Publicity

Directorate of Field Publicity with its headquarters in New Delhi is the largest
rural oriented interpersonal communication medium in the country. It operates
as a two-way channel for dissemination of information among masses and
gathering feed back for the Government. It acts as a bridge between the people
and the Government. Established in 1953 as ‘Five Year Plan Publicity
Organization’ with the sole objective of publicity of Five Year Plans, the
Directorate assumed its present format and role in 1959 with its publicity scope
widened and made all inclusive. Over the years, its areas of operation as also its
aims and objectives have been diversified. Briefly they are:- (a) to inform,
educate, motivate and involve the people, especially at the grass root level, in
the process of development so that the vision of the framers of the Constitution
as outlined in its preamble is realized. (b) to generate public opinion for the
implementation      of   developmental   programmes      and   mobilize    popular
participation in the process of nation building. (c) to keep the public, especially
the weaker, the marginalized and the remotely placed people informed about
the policies and the programme of the Government and generate awareness on
several national and social issues of relevance. (d) to keep the Government
informed of the people’s reactions to its programmes and policies and their
implementation at the field level thereby facilitating corrective measures as and
when required.




                                                                                      77
   vi) Press Council of India

Press Council is a statutory quasi-judicial authority mandated by the Parliament
to preserve the freedom of the press and maintain and improve the standards of
newspapers and the news agencies in India. It is an autonomous body with equal
quasi judicial authority over the authorities and the press persons.

The Council discharges its functions primarily through adjudications on
complaint cases received by it, either against the Press for violation of
journalistic ethics or by the Press for interference with its freedom. Where the
Council is satisfied, after inquiry, that a newspaper or a news agency has
offended against the standards of journalistic ethics or public taste or that an
editor or working journalist has committed any professional misconduct, the
Council may warn, admonish or censure them or disapprove of their conduct.
The Council is also empowered to make such observations as it may think in
respect of the conduct of any authority, including Government, for interfering
with the freedom of the press. The decisions of the Council are final and cannot
be questioned in any court of law.

The Press Council of India has been entrusted by the Parliament with the additional
responsibility of functioning as an Appellate Authority under Section 8 (c) under the
PRB Act 1867 and the Appellate Board comprising of the Chairman of the Council and
another member meet regularly to hear the Appeals before it.

   vii)Film Certification Appellate Tribunal

The Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) is a statutory body, constituted vide
Section 5D of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 under the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting, Government of India. The Tribunal hears the appeals filed under
Section 5C of the Act under which any applicant for a Certificate in respect of a film
who is aggrieved by an order of the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC), can



                                                                                   78
file an Appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal has its headquarters in New
Delhi. The Tribunal has a Secretary to look after its day to day affairs.

   viii)   Central Board of Film certification

Central Board of Film certification (CBFC) with its headquarters at Mumbai is
responsible for certifying the films produced in India as well as outside the country
suitable for public exhibition. The Board gives four categories of certificates "U" for
unrestricted public exhibition, "A" for public exhibition restricted to adults only,
"UA" for unrestricted public exhibition with parental guidance for children below the
age of 12 and "S" for exhibition to restricted audience such as doctors etc. These
certificates are issued through the Regional Offices of the Board located at
Bangalore, Calcutta, Chennai, Cuttack, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Mumbai, New Delhi
and Thiruvananthapuram. Appeal against the decision of the Board lies with the Film
Certification Appellate Tribunal. The enforcement of the penal provisions of the
Cinematograph     Act,   1952   is   with   the   State   Governments/Union   Territory
Administrations, since exhibition of films is a State subject.

   ix) The Advertising Standards Council of India

The Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI) is a self regulatory voluntary
organization of the advertising industry. It was set up in October 1985. The ASCI and
its Consumer Complaints Council deals with complaints received from consumers and
industry, against Ads which are considered as False, Misleading, Indecent, Illegal,
leading to Unsafe practices, or Unfair to competition, and             consequently in
contravention of the ASCI Code for Self-Regulation in Advertising. The representatives
of Indian Society of Advertisers, the Advertising Agencies Association of India and the
Indian Newspapers Society have set up the Council to self-regulate the content of
advertisements. The Code of the Council for Self-Regulation in Advertising specifies
that all advertising should be truthful, honest, decent, legal and safe for consumers
particularly minors, and fair to the competition.


                                                                                      79
   x) Copyright Board

The Copyright Board, a quasi-judicial body, was constituted in September 1958. The
jurisdiction of the Copyright Board extends to the whole of India. The Board is
entrusted with the task of adjudication of disputes pertaining to copyright
registration, assignment of copyright, grant of Licenses in respect of works withheld
from public, unpublished Indian works, production and publication of translations and
works for certain specified purposes. It also hears cases in other miscellaneous
matters instituted before it under the Copyright Act, 1957. The meetings of the Board
are held in five different zones of the country. This facilitates administration of
justice to authors, creators and owners of intellectual property including IP attorney’s
near their place of location or occupation.


   xi) Telecom Regulatory Authority of India

The entry of private service providers brought with it the inevitable need for
independent regulation. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) was, thus,
established with effect from 20th February 1997 by an Act of Parliament, called the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, to regulate telecom services,
including fixation/revision of tariffs for telecom services which were earlier vested in
the Central Government. TRAI's mission is to create and nurture conditions for growth
of telecommunications in the country in a manner and at a pace which will enable
India   to   play   a   leading   role   in   emerging   global   information   society.
One of the main objectives of TRAI is to provide a fair and transparent policy
environment which promotes a level playing field and facilitates fair competition.




                                                                                       80
                              10.       CASE LAWS

i) Sakal Papers Ltd. v. Union of India [4]

   In this case, the Daily Newspapers (Price and Control) Order, 1960, which fixed
   a minimum price and number of pages, which a newspaper is entitled to
   publish, was challenged as unconstitutional. The State justified the law as a
   reasonable restriction on a business activity of a citizen. The Supreme Court
   struck down the Order rejecting the State’s argument. The Court opined that,
   the right of freedom of speech and expression couldn’t be taken away with the
   object of placing restrictions on the business activity of the citizens. Freedom
   of speech can be restricted only on the grounds mentioned in clause (2) of
   Article 19.

ii) K. A. Abbas v. Union of India

   The petitioner for the first time challenged the validity of censorship as
   violative of his fundamental right of speech and expression. The Supreme Court
   however observed that, pre-censorship of films under the Cinematograph Act
   was justified under Article 19(2) on the ground that films have to be treated
   separately from other forms of art and expression because a motion picture
   was able to stir up emotions more deeply and thus, classification of films
   between two categories ‘A’ (for adults only) and ‘U’ (for all) was brought
   about.

iii) Bobby Art International v. Om Pal Singh Hoon

   The Supreme Court re-affirmed the afore-mentioned view and upheld the order
   of the Appellate Tribunal (under the Cinematograph Act) which had followed



                                                                                81
   the Guidelines under the Cinematograph Act and granted an ‘A’ certificate to a
   film.

iv) Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India

   The Supreme Court was faced with the question as to whether the Drug and
   Magic Remedies Act, which put restrictions on the advertisements of drugs in
   certain cases and prohibited advertisements of drugs having magic qualities for
   curing diseases, was valid as it curbed the freedom of speech and expression of
   a person by imposing restrictions on advertisements. The Supreme Court held
   that, an advertisement is no doubt a form of speech and expression but every
   advertisement is not a matter dealing with the expression of ideas and hence
   advertisement of a commercial nature cannot fall within the concept of Article
   19(1)(a).

v) Tata Press Ltd. v. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.

   A three judge bench of the Supreme Court differed from the view expressed in
   the Dawakhana case and held that ‘commercial advertisement’ was definitely a
   part of Article 19(1)(a) as it aimed at the dissemination of information
   regarding the product. The Court, however, made it clear that the government
   could regulate commercial advertisements, which are deceptive, unfair,
   misleading and untruthful.




                                                                               82
           11.       PROFESSIONAL OPPORTUNITIES IN THE MEDIA INDUSTRY

In India the Media and Entertainment industry comprises of the following segments:

   •   Television
   •   Print
   •   Films
   •   Radio
   •   Music
   •   Animation
   •   Gaming
   •   Advertising – internet and outdoor
Professional opportunities in Indian media and entertainment industry are enormous.
Most media organizations in India are in the private sector, while quite a few are
owned by the government. Media organizations which are directly under the control
of central government comes under the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The
government media units in which one can seek opportunities are: Akashvani (All India
Radio), Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan, Direct to Home, Press information bureau,
Publication Division, Photo Division, Registrars of newspapers, Directorate of
advertising and Visual Publicity, Press Council of India, Song and Drama Division, Film
Division, National Film Archive of India, Directorate of Film festivals, National Film
Development Corporation, Central Board of Film Certification, Children’s Film society
etc.
The Indian press, is predominantly in private hands. News agencies like Press Trust of
India, United News of India, Hindustan Samachar and Samachar Bharati, form the
major sources for disseminating information to the public.

Besides the government agencies, Media companies, industrial houses and start-ups
backed by venture money are all launching newspapers, magazines and television
channels. In the film industry, technical jobs include story and script writing for film
and television, copywriting for advertisements, cinematography, photography, Sound
mixing and recording, direction of films and promotional ventures etc.
                                                                                     83
Advertising industry is another major employer for media professionals.

Indian media and entertainment industry is one of the fastest growing in the world
and has the largest output by any media industry in the world. Raised regulations,
quality content development, competitive pricing, increased consumer base and
significant marketing, creative use of technology and work effectiveness are driving
the growth of this industry. Many media companies in India have grown up speedily
and are recruiting newer and younger talent for increased efficiency and creativity.
The challenges and scope for growth for those who decide to make a career for
themselves in the field of media and entertainment are varied and endless.

The Indian media and entertainment industry being one of the fastest growing sectors
in the country provides ample opportunities for professionals. Some of the
opportunities are -

   1. Obtaining registration under the media related laws
   2. Advisory on all aspects of contractual agreements pertaining to media laws.
   3. Legal compliance audit.
   4. Advisory on issues arising out of Intellectual property transfers and assignment
      rights for distributors, productions and fiscal arrangements for media
      corporations and individuals.
   5. Maintenance of accounts.
   6. Internal audit
   7. Information Systems Audit
   8. Audit of accounts

   9. Advisory on mergers and acquisitions
   10. Advisory on foreign investment and FEMA related compliances

   11. Representation before authorities
   12. Advisory on codes and guidelines applicable to the media industry




                                                                                    84
                               12.        USEFUL WEBSITES

www.mib.nic.in – Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. Of India
http://www.trai.gov.in/ - Telecom Regulatory Authority of India
www.pib.nic.in – Press Information Bureau

https://rni.nic.in/ - Registrar of Newspapers for India
www.allindiaradio.org – All India Radio

www.ddindia.gov.in - Doordarshan
http://rrtd.nic.in/ - Research, Reference and Training Division (RR&TD)

http://publicationsdivision.nic.in - Publications Division (PD)

http://photodivision.gov.in – Photo Division
www.davp.nic.in - Directorate of Advertising & Visual Publicity
http://presscouncil.nic.in/ - Press Council of India
http://iimc.nic.in – Indian Institute of Mass Communication

http://mib.nic.in/fcat/default.htm - Film Certification Appellate Tribunal
www.copyright.gov.in – Copyright office, India
www.dff.nic.in - Directorate of Film Festivals
www.cbfcindia.gov.in - Central Board of Film certification
www.becil.com – Broadcast Engineering Consultant India Ltd.

http://www.ijuindia.org/wjact.html - Indian Journalists Union
http://www.ascionline.org/ - Advertising Standards Council of India
http://www.nbanewdelhi.com - News Broadcasters Association
www.wapconline.org - World Association of Press Councils




                                                                             85
About the Author




                                                             CA Rajkumar S. Adukia
                B. Com. (Hons.), FCA, ACS, AICWA, LL.B, Dip.IFR (UK), MBA, DIPR, DLL&LP
                                              Mobile +91 98200 61049/+91 93230 61049
                                                                    Fax +91 22 26765579
                                                            Email rajkumarfca@gmail.com
                                                                             www.caaa.in


Mr. Rajkumar Adukia is an eminent business consultant, academician, writer, and
speaker. He is a rank holder from Bombay University and did his graduation from
Sydenham College of Commerce & Economics. He passed the Chartered Accountancy,
Company secretary and Cost Accountancy Course and was among the top rank holders
in the courses. Mr. Adukia also holds a degree in law. He has been involved in the
activities of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). In addition to being
a Council Member of the ICAI, he is actively involved in various committees of ICAI.

He has been coordinating with various professional institutions, associations’
universities, University Grants Commission and other educational institutions and has
actively participated with accountability and standards-setting organizations in India
and at the international level. He is constantly engaged in knowledge development
and has done extensive study and given various presentations and seminars on the
subject of Corporate Social Responsibility and Corporate Governance.

Based on his rich experience, he has written numerous articles on varied topics in
finance, real estate, International Trade, Climate Change and Carbon Credits
Mechanism etc. His authoritative articles appear in financial papers like Business
India, Financial Express, Economic Times and professional and business magazines. He
has authored several books on vast range of topics. His books are known for their
practicality and for their proactive approaches to meeting practice needs.
                                                                                       86
Mr. Adukia is a frequent speaker at seminars and conferences organized by the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, various chambers of Commerce, income
tax offices and other professional and industry associations.        He has extensive
experience as a speaker, moderator and panelist at workshops and conferences held
for both students and professionals across the country and abroad.




                                                                                   87
