                           MASTER OF ARTS
                               MASS
                          COMMUNICATION
                          AND JOURNALISM
                       CENTRE FOR OPEN AND
                        DISTANCE LEARNING
                                 (CODL)




MMC 201: MEDIA AND LAW AND ETHICS

                 BLOCK I




  CENTRE FOR OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING
  TEZPUR UNIVERSITY (A CENTRAL UNIVERSITY)
           TEZPUR, ASSAM - 784028
                   INDIA
                                  Vision

To grow to be a leading centre for human resource development through
distance, open and universal learning system.


                                 Mission

To provide quality higher education at door step through barrier-less,
flexible and open learning mode in conformity with national priority and
societal need.


                                Objective

   •   To offer degree, diploma, certificate level programme of study
       through distance learning in various emerging subjects across the
       disciplines.


   •   To offer job oriented and vocational programmes in flexible terms
       in the line of the national and regional level demand of manpower.


   •   To offer various programmes under lifelong learning contributing
       to the local and regional level requirements and as per the need of
       the society at large.


   •   To undertake various research and academic activities for
       furtherance of distance education in the region.

   •   To contribute to conserve and promote cultural heritage, literature,
       traditional knowledge and environment conducting short
       programmes,       workshops,    seminars    and     research      in
       interdisciplinary field.
MMC 201: MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS




     CENTRE FOR OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING

     TEZPUR UNIVERSITY (A CENTRAL UNIVRESITY)

           TEZPUR, ASSAM-784028

                    INDIA
             MMC-201: MEDIA LAW AND ETHICS

                     ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Prof. Abhijit Bora              Professor & Head, Department of Mass
                                Communication       and    Journalism,  Tezpur
                                University
Dr. P. Anbarasan                Associate Professor, Department of Mass
                                Communication       and    Journalism,  Tezpur
                                University
Dr. Uttam Kumar Pegu            Associate Professor, Department of Mass
                                Communication       and    Journalism,  Tezpur
                                University
Ms. Madhusmita Boruah           Assistant Professor, Mass Communication, Centre
                                for Open and Distance Learning, Tezpur
                                University

                         CONTRIBUTOR


Module I & IV Ms Mousuna Gogoi          Assistant Professor, Department of Mass
                                        Communication,       North   Lakhimpur
                                        College (Autonomous), Lakhimpur




                                   EDITOR

Prof. G.P.Pandey                   Professor,  Department   of     Mass
                                   Communication, Assam University

 Copyright © reserved with Centre for Open and Distance Learning (CODL), Tezpur
 University. No part of this wok may be reproduced in any form, by mimeography or
 any other means, without permission in writing from CODL.

 Any other information about CODL may be obtained from the Office of the CODL,
 Tezpur University, Tezpur-784028, Assam.

 Published by Director on behalf of the Centre for Open and Distance Learning,
 Tezpur University, Assam.




   MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                                    Page i
                     BLOCK I

MODULE I: LEGAL SYSTEM IN UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL SYSTEM
INDIA                     UNIT 2: RIGHTS, RULES AND LAWS

                                     UNIT 3: JUDICIAL SYSTEMS IN RELATION TO MEDIA

                                     UNIT 4: CONSTITUTIONAL OBLIGATIONS




MODULE II: MEDIA LAWS                UNIT 5: LAWS RELATED TO MEDIA PROFESSION

                                     UNIT 6: PUBLIC    INTEREST    LITIGATION   AND
                                     DEFAMATION

                                     UNIT 7: MEDIA LAWS RELATING TO WOMEN AND
                                     CHILDREN

                                     UNIT 8 : FREEDOM AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE
                                     MEDIA




     MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                                Page ii
                        TABLE OF CONTENT



                   MODULE I: LEGAL SYSTEM IN INDIA
UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL SYSTEM
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Objectives
1.3 Jurisprudence
1.3.1. Scope of Jurisprudence
1.4. Sources and Types of Law
1.5. History of Indian Media Law
1.6. Summing Up
1.7. Questions
1.8. Recommended Readings

UNIT 2: RIGHTS, RULES AND LAWS-JUSTICE AND LAW, LAW AND SOCIETY
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Objectives
2.3 Concepts of Justice and Law
2.3.1 Characteristics of Justice
2.3.2 Various dimensions of Justice
2.3.3 Doctrines of Justice
2.4 Laws and Society
2.4.1 Why Laws are important in a society
2.4.2 Relationship between laws and society
2.5 Summing Up
2.6 Questions
2.7 Recommended Readings

UNIT 3: JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN RELATION TO MEDIA UNIT STRUCTURE
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Objectives
3.3 Preamble of the Indian Constitution
3.4 Basic features of the Indian Constitution
3.5 Structure of Judicial system in India
3.4 Summing Up
3.5 Questions
3.6 Recommended Readings




  MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                               Page iii
UNIT 4: CONSTITUTIONAL OBLIGATIONS
4.1. Objectives
4.2. Introduction
 4.3. Freedom of Speech and Expression
4.3.1. Reasonable restriction on freedom of speech and expression
4.3.2. Feature of speech and expression
4.3.3. Some landmark judgement of the supreme court
4.4. Freedom of the Press
4.5. Right to Information Act, 2005
4.5.1. Objective of the Act
4.5.2. Commencement of the Act
4.5.3. Basic features of RTI Act, 2005
4.5 Summing Up
4.6 Questions
4.7 Recommended Readings

                               MODULE II: MEDIA LAWS
UNIT 5 : LAWS RELATED TO MEDIA PROFESSION

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Objectives
5.3 Introduction to Indian Penal Code
5.4. Press Council of India
5.5. Press Council Act
5.5.1. Compositions of the Press Council
5.5.2. Objectives and Functions of Press council of India
5.5.3. Press Council’s power
 5.6. Cinematographic Act, 1952
5.6.1. PART I – Highlights
5.6.2. PART II – Certification of Films for public display highlights
5.6.3. Film Certification of CBFC
5.6.4. Censorship
15.6 Summing Up
5.7 Questions
5.8 Recommended Readings

UNIT 6: PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION AND DEFAMATION

6.1 Introduction
6.2 Objectives
6.3 Civil and Criminal Law of Defamation



   MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                                        Page iv
6.3.1. Distinction between Civil and Criminal Law relating to
Defamation
6.3.2. Defamation: Key Elements
6.3.3. Defence to an action for defamation
6.3.4. Remedies for Defamation
6.3.5. Defamation’s Punishment
6.3.6. Case Study
6.4. Libel and Slander
6.4.1. Elements of Libel and Slander
6.4.2. Defence against libel and slander
6.4.3. Libel and Slander : The distinction
6.4.4. Case study
6.5. Public interest litigation (PIL)
6.5.1. Cases in which PIL can be filed included
6.5.2. Method of filing s PIL – when and how
6.5.3. Case study
6.5 Summing Up
6.6 Questions
6.7 Recommended Readings



UNIT 7: MEDIA LAWS RELATING TO WOMEN & CHILDREN

7.1 Introduction
7.2 Objectives
7.3 Law relating to obscenity
7.3.1 Cases of obscenity
7.4. Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986
7.5. The Children Act, 1960
7.6 Summing Up
7.7 Questions
7.8 Recommended Readings




UNIT 8: FREEDOM AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE MEDIA

8.1. Introduction
8.2. Objectives
8.3. Freedom and Responsibility
8.4. Contempt of Court 1971


   MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                                Page v
8.4.1. Punishment for the Contempt of Court
8.4.2. Defences allowed in Contempt Proceeding
8.4.3 Norms to be followed by the media to avoid Contempt of
Course cases
8.5. Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955
8.5.1. Main Provisions of the Act
8.6. Parliamentary Proceeding Act, 1977
8.7. Summing Up
8.8. Questions
8.9. Recommended Readings




   MMC 201- Media Law and Ethics                               Page vi
                           COURSE INTRODUCTION


This course, Media Law and Ethics (MMC 201) addresses the different aspects of
judicial systems particularly in relation to Indian media. The basic objective of this
course is to discuss the ethical issues in journalism in context to existing laws and
policies. This course includes topics like legal system in India, media laws, media
ethics, and issues in reporting, etc. This course is divided into two Blocks and each
block includes of two modules.

The Block I includes Module I and Module II which deal with the topics of Legal
system in India and Media Laws respectively. On the other hand the Block II
consists of Module III and Module IV which further comprise topics such as
Media Ethics and Issues in Reporting respectively.

The Module I of this course include four units based on the topic named as Legal
system in India. This module introduces to legal system and gives an idea about
the rights , rules and laws, judicial system in relation to media and constitutional
obligation, etc. discussed within these four units.

The Module II, is named as Media Laws which contains five units including Laws
Related to Media Profession (Unit 5) , Public Interest Litigation and Defamation
(Unit 6), Media Laws relating to Women & Children (Unit 7) and Freedom and
accountability of the Media (Unit 8) . This module is all about teaching the students
to understand the different existing laws in relation to media for practicing
journalistic duties and responsibilities.

Under Block II , the Module III and Module IV include Media Ethics and Issues
in Reporting respectively. The third module discusses about ethics in journalism ,
social responsibilities of the journalists, and rights and duties of the journalists. On
the other hand Module IV consists of different issues related to journalism such
as Media and Conflict Reporting (Unit 12) , Cyber Laws (Unit 13) and Intellectual
Property Rights ( Unit 14). From these units you will know the exiting provisions
to practice ethics in the media profession in order to maintain social equilibrium.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 1
MODULE I: LEGAL SYSTEM IN INDIA




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics   Page 2
UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL SYSTEM


UNIT STRUCTURE
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Objectives
1.3 Jurisprudence

       1.3.1. Scope of Jurisprudence

1.4. Sources and Types of Law

1.5. History of Indian Media Law

1.6. Summing Up

1.7. Questions

1.8. Recommended Readings

1.1 INTRODUCTION


The unit introduces you to the basic concepts of jurisprudence. The purpose
of this unit is to help understand the students about the source of law and
types of law. We will also discuss the history of Indian media law.

1.2 OBJECTIVES
The objective of this unit is given below:

   •   To understand the concept of jurisprudence
   •   To understand about the sources of law and the types of law
   •   To know about the history of Indian media law
1.3 JURISPRUDENCE
The term ‘Jurisprudence’ is derived from its Latin word “Jurisprudentia”
which means ‘Knowledge of Law’. In the Latin language, ‘Jure’ or
‘juris’ means ‘law’ and ‘prudentia’ means ‘skill’ or ‘knowledge’.
Jurisprudence then signifies a practical ‘knowledge of law and its
application’. This meaning of the term is also given in dictionaries, for

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                          Page 3
instance, Murray’s New English Dictionary lists as its first meaning
‘Knowledge of or skill’ in law. Under the French law it refers to the body of
judicial precedent, as distinguished from Statues, and expert opinions etc. in
Germany it is termed as “rechts philosophic’ that is the philosophy of rights,
that is of law in an abstract sense.
Sometimes terms like ‘medical jurisprudence’, ‘Architectural Engineering’
and ‘environmental jurisprudence’ etc are used. When used in this sense, the
phrase refers to treatise dealing with that part of knowledge which is used in
applying legal doctrines or principles applicable to or useful for medico-legal
cases or architectural or engineering or environmental cases.
John Austin defines ‘jurisprudence’ as ‘science of law which deals with
analysis of the concepts or its underlying principles’. For Austin, the
appropriate subject of jurisprudence is positive law i.e., the law as it is
(existing law). To him, jurisprudence is not a moral philosophy but it is a
systematic study of actual law as distinguished from moral, ideal or natural
law. Austin further divides jurisprudence into two classes viz., ‘general
jurisprudence’ and ‘particular jurisprudence’. According to him ‘general
jurisprudence’ is the philosophy of positive law. It is concerned directly with
principles and distinctions which are common to various systems of
particular and positive law and which each of those various systems
inevitably involves, let it be worthy of praise or blame or let it accord or not
with an assured measure or test’. The concept of rights and duties,
ownership, possession, personality, property etc. comes under the province
of general jurisprudence. ‘Particular jurisprudence’ “is the science of any
such system of positive law as now actually obtains or once actually obtained
in a specifically determined nation or specifically determined nations”.
Holland defines jurisprudence as ‘the formal science of positive law’.
According to Holland, formal science is that which deals with the various
relations which are regulated by legal rules than with the rules themselves
which regulate those relations. Thus, for Holland jurisprudence finally is a
formal science as opposed to material. Material science supplies the facts,
while the formal science of jurisprudence elucidates the meaning of the
relations or prescriptions regulated by law.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 4
According to Prof. Salmond jurisprudence can be defined in two senses first
in the ‘Generic Sense’ jurisprudence can be defined as “Science of Civil
Law” and in its ‘specific sense’ jurisprudence can be defined as “the Science
of the first principle of Civil Law”.
Sir C.K. Allen describes jurisprudence as the scientific synthesis of the
essential principles of law.

Gray has defined jurisprudence as a science of law i.e., systematic
arrangement of rules followed by courts and principles underlying them. For
Gray, jurisprudence is of three kinds- first particular jurisprudence or the
science of law of a particular community; second comparative jurisprudence
or the comparison of the law of two or more communities; third, general
jurisprudence or the comparison of all legal systems of the world.

Hindu Jurisprudence: Hindu jurisprudence is rooted in Hindu religion and
custom. In Hindu jurisprudence, the prescribed rules that are supposed to
regulate human relations are founded on religion. That which is wholesome
for the community is not separable from what is supposed to be pleasing to
the deity. Hindu jurisprudence concerns itself and embraces all activities of
man from the moment he is conceived till he attains salvation. In Western
Jurisprudence, positive prevails as against immemorial custom or revelation
because it embraces a small portion of a man’s life. One who did not commit
a crime or have anything to do with a contract or tort or breach of trust or
marriage or real or personal property did not have, till very recently, to worry
about the law. But this was not so in India. The moment he was conceived,
the law prescribed a ceremony. His advent into the world was celebrated by
another ceremony, wherein gifts to fellowmen, whose society he joins, play
a prominent part. Then comes the tonsure ceremony, and, after that, the
Upanayanam (holy thread investiture), more important than the physical
birth, as it is the admission into the world of God-knowledge, the beginning
of Brahmacharya, the path of God (Brahm). Later on, after study, according
to the choice of the individual, comes marriage which was wholly spiritual
in its conception. Then, we get the ritusanti, the consummation of the
marriage. After that, his son’s conception ceremony comes, and so the circle

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 5
continues. When a man dies, prescribed rites are to be performed. The matter
does not end there. The eldest son performs the Shradhasso that deceased
may attain Moksha or salvation. Early Hindu juristic thought and hence
Hindu jurisprudence bears a distinct imprint of its own. “Hindu Law,” says
Mayne, “has the oldest pedigree of any known system of jurisprudence”.
Hindu Jurisprudence thus made no demarcation between ceremonial rites or
rules, moral or religious information and strict legal precepts.

1.4 SCOPE OF JURISPRUDENCE
In the modern age, jurisprudence has been treated as a science of social
control of human conduct. This idea invariably widened the scope of this
subject. Hence for an integrated understanding of jurisprudence, it is
essential to understand jurisprudence from all angles. There are mainly four
views on this subject which are popularly known as the school of legal
theory. These are:
   i.   Philosophical,
 ii.    Analytical,
 iii.   Historical,
 iv.    Sociological.
Philosophical Jurisprudence: Exponents of this school of jurisprudence
were mainly concerned with the relations of law to some set of idea or ideals
outside the law. Among such ideals are-“that the purpose of society is to
make men virtuous and such is the purpose of law, which the end of the law
is to maintain justice in society, and that legal restrictions can be justified
only in so far as they promote the freedom of individuals in society (Kant),
that the end of law is to promote the greatest happiness of the greatest number
(Bentham)”. In short, this school is primarily concerned with principles of
ultimate right and wrong.
Analytical Jurisprudence: Those thinkers of jurisprudence who regard the
law as a command emanating from the government or from the state as the
political organization of a society and who treat the relation of law to the
State as its most important aspect, may be grouped in the analytical school
of jurisprudence. They are mainly concerned with the definition of law. In


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 6
fact, the purpose of analytical jurisprudence is to analyse without reference
either to their historical origin and development or to their ethical
significance or validity of the first principles of the law. John Austin is the
leading exponent of this school.
Historical Jurisprudence: Writers of Historical Jurisprudence take the
social institutions at a time sequence with primacy given to the primitive
legal institutions of the society. The German Historical School of Savigny
and Puchta developed a conception of the origin and growth of law on the
analogy of language. The historical school gave a theoretical justification for
those vast studies of legal history which in Europe, England and even
America was consummated during the nineteenth century.
Sociological Jurisprudence: the sociological jurisprudence is chiefly
concerned with the relation of law to contemporary social institutions. It is
still in the making. Jurists like, Pound, Ihering Enrlich have adopted this
method for the study of legal philosophy. According to these jurists, the
essential characteristic of law is that it shall prevail, that it shall actually
represent the common interactions of men in their daily life.
This classification of jurisprudence provides a rough classification of ideas
and it is not proper to limit the scope of jurisprudence on the basis of this
classification. With the changes in the social, political and economic outlook
and with the changes in the conditions of individuals and nation life much
may come under the province of this science of law, namely, jurisprudence.
Thus, we can say that whatever the nature of law or the working of authority,
or the analysis of legal concepts legal concepts, jurisprudence should nor
confine itself to logic. Legal theory is concerned with law as it exists and
functions in the society. The way in which law is created and enforced, the
influence of social opinions, the effectiveness of law and the part played by
sanctions, are all points where jurisprudence meets other disciplines such as
sociology, psychology and so forth. One task of jurisprudence is to link law
with other disciplines and to help to locate it within its wider social context.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 7
1.5 SOURCES AND TYPES OF LAW
The sources of Laws are as given below:

   i.     Custom
 ii.      Religion and Morality
 iii.     Legislation
 iv.      Delegated Legislation
  v.      Judicial Decisions
 vi.      Equity
vii.      Scientific Commentaries

Types of Law: Law in general or universal sense includes different varieties
or species. These are:

       a) Law of Nature: The law of nature consists of those ideals, abstract
          principles of universal justice and applicability which were
          considered to be based on Reasons or God for the guidance of all men
          for all times and for all places. According to Greeks, Romans and
          Hindus in ancient time to live according to reasons was to live
          according to nature itself.
       b) Customary Law: According to Keeton, customary law consists of
          those rules of human action, established by usage and regarded and
          legally binding by those to whom the rules are applicable, which are
          adopted by the court and applied as a source of law, because they are
          generally followed by the political society as a whole. Or by some
          part of it.
       c) Physical Law: Physical law which is also known as the scientific law
          is those which describe general nature and principles according to
          which the physical phenomena act and interact under given
          conditions.
       d) Moral Law: Moral laws are also termed as ethical rules which
          generally lay down an ideal standard for human behaviour. It
          includes rights conduct, right means and fair play etc.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 8
   e) Conventional Law: Any rule which is voluntarily agreed by parties
      in their mutual relationship with each other is known as the
      conventional law.
   f) Constitutional Law: It is the basic and fundamental law of the state
      which governs or determines the structure and functions of its various
      organs.
   g) Common Law: Common law consists of all those principles, usages
      and rules of action applicable to the government and security of
      persons and of property which does not rest for their authority upon
      any express or positive declaration of the will of the legislation.
   h) Equity Law: It is that law which is based on ‘fairness’. All legal
      systems of the world had developed equity law as corrective to the
      law of the land.
   i) Administrative law: It is the law relating to the organization and
      services   performed        by various   administrative   agencies     of
      government. It deals with powers of all such bodies and determines
      their rights and duties.
   j) By-Laws: The legislation of subordinate law making bodies are
      known as by-laws.
   k) Martial Law : It means the suspension of the ordinary law and
      government of a country or part of it by Military Tribunals.


   l) Military Law: It is that law which controls the conduct of all those
      serving within the armed forces which are subject to the jurisdiction
      of Court Martial.
   m) Public Law: It is that part of the law which is applicable to State in
      relation to its subjects.
   n) Private Law: It is that part of the law which determines the
      relationship between individuals in their ordinary private capacities
      like the law of Contract, the law of property etc.
   o) International Law: The set of rules that are regulated by the
      civilized states as binding in their relationship with other states. It
      arises primarily in the form of treaties and conventions.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 9
     p) Civil Law: It means a legal system of a particular country.


1.6 HISTORY OF INDIAN MEDIA LAW
In the year 1780, the first newspaper of India namely The Bengal Gazette or
Calcutta General Advertiser was started by James Augustus Hickey. But due
to its outspoken criticism of the Government, it was seized in the year 1872.
Until the year 1757, there was no press regulation. It was only after the
British East India Company started ruling a part of India after the Battle of
Plassey.

To control the press, censorship and licensing was a European institution. In
Bengal, in the year 1823, it was introduced through Adam’s regulations.

Metcalfe’ Act replaced the Licensing regulations that were applicable to the
whole territory of the East India Company. The location of the premises of
its publication is required to be declared by the printer and publishers of
every newspaper.

Lord Canning reintroduced Licensing in 1857. It was then applied to all form
of publications. As a general law Indian Penal Code was passed in the year
1860. The offences of defamation and obscenity were laid down by it i.e. the
offences which any writer, editor or publisher must avoid.

Registration of Books Act, 1867:The Press and Registration of Book Act,
which continues to be in force was brought into effect in 1867. This was
merely a regulatory law which enabled the government to regulate printing
presses and newspapers by a system of registration and to preserve copies of
books and other material printed in India. The idea was to prevent
publication of anonymous literature.

The Vernacular Press Act, 1878: The Vernacular Press Act of 1878,
enacted during the region of Viceroy Lytton was undoubtedly one of the
most repressive of the press legislations passed during this period. This was
the first of the press laws specifically directed against newspapers published
in the Indian language. The Act which was aimed at suppressing seditious

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 10
writings required that all Indian owners of newspapers furnish a bond for Rs.
10,000 while registering their papers with the registrar and undertake not to
publish any ‘objectionable material’. The Act introduced the concept of a
security deposit which could be forfeited if, in the opinion of the government,
the undertaking was violated. To make it worse, a publisher did not have
recourse to a court of law to challenge an order of forfeiture of deposit or
confiscation of the ‘objectionable material’. The act also empowered the
government to issue search warrants and enter the premises of any press.

Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 :Although the Criminal Procedure Code
was the general law laying down the procedure for criminal matters, it
contained some matters of interest to the press. For instance, Section 108,
particularly after the insertion of Section 99-A to 99-G in 1992 conferred
powers upon the government to search and forfeit publications which
offended the provisions of Section 124-A, 153-A or 295 of the Indian Penal
Code.

The Official Secrets Act, 1889 :The Official Secrets Act was the first
measure after the repeal of the Vernacular Press Act to affect the freedom of
the press. It was a reaction to a number of official secrets being leaked to the
press. The Act exposed the Indian owned press to further oppression as the
government was to decide as to whether the material was confidential or not.
In 1903, the Act came up for amendment. Under the Act, as it originally
stood, a person who was in possession of military secrets could not be
prosecuted unless the criminal intention was proved. In the amendment, both
criminal and civil matters were covered and the government was spared the
burden of proving the intention of the accused. The amendment became the
subject matter of much criticism by the vernacular and Anglo-Saxon press.
The Act was more drastically recast in 1923.

The Newspaper (Incitement to Offences) Act, 1908 : In 1908, The
Newspaper (Incitement to Offences) Act was introduced along with the
Explosive Substances Act. The Home Minister, Sir Harvey Adamson stated
that the bill was designed to empower the government to confiscate the

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 11
printing press and to extinguish a newspaper which contains any incitement
to murder or any offences under the companion bill on explosive substances.
He considered that ‘the public incitement to murder and acts of violence
carried all through the medium of an infamous section of the press’ was an
equally serious menace as the ‘actual making and use of bombs’.

Copyright Act :Copyright Act was passed by the British Parliament in 1911.
Indian Copyright Act came into force in 1914 and it brought into force
similar provisions like the Copyright Act of 1911 passed by the British
Parliament. Later in the year 1957, it was replaced by the new Copyright Act,
1957.

Cinematograph Act :The Cinematography Act was passed by the
government in the year 1918 to regulate the exhibitions by means of
Cinematographs. This Act was later replaced by the Cinematography Act,
1952.

Indian Press Act, 1910 :The Act of 1910 empowered the government to
require a deposit of security by the keeper of any press which contains matter
inciting sedition, murder or any offence under the Explosive Substances Act,
and also provided for the forfeiture of such deposit in specified
contingencies. No forfeiture could be questioned except in the High Court.
Between 1917 and 1919 coercive action was taken against 963 newspapers
and printing presses. In addition, 173 new presses and 129 newspapers were
stifled at birth by the demand for crippling securities. More than 500
publications were proscribed during that period. On October 6, 1921, Young
India published the manifesto on freedom of opinion.

The Foreign Relations Act :The Foreign Relations Act came into force in
1932. The main objective of the Act was to provide against the publication
of statements which are likely to be intolerance for the continuation of
friendly relations between the British Government and the governments of
certain foreign states.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 12
The Newspaper (Prices and Pages) Act, 1956 :The Act authorizes the
Central Government to control the price of newspapers in relation to the
number of pages and size. The central Government is also entitled to set the
allocation of space to for advertising matter.
The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954:

This Act provides for delivery of books and newspapers to public libraries.
Under Section 3-A of this Act, the publisher of every newspaper is required
to deliver at his own expense, one free copy of each of the newspaper as soon
as it is published to public libraries as notified by the Central Government.
They are:

   i.   National Library, Calcutta
 ii.    Connemara Public Library, Madras
 iii.   Central Library, Bombay

The Working Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Conditions
of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955

This Act regulated certain conditions of services of working Journalists and
other persons employed in newspaper establishments

Press Council Act : After 1976 the Act was reconstituted in the year 1978
for maintaining and improving the standards of news agencies and
newspapers in India.




                       ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

                1. Discuss Vernacular Press Act,1778.______________
                   __________________________________________
                2. What are the types of law?____________________
                   __________________________________________




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 13
1.7 SUMMING UP
Jurisprudence is the philosophical interpretation of the nature and purpose of
the law. It is thus a set of rules and regulations that regulate human behaviour
in societies.

Jurisprudence has been treated as a science of social control of human
conduct. For an integrated understanding of jurisprudence, it is essential to
understand jurisprudence from all angles. There are mainly four views on
this subject which are popularly known as the school of legal theory. These
are- i) Philosophical ii) Analytical iii) Historical iv) Sociological.

1.8 QUESTIONS
    1. Define Jurisprudence. Discuss the scope of Jurisprudence.
    2. Discuss the sources of law.
    3. Elaborate on the history of the Indian media law.



1.9 RECOMMENDED READINGS
    1. JURISPRUDENCE (LEGAL THEORY) by Prof. Namita Aggarwal
                                  ***************




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 14
UNIT 2: RIGHTS , RULES AND LAWS-JUSTICE AND LAW, LAWS AND
SOCIETY


UNIT STRUCTURE
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Objectives
2.3 Concepts of Justice and Law
        2.3.1 Characteristics of Justice

       2.3.2 Various dimensions of Justice

          2.3.3 Doctrines of Justice
2.4 Laws and Society

         2.4.1 Why Laws are important in a society

       2.4.2 Relationship between laws and society

2.5 Summing Up
2.6 Questions
2.7 Recommended Readings


2.1 INTRODUCTION
The unit introduces you to the basic concept of justice and law, and laws and
society. Various dimensions of justice and the doctrines of justice have been
discussed. The purpose of this unit is to help you understand the relationship
between laws and society and the importance of laws in a society.

2.2 OBJECTIVES
After reading this unit you will be able to –

   •   Get a clear concept of justice and law
   •   Discuss the various dimensions of law and the doctrines of justice
   •   Discuss the concept of law and society
   •   Know the importance of law in a society
   •   Relationship between laws and society

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 15
2.3 CONCEPTS OF JUSTICE AND LAW



Term ‘Justice’ is originated from the Latin word ‘Jus’ that means bond or
tie. This means that justice is a system in which men are tied in a close
relationship. A man living in society is attached to another man in one way
or the other. This relationship has few rights and duties attached to it. When
a man while enjoying his rights also fulfils his duties and behaves in an
appropriate manner with others, then he is said to be doing justice. It is the
result of the fair and proper administration of law.

According to Salmond, “Justice means provide everyone his share”

According to Plato, ‘Justice is a quality.’ In simple words, the meaning of
justice is to discharge one’s duties honestly and not to interfere in other
actions.

So justice is concerned with human welfare.

Broadly speaking, ‘Law’ is a national pattern of conduct to which actions do
or ought to conform. Law is defined by John Salmond as “a body of
principles recognized and applied by the state in the administration of
justice.”

Laws are sets of rules and regulations that are meant to be practiced and
established by a form of government. Laws are meant to attempt to create
equality throughout a community or society. For example, the freedom of
the speech and expression, the freedom of the press, the freedom to assemble,
the freedom to any religion etc is guaranteed by the Constitution of India.
This law, upheld by the Indian constitution, is created to provide each citizen
their individual rights. This is meant to develop equality for each individual
to believe and express what they desire. However, laws often have defects.
They may not clearly state the literal meaning, resulting in various
interpretations of a single law. For example, in the Tinker v. Des Moines
case, three students were sent home because they were protesting against the
government's policy in Vietnam by wearing black armbands. In their

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 16
opinion, their right to the freedom of expression was being threatened. In this
situation who is right? The administration or the students?


Laws are used to determine fair and appropriate sanctions for people in a
society, this is known as justice. Justice is a formulated opinion on the
fairness of how a conflict should be resolved. Influences from religion,
economic background, and race are all factors that could potentially
influence what an individual determines as just. What one social group
defines as just may not be the same that another social group defines as just.



2.3.1 CHARACTERISTICS OF JUSTICE

a) Human welfare

b) Ethical concept

c) Fulfilment of reasonable interest

d) To provide everybody their own reasonable share without any
discrimination

e) Performance of duties

f) Justice is related to values prevailing in society




2.3.2 VARIOUS DIMENSIONS OF JUSTICE

1. Legal Dimensions of Justice

Justice and laws have a close affinity with each other. The State makes laws
and implements them in order to establish justice in the society.

Following conditions are necessary to ensure legal justice:-

    •   Just laws

    •   Equality before law

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 17
   •   Uniform legal system

   •   Impartial and independent judiciary

   •   Inexpensive and efficient justice

   •   Democratic organization of legislative bodies

2. Political dimensions of justice

       Nobody should be denied political rights and to provide equal
       political rights is political justice.

       Following conditions are necessary to ensure political justice:-

   •   Universal adult franchise

   •   Right to contest elections

   •   Right to criticize the government

   •   Right to form political parties

   •   Right to protest

   •   Right to petition

   •   Respect for human right

   •   Protection of the interests of minorities

   •   Political authority should be based on the consent of the people

   •   Democratic system

   •   Special provisions for the protection of the interests of Backward
       classes and backward tribes




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 18
3. Social Dimensions of Justice

Social justice means to give proper opportunities to every citizen, in every
sphere of life, to develop his personality and to end all types of social
inequalities.

        Following conditions are necessary to ensure Social justice:

    •   Equality before law

    •   The absence of special rights

    •   Prohibitions of discrimination

    •   To end the caste system

    •   Just distribution of wealth

    •   Democratic government

    •   Just balance between freedom and social control

    •   Social security

    •   Provision of equal political rights

    •   Protection of interest of minorities

    •   Abolition of social values

    4. Economic Dimensions of Justice

        Economic justice means to provide equal opportunities to everybody
        to earn his livelihood. It also means to help such people who are not
        able to work and earn their livelihood. The basic needs of everybody
        such as food, cloth and shelter should be fulfilled and the unequal
        distribution of wealth needed to be stopped.

        Following conditions are necessary to ensure economic justice:-

        •   Right to work for everybody


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 19
        •   Fulfilment of basic needs
        •   To reduce wide economic disparities
        •   Protection of the interest of workers
        •   From each according to his ability and to each according to his
            needs
        •   Just distribution of wealth
        •   End of economic exploitation
        •   Special protection of the interest of weaker section
        •   Limited right to property
        •   Question of state interference in economic needs
        •   Fixed economy is better
        •   Equal wages for the same job

2.3.3 DOCTRINES OF JUSTICE

   i.   Rule of Law: It states that the state is governed, not only by the ruler
        or the nominated representatives of the people but by the law. The
        Indian Constitution intended the country to be a country governed
        by the rule of law. It provides that the Constitution is the superior
        power in the country. Legislative and the Executive drive their
        authority from the Constitution. It just laid to the principle that all
        people and institutions are subject to and accountable to the law that
        is fairly applied and enforced; the principle of government by law.


  ii.   Rule of Natural Justice: The concept of natural justice implies that
        during a trial both the parties to the trial must be treated with
        fairness. Both the parties to the trial must have an equal chance to
        put their case forward and to put their points. It thus implies to be
        fair, reasonable and equality. In any judicial process, these are the
        procedural principles to be taken into account for protecting the
        rights of a private individual. Principles of natural justice are firmly
        grounded in Articles14and 21 of the Constitution. Example: The
        entire M.B.A. entrance examination was cancelled by the Osmania
        University because of mass-copying. The action of the University
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 20
        was challenged on the Ground that it was taken without observing
        the principles of natural justice.
The two basic principles of natural justice are-

    a. Nemo in Propria causa judex, esse, debet: Rule against Bias.
    b. Audi Alteram Partem: Rule of fair hearing.
caution in interpreting them universally because different individuals, people
and cultures vary in the range of use of nonverbal communication.


                           ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

             1. Discuss       the        political        dimensions     of
                justice.________________________________________
                _______________________________________________
             2. What are the characteristics of justice? ________________
                ________________________________________________




2.4 LAWS AND SOCIETY


The term society is derived from the Latin word ‘socious’ that means
associations or companionship- a large group of individuals who are
associative with each other. Society is the system in which people live in
organized communities. It may be defined as an organization of people with
an interest or purpose. Human conduct is controlled through moral standards,
religious doctrines, social traditions and legal rules.

Law plays a fundamental role in our lives and in our society. Law is used as
one of the mode to control the society. The laws of society reflect the values
and beliefs of the people living in that society. As society’s values change,
so does the law. Our laws reflect our accepted standards of right and wrong.
Society cannot always agree with the same moral codes and standards the
law applies equally to everyone without exception. No individual in the
society has any rights to use any unrestrained ability to take away the rights
of another person except in accordance with the land of the country.


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 21
Law being a social science, it grows and develops within the society. Thus,
a social change in society brings about a change in the definition, scope and
functions of law. For example, what is prohibited behaviour today may
become a permissible conduct tomorrow and vice versa. Thus, abortion
which was considered to be a heinous crime because of the immorality
involved in it is no longer an offence after the enactment of the law legalizing
abortion. The concept of law depends largely on the social values, accepted
norms and behavioural patterns of a particular society at a given time.

The law of the land has the power and the authority to command and control
misconduct, corruption, the inconstant and unfaithful behaviour of the
human’s beings, to sustain discipline and also to force limitations on some
freedom. We are living in a disorganized and unresolved world. So without
a proper and authoritative setting in the society, the normal livelihood of a
person would be disorganized and in havoc. Law contributes a lot to the
society we are living in. It helps the society in sorting out contention,
disagreement and disputes. It protects the individual rights, properties and
liberties of a person, ensuring equality and justice to all the people living in
the society. It is important in society because it acts as a guideline as to what
is accepted in society. Without it, there would be conflicts between social
groups and communities. It is important that we follow them. The law allows
for easy adoption to changes that occur in the society.

2.4.1 WHY LAWS ARE IMPORTANT IN A SOCIETY?

i) It helps to regulate society

ii) Law encourage the dignity, principle and integrity within us to protect the
rights as human beings

iii) Education and technologies are protected by law so that they can thrive
and grow for the advancement of the society.

iv) Law deters criminality with the punishment of imprisonment.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 22
v) Law provides procedures for settling disputes which may arise between
the people living in the society. It thus protects people from harming each
other’s and to live in the society with peace and harmony.

vi) Law can bring about change as laws influence social thinking.

vii) We all are equal law; it allows for just and fair treatment for all.

viii) Laws outline our rights and duties

ix) It identifies the values and believes of a society.

People should respect the law of the land, comprehend its importance and
abide by it.

2.4.2 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LAWS AND SOCIETY

Law and society are interrelated to each other. Society would become a chaos
without the law of the land. Law also needs to be changed according to the
changes that the society faces because without the necessary changes law
cannot keep step with society. Without the control of the law, the society
became the mess or at brutal. So, to keep the society peacefully, we need to
create a balanced relationship between law and society.

The legal system reflects all the vitality of life within any society. We can
say that law is a social science characterized by movement and adaptation.
Rules are neither created nor applied in a vacuum. On the other hand, they
are created and used time to time and again for a purpose. Rules are intended
to move us in a certain direction that we assume is good or prohibit
movement in a direction that we believe is bad.

The social rules are made by the members of the society. Disobedience of
the social rules is followed by punishment of social disapproval. There is no
positive penalty associated with the violation of rules except ostracism.

Law is enforced by the state. The objective of the law is to bring order in the
society so the members of society can progress and develop with some sort
of security regarding the future. The state makes laws. Disobedience of state

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 23
laws invites penalty, which is enforced by the government by the power of
the state. What is not enforceable is not Law.

The legal system of a country reflects the rules of society. If there is a change
in social rules then we can say that a change in social law just occurs. Law
can be changed due to the social condition by amending the law according
to the circumstances and situation.

Laws are also used to manage various governmental public benefits such as
educational centres. Through the concept of the welfare state law are being
used to achieve social justice, social welfare, eradication of poverty and
economic exploitations.

2.6 SUMMING UP
In this unit, we learned about law and justice, the various dimensions of
justice i.e. legal, political, social and political. Further, we have also
discussed about laws and society, the importance of law in a society and the
relationship between laws and society.

From the above discussion, we have learned that the ultimate goal of the law
is justice for all. To ensure justice the idea is to treat every person equally.
We consider a law unjust if it discriminates against one person from the other
on the basis of irrelevant characteristics. Justice is impartial irrespective of
people’s status. The law itself should conform to society’s values and beliefs.
Law thus plays an important role in the society. To live in peace and harmony
in the society the individuals must identify and agree that the law of a country
is obligatory and imperative to balance and control the society. Whether it is
an individual, a worker or a business owner everyone is subject to or abide
by the law of the land. It controls the behaviour of mankind, influences
human rights, raises the standards of living, and allows us to determine the
quality of our lives.

successful communication, apart from the elements of communication, body
language and proxemics plays an important role.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 24
2.7 QUESTIONS
   1. What are the various dimensions of justice? Discuss.
   2. Discuss the relationship between law and society.
   3. Write short notes on :


       a) Rule of Law                        d) Justice and Law
       b) Rule of Natural Justice           e) Law and Society


2.8 RECOMMENDED READINGS
   •   The Indian Constitution by P.K. Pandey
   •   Jurisprudence –Legal Theory by Prof. Nomita Aggarwal
   •   Principles of Political Sciences by R.C. Aggarwal


                                *************




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                     Page 25
UNIT 3: JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN RELATION TO MEDIA UNIT
STRUCTURE

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Objectives
3.3 Preamble of the Indian Constitution
3.4 Basic features of the Indian Constitution

3.5 Structure of Judicial system in India

3.4 Summing Up

3.5 Questions
3.6 Recommended Readings



3.1 INTRODUCTION


In this unit, we will discuss about the Preamble of the Indian constitution,
basic features of the Indian constitution. We will also enumerate ant the
structure of the judicial system in India.

A Constitution means a document having a special legal sanctity which sets
out the framework and principal functions of the government, Constitution
of a country gives an idea about the basic structure of the political system
under which its people are to be governed. The Constitution deals with the
powers of the principal organs of state, demarcates their responsibilities and
regulates their relationships with each other’s and with the people. It can also
be termed as “Fundamental Law” of the country which reflects people’s faith
and aspirations. The Constitution of India is considered as the Superior Law
of the land. It places down the structure describing the governmental
principles, construct the structures, policy powers and responsibilities and
obligations of executive, administrative and governmental establishments
and organization, sets the basic rights and duties of every citizen.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 26
3.2 OBJECTIVES

After reading this unit, you will be able to:

   •   Know the Preamble of the Indian Constitution
   •   Understand the Indian Constitution’s basic features
   •   Know the structure of India’s Judicial System



3.3 PREAMBLE OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

“WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute
India into a SOVEREIGN, SOCIALIST, SECULAR, DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens:

JUSTICE; social, economic and political;

LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;

EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the [unity and
integrity of the Nation];

IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November,
1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
CONSTITUTION”.


3.4 BASIC FEATURES OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION

Constituent Assembly drafted the Indian Constitution. The Constituent
Assembly held its first sitting on the 9th December, 1946. It reassembled on
the 14th August, 1947, as the sovereign Constituent Assembly for the
Dominion of India. The Constituent Assembly passed it on 26th November
1949. It came into effect on 26th January 1950.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                           Page 27
Every country has its own Constitution with special features because the
historical background, social life, economic background and political
conditions influence the making of the Constitution. All these factors have
contributed to the making of the Constitution of India.

Prof. K.K. Ghai in his book, ‘Indian Government and Politics’ has given
some important features of the Constitution of India. These are as follows:

1. Written and Detailed Constitution: The Constitution of India is a written
document. It incorporates the constitutional law of India. It was enacted by
the Constitution Assembly of India. It took the Assembly 2 years, 11 months
and 18 days to write and enact the Constitution. Indian Constitution is a very
detailed constitution. It consists of 395 Articles divided into 22 Parts with 12
Schedules and 94 constitutional amendments. It is a constitution of both the
Centre and states of Indian Union.

2. Self-made and Enacted Constitution:

Indian Constitution is a constitution made by the people of India acting
through their duly elected and representative body—the Constituent
Assembly that was organized in December 1946. Its first session was held
on 9th December, 1946. It passed the Objectives Resolution on 22 January,
1947.

3. The Preamble to the Constitution of India: It is a well draft document
which states the philosophy of the constitution. The Preamble is the key to
the Constitution. It constitutes India into a sovereign, socialist, secular and
democratic republic and to secure to all its citizens-JUSTICE; social,
economic and political; LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among
them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the [unity
and integrity of the Nation].
4. India is a Sovereign, Socialist, Secure, Democratic, Republic: The
Preamble constitutes India into a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular and
democratic republic. All these five terms signify five major features of the
Indian policy:
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 28
i) India is a sovereign State

ii) India is a Socialist State

iii) India is a Secure State

iv) India is a Democratic State

v) India is a Republic

5. India is a Union of States: Article I of the Constitution declares, that
“India that is Bharat is a Union of States.”

6. Federal Structure and a Unitary Spirit: While describing India as a
Union of States, the Constitution provides for a federal structure with a
unitary spirit. Scholars describe India as a ‘Quasi-Federation’ or as ‘a
federation with a unitary bias, or even as ‘a Unitarian federation.’

i) Mixture of Rigidity and Flexibility: The Constitution of India is rigid in
parts. Some of its provisions can be amended in a difficult way while others
can be amended very easily.

ii) Fundamental Rights: Under Part III, Articles 12-35), the Constitution of
India grants and guarantees Fundamental Rights to its citizens.

7. Directive Principles of State Policy: The Directive Principles are
instructions to the state for securing socio-economic developmental
objectives through its policies. Part IV of the Constitution of India deals with
the ‘Directive Principle of State Policy’.

8. Fundamental Duties: Part IVA- Article 51A (incorporated by the 42nd
Amendment 1976) of the Constitution of India enumerates Fundamental
Duties of the citizen. These are:

    •   To obey the Constitution and have regards to the ideas and
        institutions
    •   To respect the National Anthem and the National Flag



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 29
   •   To realize and follow the essential epitome of non-violence,
       democracy and secularism.
   •   It the duty of every citizen to preserve the rich heritage of our culture.
   •   To safeguard the sovereignty, unity and integrity of our nation.
   •   To safeguard public property.
   •   To defend our country even at the cost of lives.
   •   To protect natural resources.
   •   To avoid dowry, gambling and other social evils.
   •   To aim towards supremacy in their respective spheres of activity.
   •   Protect natural environment and have sympathy towards living
       beings.
   •   Advance scientific temper, humanism and spirit of inquiry and refine.
   •   By the 86th Amendment, it has been made a fundamental duty of the
       parents to provide education to their children.

9. Protection of the Human rights of the people: The protection of Human
Rights Act, 1993 was passed by the Union Parliament for safeguarding the
human rights of all the people. Under it, the National Human Right
Commission was established. It was headed by a former Chief Justice of
India. It acts as an independent commission with a status of civil court. It
works for preventing the violations of human rights of the people.

10. Bi-Cameral Union Parliament:           The Constitution provides for a
Bicameral Legislature at the Union level and names it as the Union
Parliament. The lower house is the Lok Sabha, popular, directly elected
house of the Parliament. It represents the people of India. The Rajya Sabha
is the upper and, indirectly elected second House of Parliament. It represents
the states of the Indian union.

11. Parliamentary System:         The Constitution of India provides for a
parliamentary system of government at the Centre as well as in every state
of the Union. The constitutional head of the State is the President of India
with its nominal powers. The real executive is the Union Council of Minister
headed by the Prime Minister.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 30
12. Universal Adult-Suffrage: Another feature of the Constitution is that
it provides for universal adult suffrage. All men and women enjoy an equal
right to vote. Each adult man and woman above 18 years of age has the right
to vote.

13. Single Citizenship: The integration of the Indian States with the rest of
India is the basic features of the Indian Constitution. It allows only single
citizenship to the Indians, unlike the USA. All citizens enjoy a common
uniform citizenship. They are thus authorized to freedom and equal rights
and uniform protection of the state.

14. Single Integrated Judiciary: The Constitution provides for a single
integrated judicial system common for the Union and the states. The highest
court of the land is the Supreme Court of India with the High Courts at its
State level and other Courts working under the High Courts.

15. Independence of Judiciary: The Indian Constitution makes judiciary
truly independent.

16. Judicial Review power: The Constitution is the supreme law of the
land. The Supreme Court acts as the supervisor protector and interpreter of
the Indian Constitution. It is also the guardian of the Fundamental Rights of
the people. For this purpose, it exercises the power of judicial review. The
constitutional validity of all laws made by the legislatures is determined by
the Supreme Court. It can reject any law which is found to be
unconstitutional.

17. Judicial Activism: Currently, Indian judiciary has been becoming more
and more active towards the performance of its social obligations.

18. Emergency Provisions: The Constitution of India contains special
provisions for dealing with emergencies. The Constitution stipulates three
types of emergencies




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 31
   •   National Emergency (Article 352) an emergency resulting from war
       or external aggression or threat of external aggression against India
       or from armed rebellion within India or in any of its part;
   •   Constitutional Emergency in a State (Article 356) an emergency
       resulting from the failure of constitutional machinery in any state; or
       some states and
   •   Financial Emergency (Article 360) an emergency resulting from a
       threat to the financial stability of India.

The President of India has been empowered to take appropriate steps for
dealing with these emergencies. During the period of an emergency, the
powers of the President, actually of the PM and the Union Council of
Ministers Cabinet increase tremendously. President can take all steps
deemed essential for meeting an emergency.

19. Special Provisions relating to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes: The Constitution in its Part XVI specifies certain special provisions
relating to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes to protect and safeguard
the interests of the people belonging to these tribes.

20. Language Provisions: The Constitution lays down special provisions
for defining the Language of the Union, Regional Languages. Hindi shall be
the official language of the Union in Devnagri script. But along with this, it
also provides for the continuance of the English language. A state legislature
can adopt the language of the province as its official language. English
continues to be the language of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
Twenty-two modern languages are recognized in the Eighth Schedule by the
Indian Constitution.

                         ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

         1. Elaborate the characteristics of the Constitution of India. -
             ___________________________________________
         2. What are the fundamental duties stated in the Constitution of
             India.___________________________________________
             _______________________________________________
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 32
3.5 STRUCTURE OF JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN INDIA

Judiciary is that branch of government which interprets the law, settles
disputes and administers justice. Judiciary is the watchdog of democracy,
guardian of the constitution as well as a champion of liberty.

The judiciary, in order to be fair and uniform, is structurally hierarchically
organized. In India, the structure of the judiciary is like a pyramid. Supreme
Court is at the Apex, at the state level it is the High Court, District level it is
the District Court and in the village and Panchayat level it is the Lok Adalats.

The preservation of laws and orders of India is protected and safeguarded by
the Judiciary. Problems and issues related to criminal and civil offences are
solved by the Judiciary. The Indian Judiciary System follows the British
Legal System.

The Supreme Court :In India, the foremost judiciary tribunal is the
Supreme Court of India. There is one Chief Justice and other twenty-five
Judges. The president of India appoints them. The term of office for a judge
in the Supreme Court is 65 years. It has original, appellant, writ and advisory
jurisdictions.

Original Jurisdiction: In any disputes between the Government of India
and any State, Government of India and any State on one side and any other
States on other side and two or more States inter se the absolute Original
Jurisdiction lies with the Supreme Court of India.

Appellate Jurisdictions: An appeal lies to the Supreme Court of India when
the matter is Constitutional. When the case involves a substantial question
of law as certified by the High Court the Supreme Court has the Appellate
Jurisdiction. An appeal lies to the Supreme Court in Civil cases when it is
certified by the High Court that the matter necessitates a substantial question
of law of common public significance. An appeal lies to the Supreme Court
of India in criminal cases when the High Court reverses the acquittal order
of the lower court and sentences him to death.


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                  Page 33
Writ Jurisdiction: The fundamental rights of the citizens are protected and
defended by the Supreme Court of India. For the imposition and
implementations of the rights and freedom of the people, the Supreme Court
can issue the writ in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus prohibition,
certiorari and quo warrantor.

Advisory Jurisdiction: Any question of law or fact of public importance
can be referred to the Supreme Court by the President of the Republic for its
opinion under the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court may on being
for the opinion report to the President its opinion thereon. The Constitution
of India is protected and safeguarded by the Supreme Court of India. The
unconstitutional laws and orders of the Union and the State Government can
be annual by the Supreme Court.

The High Court : Each High Court consists of a Chief Justice and one other
Judges as the President of India may decide from time to time. The President
of India in discussion with the Chief Justice of India and the Governor of the
Concerned State appoint the Judges of the High Courts. The High Court is
also entitled as the court of fairness. For the violation of fundamental rights
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, the High Courts can be
approached for writs. Under Article 226 of the Indian Constitution, the High
Court can be approached for any other rights. And under Article 227 of the
Indian Constitution, the High Court has the powers to supervise overall its
subordinate court falling within the physical jurisdiction.

Subordinate courts : In each state, there are subordinate courts below the
High Courts. The High Courts have the entire authority of the subordinate
court. From the lower courts, appeals lie to the higher courts. The High Court
accepts an appeal from the subordinate court against the decisions of the
District Judge’s court or the Session Judge’s Court. The minor cases are deal
by the lower courts i.e. the Nyaya Panchayat or Munsiffs Court and the
higher court i.e. the Subordinate Judge’s Court or District Judge’s Court
deals with the important issues and cases. City Civil Courts and Metropolitan
Magistrates Courts are there in a Presidency town. The Governor in


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 34
consultation with the High Court of the concerned State appoints most of the
Judges of the subordinate courts.

The key task of the judiciary is the administration of justice. Justice, which
is the soul of the state, must be administered without fear or favour. The
judicial branch should remain outside the influence of politics. While
interpreting laws and deciding cases, the judges must be impartial and
honest. Without independence, impartiality and integrity of the judges are
endangering. The first condition for an efficient and impartial judiciary is
independence. This independence broadly means the freedom of the
judiciary from the control and influence of the executive, the legislature and
the people at large. Secondly, impartiality in the administration of justice is
as important as independence. Administration of justice should be always
without consternation or favour, endearment or enmity.

3.4 SUMMING UP
        •   A Preamble means an introduction to the statute. The objectives
            before the Constituent Assembly were to comprise and compose
            India into a “sovereign democratic republic” for securing to all
            its citizens “justice liberty, equality and fraternity”. The
            Preamble is the key to the Constitution.
        •   Constitution of India is the unique constitution. The Indian
            Constitution is the largest written liberal democratic constitution
            of the world. It provides for a mixture of federalism and
            Unitarianism, and flexibility and with rigidity. Since its
            inauguration on 26th January 1950, the Constitution India has
            been successfully guiding the path and progress of India.
        •   Judiciary, as one of the pillars of democracy, holds great
            responsibilities to govern the justice and injustice in the society
            through its functioning. Therefore, the vacations of Indian courts
            play a major role in the better functioning of the Indian judiciary.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 35
3.8. QUESTIONS
           1. What is the preamble of the Indian Constitution?
           2. Discuss the structure of the Indian’s Judicial System.
3.6 RECOMMENDED READINGS
   •   Constitution of India by P.K.Panday

                             ************




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                          Page 36
UNIT 4 : CONSTITUTIONAL OBLIGATIONS

UNIT STRUCTURE

4.1. Objectives

4.2. Introduction

4.3. Freedom of Speech and Expression

       4.3.1. Reasonable restriction on freedom of speech and expression

       4.3.2. Feature of speech and expression

       4.3.3. Some landmark judgement of the supreme court

4.4. Freedom of the Press

4.5. Right to Information Act, 2005

       4.5.1. Objective of the Act

       4.5.2. Commencement of the Act

       4.5.3. Basic features of RTI Act, 2005

4.5 Summing Up
4.6 Questions
4.7 Recommended Readings


4.1 INTRODUCTION

The unit introduces you to the basic concept Article 19(1) (a) of the
Constitution of India i.e. the freedom of speech and expression and we will
also know about the Article 19(2) of the Constitution i.e. the reasonable
restrictions related with it. We shall also discuss about the press freedom.
And lastly, we will discuss the Right to Information Act, 2005.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                           Page 37
4.2 OBJECTIVES

The objectives of this lesson are as follows:

            •   To know about the freedom of speech and expression
            •   To know about the press freedom
            •   To know about the Right to Information Act,2005


4.3 FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION

The way one expresses is a substance of freedom, right and virtuous. The
sources of expression may include the liberty as to how one thinks and the
right to know. Freedom to speech is a live lead of the democracy. It is
fundamental to the enlargement, growth and fulfilment of individual identity.
Freedom of speech and expression is more crucial in a parliamentary setup
of the State where the sovereign rulers are the people of the State. It is an
indivisible right, which forms the basis of all other human rights and
measures the effectiveness of laws.


Freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
of India is the fundamental right guaranteed to every citizen. Every person
who is a citizen of India is entitled to enjoy this right. But this right is not
available to a person who is not the citizen of India i.e. he resides in a foreign
national. For a democratic polity, the freedom of speech and expression has
been considered to be indivisible and fundamental.

The freedom of speech and expression means that every person has the right
to express his or her own opinions or viewpoints. They can express by words
of mouth, by printing, through photographs, by writing, through photographs
or cartoons or through any other mode of expression. Thus the people can
express their opinions through any medium of communication be it the
representation of visuals like signs, symbols, gestures etc. It is the way to
openly propagate, circulate or to exchange one’s viewpoints or ideas. In a
democratic government freedom of speech is the embankment and it
connects substantial significance to this freedom because without the

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                 Page 38
freedom of speech plead to reason, which is the root of democracy, cannot
be made. Freedom of speech and expression unlocked ways and provides a
platform for free discussion of matter and issues. It thus plays a pivotal part
in forming public opinions on political issues, social subjects and economic
issues.

4.3.1. REASONABLE RESTRICTION ON FREEDOM OF SPEECH
AND EXPRESSION

The Constitution of India under Article 19(2) provides reasonable
restrictions on freedom of speech and expression. Under Article 19(1)(a), the
freedom of speech and expression provided by the India Constitution is not
absolute. There are certain reasonable restrictions provided under Article
19(2) of the Constitution in respect of the sovereignty and integrity of the
country. These reasonable restrictions include- relation with the foreign
states, contempt of court, sovereignty and integrity of India, public peace and
safety i.e. public order, morality and decency, defamation, security of the
State, obscenity, sedition, motivation to an offence.

4.3.2. FEATURES OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION

Under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India the freedom of speech
and expression is a notion with various characteristic, both in consideration
to the contended of the freedom of speech and expression and in the manner
in which communication and exchange of thoughts and ideas can take place
between people. It is also a vital idea that has developed with the
advancement of time and approach in technologies.

It is only through the freedom of speech and expression that a person has the
right to express himself through the words of his mouth, or by writing, or by
printing or through pictures or in any other means of communication. One
can put forward one’s own opinions and he also has the right to propagate.
Any person can communicate with the other person his ideas or thoughts
through any means be it be through magazines, books, newspapers, movies,
it also includes the audio-visual media and the electronic media.
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 39
   •   Right to circulate
   •   Right to criticize
   •   Right to receive information
   •   Right of the press to conduct interviews
   •   Reporting court proceedings
   •   Reporting legislative proceedings
   •   Right to advertise (commercial speech)
   •   Right to rebuttal
   •   Right to broadcast
   •   Right to entertain and to be entertained
   •   Right to fly the National Flag

4.3.3. SOME LANDMARK JUDGEMENTS OF THE SUPREME
COURT CONCERNING THE FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

Romesh Thappar V. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC124: From the earliest
cases to be decided by the Supreme Court, involved a challenge against an
order provided by the Government of Madras under Section 9(1-A) of the
Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, 1949 striking a ban on the entry
and circulation of the journal, Cross Roads, printed and published by the
petitioner. The court struck down section 9 (1-A) holding that the rights to
freedom of speech and expression was of supreme importance and that
holding short of a danger to the foundations of the States or a threat to its
overthrow could justify a retrenchment of the right to freedom of speech and
expression. The challenge provision which permits the imposition of
restrictions for the wide purpose of securing public safety and public order
fell outside the scope of the reasonable restrictions permitted under Article
19(2) and was held to be unconstitutional.

Express Newspapers (P) Ltd. V. Union of India, AIR 1958 SC 578: The case
arose out of a challenge to the Working Journalists and other Newspaper
Employees (conditions and services) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1955, on the ground that its provisions contravene Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution i.e. freedom of speech and expression. In the facts of the case,
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 40
the court held that the impact of the legislation on the freedom of speech and
expression was just too distant and no judicial interference was warranted.

Odyssey Communication (P) Ltd. V. Lokvidayan Sanghatana (1988) 3 SCC
410: In this case, the Supreme Court held that the right of a citizen to exhibit
films on the state channel, Doordarshan is part of the fundamental right
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a). The court held that this right was alike to
the right of a citizen to issue or produces his opinions through any other
medium. This medium can be the book or the newspapers, magazines,
through hoardings, by means of advertisements and any other medium. The
petitioners challenged the exhibition of a serial name HoniAnhoni on the
Doordarshan on the field that it motivated superstition and blind faith
amongst the audiences. The petition was dismissed as the petitioner failed to
show evidence of preconception to the public.

In Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting V. Cricket
Association, Bengal, (1995) 2 SCC 161: The Supreme Court held that
broadcasting is a method of communication and a means of expression and
speech inside the structure of Article 19(1)(a). This case involved the rights
of a cricket association to grant telecast rights to an agency of its choice. In
this case, it was observed that the right to entertain other and the right to be
entertained by means of broadcasting tools or medium is an important part
of the freedom under Article 19(1)(a).

State of Bihar V. Shailabala Devi, AIR 1952 SC 329: while explaining
Section 4(1)(a) of the Press (Emergency Power) Act, 1931 concern with
words, signs or visual representations which encourage or motivate or
encourage to inspire or encourage the doing of any offence of murder or
violence, the Supreme Court held that any speech or expression which
motivates or uplift the undertaking or doing of violent crime such as murder,
erode the security of the state and falls inside the reach of Article 19(1)(a).




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 41
4.4 FREEDOM OF THE PRESS

Press Freedom is basically equitable to circulate opinions and viewpoints in
the media by the journalist through various means of communication which
include through newspapers, television, hoardings, or any other medium of
communication without censorship by the government. While Article 19 of
the Indian Constitution does not include the provision of the freedom of the
press, the freedom of the Press is implied in the right the freedom of speech
and expression.


The media obtain its rights from the right to freedom of speech and
expression as provided by the Indian constitution to the citizens of India.
Thus, the media enjoys the same rights to write, publish, to broadcast and to
circulate like any other individual. It is not more or less than an individual.


In the pre-independent India there appears a case, where the Privy Council
held that the freedom of the journalist is a customary part of the freedom of
the subject and to whatever lengths the subject, in general, may go, so also
may the journalist, apart from the statute law, his privilege is no other and
no higher. No privilege attaches to his position. The framework for analysing
media rights remains much the same in post-independence India.


Freedom of the Press means that there is an absent of statutory body and
executive and administrative jurisdiction on circulation and distribution of
plan or ideas or information. Press freedom is of outermost important as it
acts as a monitor of the legislature, executive and the judiciary. But the press
freedom is not absolute in nature. There are certain reasonable restrictions
which are mentioned in Article 19(2) of the Indian Constitution. These
restrictions include- the contempt of court, defamation, decency and
morality, maintaining a friendly relationship with the Foreign States,
integrity and sovereignty of India and the security of the States.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 42
The freedom of the press is the soul and mind of the social and political
intercourse. It is only through the press that people can express their opinion
and viewpoints and speak out in the public regarding any issue or matter of
concern. The press plays the role of a public educator by education the people
of the different section of the society. It is only through the press that people
came to know about what is going on in their surroundings. There the press
must not break the trust of the common people and act for the welfare of the
people. But while doing this the press must follow some reasonable
restrictions which otherwise may violate the right of the other parties. While
publishing and circulating any news the press must take into account certain
restrictions. It cannot circulate and write whatever it pleases without
knowing the truth of the story. The freedom of the press is given by the
constitution under Article 19(1) (a) but then the press cannot violate its rights
by disseminating information, publishing news which is violative and
defamatory in nature.


Discussed below are two case laws where the freedom of the press subdues
by the legislature:


  i.    In Sakal Papers V. Union of India AIR 1962 SC 305, the Supreme
        Court held that the State could not make laws which directly affect
        the circulation of a newspaper for that would amount to a violation
        of the freedom of speech. The right under Article 19(1) (a) extends
        not only to the matter which the citizen is entitled to circulate but also
        to the volume of circulation. This case arises from a challenge to the
        newsprint policy of the government which restricted the number of
        pages a newspaper was entitled to print.


 ii.    In Bennett Coleman V. Co. V. Union of India, (1972) 2 SCC 788:
        AIR 1973 SC 106, the Supreme Court held that newspapers should
        be set independent to control and decide their pages and their
        circulation. The case arises out of a constitutional challenge to the
        validity of the Newspaper (Price and Pages) Act, 1956 which

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                 Page 43
       authorize the Government to control and manage the allotment of
       space for advertisements material. It was held by the court that the
       reduction of advertisements would fall repulsive of Article 19(1) (a)
       since it would have a straight effect on the dissemination of
       newspapers. The Court held that any limitation leading to a loss of
       advertising revenue would influence dissemination and thereby
       effect on the freedom of speech.


4.5 RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005

The Right to Information Act is an Act to supply for setting out the empirical
jurisdiction of the right to information for all the citizens to secure approach
to the information under the authority of public authority, in order to
encourage and advance transparency and responsibility in the working of
every public authorities, the constitution of a Central Information
Commission and State Information Commission and for matters attached
therewith and subordinate thereto.

The RTI Act 2005 was enacted by permission and authority of His
Excellency, President of India. On 15.06.2005 the RTI Act was enacted by
the Parliament and it was notified in the official Gazette of India on
21.06.2005. The Act extends to the whole of India but it does not extend to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

4.5.1. OBJECTIVES OF THE ACT:

       •   To set out a practical regime of RTI
       •   To firm the approach to information beneath the jurisdiction of
           public authorities
       •   To advance translucency and responsibility in the running and
           working of every public authority.
       •   To compose the State Information Commissions and the State
           Information Commission
       •   To preserve the confidentiality of sensitive information

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 44
       •   To uphold the democratic ideals with a knowledgeable citizen
           and clearness of the information.

4.5.2. COMMENCEMENT OF THE ACT

The Act consists of 31 sections, out of which 9 came into effect from 15th
June, 2005. Section 4 fixes 120 days from that date as the date from which
the rest of the provisions become effective. Therefore, the entire Act can be
said to have been effective from 13th October, 2005.

4.5.3. BASIC FEATURES OF RTI ACT, 2005

  i.   Maintenance of records: Under the Act all public authorities are
       beneath a responsibility to preserve their records in a manner that
       enable access to information. Public authorities are needed to
       safeguard that all records are properly categorized, registered and to
       the extent possible, computerized within a reasonable time and are
       attached through a network all over the country on different systems
       so that access to such records is smooth. All public authorities are
       necessitating issuing specified information about their operating
       within a period of 120 days from the passing of the Act. There is a
       detailed listing of responsibility and duty imposed on public
       authorities in the maintenance of their records. This Act makes an
       attempt to safeguard and protect circulation and distribution of
       information through easily reachable and effective methods such as
       it can be means of notice boards, newspapers, public announcements,
       media, broadcasts, the internet and inspection of the offices of any
       public authority.


 ii.   Duty to publish: Duty to publish is a principal improvement on the
       Act of 2005 on public authorities. Every public authority shall in
       persistent venture provide as such information suo moto to the public
       at regular intervals through various medium of communication which



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 45
           also includes the internet so that the common people have the
           minimum resort to the use of this Act to acquire information.


iii.       Establishment of Information Commissions: This Act provides for
           the establishment of a State Information Commission and Central
           Information Commission. The Chief Information Commissioner
           Head both the commission. Persons of renown in public life with
           extensive comprehension and understanding and experience in law,
           science and technology, social service, management, journalism,
           mass media or administration and governance are appointed for the
           posts. Both the commissions give the power and the authority to an
           inquiry into complaints made by aggrieved persons. Aggrieved
           persons are those who have been refused to access to the information
           or those who have not received a response to a request for
           information or access to information in within the prescribed time
           period, those who have be given misleading information, incomplete
           or false information and who have been required to pay a fee which
           they consider unreasonable. When the commission is satisfied that
           there is a reasonable ground to inquire into the matter, it is authorized
           to initiate an inquiry into the matter.


 iv.       Request for information: When a person is eager of acquiring
           information he may make a request in writing or through electronic
           means in Hindi, English or the official language of any area in which
           the application is made along with the prescribed fee. The application
           must be a label to the State or the Central Public Information officer
           of the Public authority or the Central or State Assistant Public
           Information Officer specifying the particulars of information sought.


 v.        Exemptions from disclosure:


       •   The information which is preconception to the scientific or economic
           engrossment of the State cannot be disclosed.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                   Page 46
   •   Any information which has been clearly prohibited to be produced or
       publicize by any court of law or tribunal or the revelation of which
       may represent contempt of court.
   •   That information the disclosure of which would harm the competitive
       position of a third person i.e. commercial confidence, trade secrets or
       intellectual property.
   •   That information which is accessible to a person in his beneficiary
       relationship, unless the authorized authority is content that the larger
       public interest warrants the disclosure of any such information.
   •   Confidence information received from Foreign Government.
   •   If any information that would endanger the life or the physical safety
       of any individual that information could not be disclosed.
   •   That information which hinders the procedure of investigation or
       disquiet or prosecution of offenders


4.5 SUMMING UP
   •   Freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1) (a) of the
       Constitution of India is the fundamental right guaranteed to every
       citizen. Every person who is a citizen of India is entitled to enjoy this
       right. But this right is not available to a person who is not the citizen
       of India i.e. he resides in a foreign national. For a democratic polity,
       the freedom of speech and expression has been considered to be
       indivisible and fundamental.


   •   The media obtain its rights from the right to freedom of speech and
       expression as provided by the Indian constitution to the citizens of
       India. Thus, the media enjoys the same rights to write, publish, to
       broadcast and to circulate like any other individual. It is not more or
       less than an individual.


   •   RTI Act introduced in 2005 has shown that it is a powerful tool for
       safeguarding and protecting translucency in the governmental
       departments and accommodating corruption of the people. It is
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 47
      generally claimed as one of the world’s best law with an excellent
      implementation track record. In the post-Independent India it is one
      of the most advanced legislation passed.



4.6 QUESTIONS
   1. What do you understand by freedom of speech and expression? What
      is the limitation associated with it? Explain


4.7 RECOMMENDED READINGS
   ➢ Facts of Media Law by Madhavi Goradia Divan

                              ***********




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                         Page 48
MODULE II: COMMUNICATION THEORIES




  MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics   Page 49
UNIT 5: LAWS RELATED TO MEDIA PROFESSION

UNIT STRUCTURE

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Objectives
5.3 Introduction to Indian Penal Code

5.4. Press Council of India

5.5. Press Council Act

         5.5.1. Compositions of the Press Council

         5.5.2. Objectives and Functions of Press council of India

         5.5.3. Press Council’s power

5.6. Cinematographic Act, 1952

         5.6.1. PART I – Highlights

         5.6.2. PART II – Certification of Films for public display highlights

         5.6.3. Film Certification of CBFC

         5.6.4. Censorship

15.6 Summing Up
5.7 Questions
5.8 Recommended Readings


5.1 INTRODUCTION

In this unit, we are going to study to discuss various media laws of India. So
in this unit, we shall study the various norms to be followed while being in a
profession of media is it in print media or digital media. In this unit, we will
also understand about the Indian Penal code and the various sections of IPC.
We will also enumerate about the PCI and the CBFC and film censorship in
India.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 50
5.2 OBJECTIVES

In this unit, we shall discuss about the Indian penal code and every section
which defines the different category of crimes committed by persons of
Indian origin. After studying this unit you should be able to –

    •    Enumerate the Press Council of India and the various powers and
         functions of the Press Council of India.
    •    Understand about the Cinematographic Act, film certification of
         CBFC and Censorship in India.


5.3 INTRODUCTION TO INDIAN PENAL CODE

The Indian Penal Code IPC is the main criminal code of India. It expands to
the whole of India. But it does not apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
In the year 1860, the introductory draft of the Indian Penal Code was
formulated. First Law Commission which was chaired by Lord Macaulay
supervised the introductory draft.

The first Penal Code came into existence in the year 1862 and since then a
number of amendments have been made in the code. The code covers all the
substantive features of the criminal law, it is an inclusive code.

The Indian Penal Code in its basic structure is a document that consists of
the list of all the punishments and cases that a person committing any kind
of a crime is to be held. It includes all the Indian origin people. The exception
to this document is that any kind of military or armed forces crimes cannot
be charged on the basis of Indian Penal Code. They have a different
dedicated list of laws and the Indian Penal Code cannot supersede any part
of it.

The most significant feature of the document is that it promotes the impartial
nature of judgments. The Indian Penal Code does not provide any relaxation
to any specific person for his or her position of power. Thus, it has been able
to stand with the aspirations of a common man and prevent all sorts of
corruption and misuse of powers. The Indian Penal Code has reached greater

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 51
heights due to its impartial judiciary in the modern world. Indian Penal Code
is a very important set of regulation which is very important for the system
to be operated in a proper way. It is the main criminal code of India. This
document majorly covers all the basic offences which are highlighted in the
society.

There are XXIII chapters and the total numbers of sections enumerated in
the Indian Penal Code are five hundred eleven. Every section defines the
different category of crimes committed by persons of Indian origin.

The various sections deal with the crime and the punishment associated with
it. It deals with the general exceptions to some crimes. The code also deals
with the various sections namely Criminal Conspiracy, of Abetment,
offences against the State, offences relating to Army, Navy and Air Force,
offences against the public tranquillity, offences by or relating to public
servants, offences relating to elections, Of contempt of the lawful authority
of public servant, Of false evidence and offences against public justice, Of
offences relating to coin and government stamps, offences relating to
weights and measures, offences affecting the public health, safety,
convenience, decency and morals, of offence relating to religion, offences
which affect the human body, offences against property, offences relating to
documents and to property marks, offences relating to marriages, cruelty by
husband or relatives of husband, defamation, criminal intimidation, insult
and annoyance, attempt to commit offences.

5.4 PRESS COUNCIL OF INDIA

On the guidance and direction of the First Press Commission, the Press
Council was structured in the year 1966. Its main objective was to preserve
the freedom of the press and of preserving and enhancing the quality and
standards of the press in India. Under the Press Council Act, 1978 the
presently available council function. It is thus a statutory, quasi-judicial body
which proceeds as an observer and monitor of the press. It examines and
arbitrates the complaints against the press and by the press for breach and
contravention of ethics and for the breach of the press freedom.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 52
The Press Council of India is an apparatus for the press to control and
manage itself. The notion is established in the conception that in a
representative and democratic society the press requires being independent
and accountable immediately. To proceed as the watchdog of the public the
press has to function effectively and it must have to assure freedom of
expression, unrestricted and unhindered by an authority having jurisdiction,
sorted bodies or person. If it is exercised with the required perception of
responsibility only then the freedom of the press can have lawfulness. In
order to maintain and preserve the highest standard and quality of
professional conduct, the press must carefully and sedulous stick to the
obtained and accepted norms of journalistic ethics. When the norms are
violated and the freedom is degrading by unethical and improper conduct,
there must be a way to examine and inspect and control it. The restraint and
control by the government or official authorities may manifest devastating
of this freedom.

The Press Council is controlled and lead by a Chairman and he has to be a
retired judge of the Supreme Court of India. A committee existing of the
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, the speakers of the Lok Sabha and a person
selected from among the members of the Press Council is appointed as a
Chairman of the Press Council. The Press Council also exists of other
twenty-eight associates of whom the press includes twenty which are elected
by the news agencies or the press organizations identified and notified by the
Press Council as all India body of classification as the – editors, working
journalist and the managers and owners of the newspapers. From the two
houses of the Parliament, five members are elected, as nominees of the
Sahitya Academy there includes three representatives from the field of
culture, literacy and legal, Bar Council of India and the University Grants
Commissions. The members are elected to serve for a term of three years to
serve the Council.

The Council has premier competence and power in consideration to the
media safeguarding and ensuring the freedom of the speech is sustained and
preserved. For sustaining democracy it is one of the supreme and principal

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 53
bodies. The council accepts complains against the press or by the press
deliberately. It has the authority and the jurisdiction to hold an investigation
and examine on the complaints received by the press or against the pressor
otherwise against the affront newspapers and the news agencies. In every
part of India, the Council has adequate powers to execute its functions and
hold any investigation, as are entrusted in a civil court, while a suit is tried
under the code of civil procedure in certain esteem. Summoning a person and
imposing the appearance of persons and inspecting the persons on oath,
necessitate discovery and examination of the documents, accepting evidence
on affidavits, taking any record of the public and issue commissions for the
inspection of witness or documents are the powers of the Press Council.

On discovering the journalist to be culpable and guilty the council may
notify, alert, censure or condemn the offending journalist. In respect of the
conduct of any authority including the Government, the council is authorized
to make an observation upon them. If the council finds it mandatory, it can
notify, censure or recommend the newspapers, news agencies, the editor or
the journalist or refuse the conduct of the editor or the journalist. The
Constitution of India protects the Press Council. The action of the Council is
not to be questioned. It can be questioned only if the council is proved to be
a violation of the Constitution which makes it an extremely stronger body.
The council has entirely functional autonomy and it is self-governing of
Government managing and supervising the discharge of its statutory
responsibilities.

5.5 PRESS COUNCLI ACT

According to the Preamble of the Press Council of India Act, this Act is
established for protecting the freedom of the press and maintaining and
improving the standards of both newspapers and news agencies. Excluding
the state of Jammu and Kashmir, it extends to the whole of India.

Press Council in India is statutory and an autonomous body which formulates
guidelines or code of conduct for the press which is followed by members of
the Press voluntarily it is an autonomous, non-official but statutory body. In

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 54
1965 the First Press Commission proposed the set up of a statutory Press
Council to look after editorial independence, objectivity on news
presentation and fairness of comments, etc. on the part of the newspaper. The
council, according to the commission, was also to foster the development of
the press, protecting it from external pressures and regulate its conduct in
matters of offensive and unacceptable writing. In pursuance of this
recommendation beneath the Press Council Act of 1965, the Press Council
of India was composed by the Government of India in 1966, with the judge
of the Supreme Court with Justice J.R. Mudholkar, as its chairman, which
was later amended in 1970. In the year 1976, during the Emergency, Mrs.
Gandhi’s Government enforced the publication of Objectionable Matter
Ordinance and even repealed the Act by the Press Council Repeal Act, 1976.
The act was repealed on the plea that it was unable to fulfil the purpose of its
formation. Ultimately, a fresh Press Council Act was passed in the
Parliament and enacted by the Janata Party Government after the Emergency
in 1978. After the first chairman, justice Mudholkar, the Press Council of
India was headed by Justice N. Rajagopala Ayyangar and (after its revival)
by Justice A.N. Grover, Justice A.N. Sen and Justice R.S. Sarkaria.

5.5.1. COMPOSITION OF THE PRESS COUNCIL

The Press Council of India having its permanent succession is an anatomy
corporate. Sec. 5 (1) of the Press Council Act of 1978, states the composition
of the Council. The council is composed of twenty-eight members and it has
a chairman. Out of the total twenty-eight members working journalist
includes thirteen in number, out of these thirteen- newspapers editors include
six and the remaining seven are the working journalist other than the editors.
Persons who have their business or carries on the business of management
of newspapers include six persons. A person who manages news agencies
includes one member. Persons possessing particular knowledge empirical
experience in respect of education, science and law and culture and literature
three persons are included. From the Members of Parliament i.e. the Lok
Sabha includes three members and two members from the Rajya Sabha.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 55
All members of the Council are in term for a period of three years, under
Sec. 5 (2) of the Act of 1978.

5.5.2. OBJECT AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL

Listed below are the functions of the Press Council of India in furtherance of
its objectives:

    •   To help the newspapers in sustaining and preserving their autonomy
    •   For   maintaining    and    retaining   the   highest   standards    of
        professionalism for journalist and newspapers a code of conduct
        should be built.
    •   The preservation and maintenance of the highest standards of the
        public flavour and savour by the newspapers and the journalists are
        to be ensured and encourage a required perception of the rights,
        accountability and responsibilities of the citizens.
    •   The magnification of a sense of responsibility is to be stimulated or
        encouraged and general people service among all those attached to
        the career of journalism.
    •   To retain beneath review any growth and development probable to
        limit the contributions and circulation and distribution of news of
        public interest and significance.
    •   Retain below review such cases of aid accepted by any news agencies
        or newspapers in India from foreign sources, as is introduced to it by
        the Central Government.
    •   To advance and assist the foundation of such usual service for the
        contribution and distribution of news to newspapers as may, from
        time to time arrive at it to be advantageous and prudent.
    •   The facilities for the genuine education and training of persons in the
        career of journalism are to be provided.
    •   To advance a real functional relationship between all the classes of
        the persons associated in the making or publishing of the newspapers.
    •   To assist technical or different research.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 56
5.5.3. PRESS COUNCIL’S POWER
The Press Council does not have the power to impact or pressure any news
agency, or newspapers, journalist or an editor to disclose the origin of any
news or information.

   •   If any news breach or contravene the standards of journalistic ethics
       or taste of the general people the council is competent to delete or
       censure any such news.
   •   If the working journalist or an editor is established to be engaging or
       performing any professional misconduct the council can hold an
       inquiry against them.
   •   Inside the meaning of Section 193 and Section 228 of the Indian
       penal code every inquiry held by the Council shall be considered to
       be a judicial proceeding.


5.6 CINEMATOGRAPHIC ACT 1952

Any film which is to be displayed or exhibited publicly has to have a
certificate from the proficient authority that the film is worthy of public
exhibition. The Cinematographic Act applies to entire India. But it does not
extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Cinema was first introduced on
1896 in Bombay, now Mumbai in India when first Cinematographic Act
1909 of England was initialized. Indian Cinematographic Act was passed
and came into force in 1920. Censor boards were then placed under cities
like Chennai, Kolkata, Lahore (now in Pakistan), Rangoon (now in Burma)
and Mumbai along with the regional censors. After independence, the
autonomy of regional censors was abolished and brought under censor board
of Mumbai with the implementation of Cinematograph Act, 1952.

The Cinematographic Act of 1952 was reviewed in 1983. Under the new Act,
a Film Censors Board (at the present time known as the Central Board of
Film Certification) was established. At the centres, there are advisory panels
that are authorized to inspect every film and sanction the films for either
unrestricted display or for display restricted to the adults. It can categories
films under different certificates as ‘UA’, ‘A’, and ‘U’ according to the
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 57
contents and presentations. The CBFC also have the authority to decline to
sanction a film for the public display if it thinks necessary. For the first time,
a petitioner questioned the reasonableness of film censorship as the
contravention of the freedom of speech and the expression. Under Article 19
(2) of the Indian Constitution i.e. the reasonable restrictions on freedom of
speech and expression the Supreme Court observed that the pre-censorship
of films were justified. It was because films have to be regarded differently
from the other forms of expression and art since a moving image was capable
to agitate more extremely and therefore certification of the same was
tendered.

5.6.1. PART I – HIGHLIGHTS

   i.      "Adult" – Any person who has completed his eighteenth years is an
           adult
 ii.       "Board" – Under Section 3 of the Act Board means Board of Film
           Certification composed by the central Government.
 iii.      "Certificate"- Under Section 5 of the Act Certificate which is allowed
           or permitted by the Board.
 iv.       "Cinematograph" – It comprises any equipment for the portrayal of
           moving pictures or sequence of pictures.

5.6.2. PART II- CERTIFICATION OF FILMS FOR PUBLIC
DISPLAY

HIGHLIGHTS

       •   Films Censors Board
       •   Examining the films.
       •   Advisory panels.
       •   Certification of films.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                 Page 58
5.6.3. FILM CERTIFICATION OF CBFC

 Certificate             Name                     Meaning




 U                       Universal                May contain only mild
                                                  themes and mild profanity
                                                  or sexual references.

 UA                      Parental Guidance        May                  contain
                                                  mature/strong themes and
                                                  moderate             sexual
                                                  references, languages and
                                                  undetailed sexual activity
                                                  is also allowed.

 A                       Adults only              Nobody younger than 18
                                                  may rent or buy an A-
                                                  rated or watch a film in
                                                  the   cinema   with     this
                                                  rating

 S                       Restricted to any social Specialized        audience,
                         class of people          such as doctors.




5.6.4. CENSORSHIP

Censorship means the control of some objectionable or offensive matter and
ideas from circulation in the society. The right to freedom of speech and
expression is although provided by the Constitution it lays restrictions on
some contents which can tend to increase the tension between
communications and affect the harmony of the state. There are various types
of censorship in India namely moral censorship which restricts obscene or
immoral matters, military censorship restricting information of military
intelligence from getting to the enemy, political censorship when the

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 59
government holds back some information from the citizens in case of
rebellions, religious censorship which objects any religious faith and
corporate censorship in corporate media outlets where the editors restricts
the publication of information related to their business in a negative light.
During the region of Indira Gandhi as the Prime Minister of our country in
1975, she imposed strict censorship upon the press and it was not allowed to
publish any matter against the Government. This censorship lasted up to
1977 and was removed only after the sixth General Election of India.

The censor board with its consultative panels has taken the initiative of
examining every film before permitting it for public viewing so that nothing
offensive or obscene can get into the society, however certification are
provided according to the contents and ideas showcased in the films. For
instance, films containing obscene scenes or contents are restricted only for
adults by providing an ‘A’ certificate which means only for adult viewers.
Similarly, ‘UA’ is for children under parental guidance and ‘U’ means
unrestricted. Many films are also allowed viewing after various cuts and
changes in scenes.


                         ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

      1. Explain the maxim: “actus non facitreum nisi mens sit rea” with
          suitable case laws________________________________________
          _____________________________________________________
      2. Do we need a film sensor? How India’s censors are affecting the film
          industry?_______________________________________________
          _______________________________________________________

      __________________________________________________________
      ____________________________________________________
5.6 SUMMING UP
  1. __________________________________________________________

    • The Indian Penal Code in its
     __________________________________________________________
                                   basic structure is a document that
       consists of the list of all the punishments and cases that a person
       committing any kind of a crime is to be held responsible and imposed


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 60
       with. It includes all the people living in India. Total numbers of
       sections enumerated in the Indian Penal Code are five hundred
       eleven.
   •   The Press Council of India was established to preserve the freedom
       of the press and of preserving and enhancing the quality and
       standards of the press in India. It is a statutory, quasi-judicial body
       which proceeds as an observer and monitor of the press. It examines
       and arbitrates the complaints against the press and by the press for
       breach and contravention of ethics and for the breach of the press
       freedom.
   •   CBFC is a Government Agency; its headquarters is in Mumbai.
       Pahlaj Nihalani is the Chairperson of CBFC. Any film which is to be
       displayed or exhibited publicly has to have a certificate from the
       proficient authority that the film is worthy of public exhibition. The
       Act applies to entire India.
   •   Censorship means the control of some objectionable or offensive
       matter and ideas from circulation in the society.
1.7 QUESTIONS
   1. Explain the power and function of the Press Council of India.
   2. Write short notes on:
           a) CBFC
           b) IPC

5.8 RECOMMENDED READINGS

Banan, Stanley J. (1999). Introduction to Mass Communication, Mayfield
       Publishing Company.

Emery E. et al., (1994). Introduction to Mass Communication, Harper
Collins College.

Hartley, Peter. (1997). Group Communication. Routledge.

                                **********




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 61
UNIT 6: PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION AND DEFAMATION

UNIT STRUCTURE

6.1 Introduction

6.2 Objectives

6.3 Civil and Criminal Law of Defamation

6.3.1. Distinction between Civil and Criminal Law relating to Defamation

        6.3.2. Defamation: Key Elements

        6.3.3. Defence to an action for defamation

        6.3.4. Remedies for Defamation

        6.3.5. Defamation’s Punishment

        6.3.6. Case Study

6.4. Libel and Slander

        6.4.1. Elements of Libel and Slander

        6.4.2. Defence against libel and slander

        6.4.3. Libel and Slander : The distinction

        6.4.4. Case study

6.5. Public interest litigation (PIL)

        6.5.1. Cases in which PIL can be filed included

        6.5.2. Method of filing s PIL – when and how

        6.5.3. Case study

6.5 Summing Up

6.6 Questions

6.7 Recommended Readings




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                         Page 62
6.1 INTRODUCTION

This unit introduces you to the basic concept of defamation and the various
laws relating to the law of defamation. It aims to help students learn about
the Public Interest Litigation, who can file a PIL, when and how to file a PIL
and the cases in which a PIL can be filed.

6.2 OBJECTIVES

Listed below are objectives of the unit:

   ➢ To understand the Law of Defamation- Civil and Criminal
   ➢ Discuss some case law related to Defamation
   ➢ To know about Libel and Slander
   ➢ To know about Public Interest Litigation (PIL)


6.3 CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW OF DEFAMATION

Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code defines Defamation and Section 500
of the Indian Penal Code deals with the punishment of defamation. If any
person by remark, comment or words either spoken or intentional to be read,
or by hint or signs or by visual portrayal or presentation issue, produce or
create any imputation regarding any person expecting to harm the person, or
if he knowingly or have possessed a ground to trust that such imputation will
injure or harm the name or reputation of such persons, it is said to defame
that person.

A person reputation or name is considered as his property. Defamation is an
injury to the reputation or the name of a person.

   i)      Defamation gives rise to the civil remedy for damages and thus
           compose an actionable wrong.
   ii)     If all the conditions of Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code are
           contended it constitutes a criminal offence.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 63
The right to reputation is an absolute right and anybody who touches the
reputation of another is said to do so at his/her peril.

Defamation gives rise to both civil and criminal action. In our country, the
civil law relating to defamation is not structured or codified and it is thus
grounded on the English Common Law which is subject to statutory
exceptions.

Section 499 to Section 502 of the India Penal Code deal with the Criminal
Law of Defamation and is very comprehensive. There is no civil action if
defamation is of the spoken word. The press, being a written and printed
medium, is likely to commit an offence of libel only. Compensation is what
differentiates between the civil suit and the criminal proceeding for
defamation. To appropriately compensate the person who is being defamed
for the loss of the name or the position by the injury or damages is the main
objective of the civil action. The main object of the criminal prosecution is
to penalize the offender, by punishing the offender with imprisonment or
with fine or with both. The intention is irrelevant in civil liability for
defamation. The truth of the statement is a complete defence to a civil action
for defamation.

In criminal law, the intention is essential for liability. Good faith is a defence
in criminal law. But truth as such is no defence in a criminal proceeding
except below Section 499 of India Penal Code’s first exception. It is
necessary to prove further that the defamatory publication is for the public
good.

How can someone be defamed?

A person is defamed when there is an incorrect, untrue or faulty printing or
announcement to injury or hurt and libellous and defamatory statement about
the person. The reputation and the image of the person are defamed when the
statement has the tendency to harm or injure the person to whom it is said or
passed. This statement is that which reveal the person to hate or to dislike,
contempt or derision or which causes to be avoided or evaded or which has
a tendency to harm the person in his workplace or career.
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                 Page 64
6.3.1. DISTINCTION BETWEEN CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LAW
RELATING TO DEFAMATION

   •   A person’s image or name is considered as his property and
       defamation is harming the reputation of the person. Defamation
       constitutes an actionable wrong and thus gives rise to the civil
       remedy of damages. Under Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code,
       1860 defamation represent a criminal offence. The Civil law of
       defamation rest in the common law and the criminal law of
       defamation are organizing and systemize.


   •   The intention of the defendant is irrelevant in the civil activity and
       thus it has no protection to plead that the defendant did not have the
       intention of defaming the plaintiff. In a civil action, ‘Good Faith’ is
       not a good defence on the part of the defendant. On the other hand
       beneath the Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, it is necessary that
       the plaintiff should manifest or show that the publication is planning
       to injure or the plaintiff has reasons to trust that such imputation will
       harm or injure. In a criminal prosecution, ‘Good Faith’ is a good
       defence on the part of the defendant.



   •   A mala fide intention to defame is not always necessary in a civil
       defamation while a Criminal defamation must contain some
       deliberate malice or mala fide intention, to cause damage to the
       reputation of someone.


   •   In civil defamation, Court fees are required to be paid as per the value
       of damages caused to reputation whereas court fees are not required
       at the level of a civil case in the case of criminal defamation.


   •   Court punishes the offender at the end of the case if defamation is
       proved in a criminal case while on the other hand in a case of civil


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 65
       defamation court awards damages to compensate loss to reputation if
       defamation is proved.



6.3.2. DEFAMATION: KEY ELEMENTS

   •   The communication or the proclamation should be defamatory
   •   The proclamation or the statement must refer to the plaintiff
   •   The statement must be published by the defendant

6.3.3. DEFENSES TO AN ACTION FOR DEFAMATION

   •   Justification
   •   Fair comment
   •   Privilege
   •   Consent
   •   Apology

6.3.4. REMEDIES FOR DEFAMATION

   •   Injunction
   •   Damages
   •   Costs
   •   General and specific damages

6.3.5. DEFAMATION’S PUNISHMENT

The punishment for defamation is incorporated in Section 500 of the Indian
Penal Code. Any person who defames the other person may be punished with
a simple imprisonment of two years or he may be asked to pay fine or with
both i.e. imprisonment and fine.

6.3.6. CASE STUDY

   •   In Cook v. Ward 1830 where the plaintiff told some friends a funny
       story about himself and the defendant published it in his newspaper
       as a source of amusement to his readers in the belief that the plaintiff
       would not mind, the defendant was held liable.
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 66
   •   In Hulton v. Jones 1910, the facts were these: the appellants,
       published in their newspaper an article in which ‘Artemus Jones’,
       narrated as the warden of a church was charged with living in France
       accompanied by a mistress. The article is meant to be imaginary and
       the writer of the article was ignorant of the existence of any person
       by that name. The plaintiff, a barrister who bore the same name,
       brought an action for defamation against the newspaper. The House
       of Lord held that the defendant was liable, notwithstanding the
       absence of any intention to defame the plaintiff.


   •   R S Lodha vs B K Birla 2006 Auditor R S Lodha, who had claimed
       that Priyamvada Birla had bequeathed her assets worth thousands of
       crores to him, sued industrialist B K Birla for damages of Rs 100
       crores. He said Birla's statements in the media had tarnished his
       image.
   •   Shah Rukh Khan v. State Of Rajasthan And others 2007
   •   Anil Ambani v. Mukesh Ambani 2008
   •   Veritas v. Indiabulls 2014


6.4. LIBEL AND SLANDER

Defamation is categorized into two. These are- Libel and Slander.

Libel – The defamation which is in the written form is libel. It exists in the
communicating, notifying and publishing of a defamatory assertion or
statement conveyed or communicated in some everlasting form. It can be in
the form of writing, by printing, through pictures, in statue, waxwork,
sculpture etc. Libel exposes a person to hatred, shame, disgrace, contempt or
ridicule. It injures a person’s reputation or causes the person to be shunned
or avoided.

Examples might include accusing someone of having committed a heinous
crime, or of having a disease that might cause them to be shunned.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 67
Slander is a spoken form of defamation. It comprises the tort of slander when
the defamation is verbal, or by signals or in some alternative form.

Examples of slander may include: telling someone that a certain person has
a sexually transmitted disease, relating to someone that a husband is cheating
on his wife, saying a doctor or a lawyer has fake diplomas on his wall,
relating that someone is incompetent at their job, claiming the business
owners participated in unethical and illegal activities

6.4.1. ELEMENTS OF LIBEL AND SLANDER

   •   Defamatory
   •   False
   •   Publication
   •   Identification
   •   Fault
   •    Harm (damages)

6.4.2. DEFENSES AGAINST LIBEL AND SLANDER

   •   Truth
   •   Privilege
   •   Fair comment and criticism
   •   Consent
   •   Privilege

6.4.3. LIBEL AND SLANDER: THE DISTINCTION

   •   Libel is addressed to the eye. It is a written form of defamation on
       the other hand slander is addressed to the ear. It is a spoken form of
       defamation.


   •   Slander is considered as a civil wrong on the other hand libel is a
       criminal wrongdoing as well as a civil incorrect.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 68
6.4.4. CASE STUDY

YoussopoffV.Metro        Goldwyn-Meyer         Pictures     Limited     –    The
communication should also be observable in addition to the test of
permanence and stability. There arises a question in this case as to whether
it is aggregate to libel when film pictures are accompanied by speech. The
court approach to the closure that the optical feature being enduring and
lasting in nature would represent libel, the audio part would also be eligible
as libel, not separately, but because it was part of one composite, common
exhibition being auxiliary to the optical image.

6.5. PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL)

PIL is a judicial tool which allows a person, a class of people and group of
people to dare and challenge an authority or government resolution and
action in a court of law for the fulfilment of the public interest. It serves as a
protection of the public interest, and which directly joints the public with the
judiciary. It is a strong protection for the abused and oppressed people to
restore and repair their issues and difficulty as it supply and issue huge and
massive social benefits, where there is non-success or failure on the part of
the execute.

PIL can be filed straight to the Supreme Court and it can also be filed in any
High Court. In order to litigate it is not obligatory that the petitioner has to
suffer some injury personally or in private or has had an individual
grievance.

A community-minded or public-spirited NGO or a socially responsible
member is allowed by the Constitution of India to take up a public cause by
seeking judicial for redressed of public harm or injury. The general people
involvement in the judicial administrative activity is assured through Public
Interest Litigation. It has the consequence of making the judicial process
more democratic and representative.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                 Page 69
The Supreme Court of India has given the following mention guidelines
through which any member of the general public having an adequate interest
may maintain an action or petition by the process of PIL issued:

    i)        When a person has suffered individual harm or injury or the
              injury is caused to a disadvantaged segment of the public whom
              access to the legal system is hard or strenuous.
    ii)       When the person brings the action has abundant interest to
              preserve and continue an action of public harm.
    iii)      When a harm or damage must have arisen because of the
              violation and contravention of the public responsibility or
              infringement of the Constitution of India.

6.5.1. CASES IN WHICH A PIL CAN BE FILED INCLUDED

    •      Environmental degradation;
    •      Violation of basic human rights of the poor;
    •      Performance of the policies of the government;
    •      When a municipal authorization is force or pressurizes to execute a
           public duty;
    •      When the primary fundamental rights are infringement or when there
           is a breach of any religious rights.

6.5.2. METHOD OF FILING A PIL-WHEN AND HOW

i) Form an enlightened determination in order to file a case.

ii) Need to ask all the pretentious interest groups class who are the possible
allies

iii) While filing a case of PIL it is required to be careful because

                  •   Lawsuit can be costly
                  •   Lawsuit can take a lot more time
                  •   The decision making ability/power from the communities
                      can be taken off by litigation.



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 70
                  •   The strength and the ability of the movement can be
                      influenced by an adverse and unfavourable decision.
                  •   The attention of the community can be diverted from the
                      real issue when litigation is involved.


    iv)       When a decision is taken to file a PIL
                  ➢ It is important to be cautious in assembling particulars for
                      using it in the case.
                  ➢ A proficient lawyer is needed to be engaged. If the person
                      filing the PIL is handling the matter himself he must take
                      good legal counsel on the drafting.
                  ➢ Only registered organizations can file a PIL. When the
                      organization is unregistered a PIL can be filed in the name
                      of an office agent or a member in his or her individual
                      capacity.
                  ➢ Before filing a PIL a legal notice have to be issued to the
                      concerned authorities or the parties. When a PIL is filed
                      against the government it is required to issue a notice at
                      least two months prior to the filing of the PIL. The notice
                      is to be issued to the concerned Officer department.



6.5.3. CASE STUDY:

  i.      Hussainara Khatoon V. State of Bihar
          In India, this case is regarded as the first case of PIL. In the case, the
          Court noticed and concentrated on the unbelievable situation of
          under-trial in Bihar who had been in custody unresolved trial for
          periods far in a surplus of the paramount sentence for their offences.
          The court not only acted to make the right to a speedy trial, but the
          court passed the order of general liberate of closed to 40,000 under-
          trials who had experience confinement afar such maximum period.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                   Page 71
 ii.   M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
       On 12th January, 1988 the judgment conveyed whip out at municipal
       authorities for permitting garbage from the Kanpur’s tanneries to
       make its way to the Ganga. Three landmark judgments were passed
       by the court. More than 50,000 numbers of orders in the Ganga basin
       opposed to the industrial pollution from time to time. More than 250
       towns and cities in this case had to set up garbage treatment plants
       apart from the industries. In the highly crowded residential area of
       Kolkata six hundred tanneries operated. The decision moved them
       out of the city and relocated them in West Bengal to an organized and
       planned leather complex. Several industries were closed down and
       they were permitted for reopening only after setting up sewage
       treatment plants and pollution control. Covering eights States in India
       millions of people escaped air and water pollution in the Ganga as a
       result of the decision in the case.
iii.   Vellore, Citizens' Welfare Forum v. Union of India (1996)
       The Supreme Court allowed standing to a public-spirited social
       organization for protecting the health of residents of Vellore. In
       Vellore, tanneries (the place where animal skins are made to leather)
       situated around a river were found discharging untreated effluents
       into the river, jeopardizing the health of the residents. The Court
       noticed that the leather industry was a major foreign exchange earner
       and Tamil Nadu's export of finished leather accounted for 80% of the
       country's export of that commodity. Nevertheless, the Court pointed
       out that the leather industry had no right to destroy the environment,
       devalue the ecology and create a danger to the health. The Court
       asked the tanneries to close their business.


 iv.   Parmanand Katara v. Union of India
       A writ petition was filed in the Supreme Court by Parmanand Katara,
       a human right activist. His petition was for a newspaper report
       regarding the death of a scooterist after the scooterist has an accident
       with a running car. The scooterist was refused to attend by the

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 72
       Doctors of the hospital. The doctors administered to the hospital
       which was 20km far that could handle medico-legal cases. The
       Supreme Court based on the petition held that-

   •   It is of supreme importance to protect the human life.
   •   There lies a professional duty and responsibility on the part of the
       doctors at any government hospital or a private hospital to expand
       and extend his or her services to protect human life.
   •   The attempt to save the human life should receive top priority and it
       does not only apply to the legal profession. It also includes the police
       and the other citizens part as well.


                          ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

       1. PIL is a case filed by an individual against any activity which can
          harm or damage the interest of the public or society.
          Explain______________________________________________
          ____________________________________________________




6.5 SUMMING UP


In this unit, we have discussed bat the law of defamation and the civil and
the criminal law of defamation. The unit also provides us with an
understanding of libel and slander defamation and the difference between
them. We now also have a clear understanding of the concept of Public
Interest Litigation. We have also discussed some case law related to
defamation and the Public Interest Litigation.


6.7 RECOMMENDED READINGS
   1. Indian penal code by S.N. Mishra
   2. Facts of Media Law by Madhavi Garadia Divan



                                ***************

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                              Page 73
UNIT 7: MEDIA LAW RELATING TO WOMEN AND CHILDREN

UNIT STRUCTURE

7.1 Introduction
7.2 Objectives
7.3 Law relating to obscenity

       7.3.1 Cases of obscenity

7.4. Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986

7.5. The Children Act, 1960

7.6 Summing Up
7.7 Questions
7.8 Recommended Readings


7.1 INTRODUCTION

The unit introduces you to the laws relating to obscenity. The purpose of this
unit is to help understand the students about the Indecent Representation of
Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 and learn the Children Act, 1960.

7.2 OBJECTIVES

After reading this unit you will be able to:

                 •   Know the law relating to obscenity
                 •   Understand the Indecent Representation of Women
                     (Prohibition) Act, 1986
                 •   Enumerate the Children Act, 1960
                     .
7.3 LAW RELATING TO OBSCENITY

From country to country the idea and the conception of obscenity vary. It
depends on the virtuous quality and the cultural and ethnic worthiness that
have formed the society and the antiquity of the country. In the backdrop of

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 74
sexual behaviour, obscenity is generally examined. The Indian Penal Code
defines the Indian law on Obscenity.

The ‘Purity’ of women in India has been stated maximum significance. To
assist a family’s social privilege and reputation it is like a social barometer.
Whether the women is an ordinary women or a woman born in the royal
family, the culture of India placed substantial significance on values such as
loyalty. The portrayal of women in India concentrated on these features until
advertising and new bohemian process of thinking alter the popular
perception.

In Indian Law Obscenity is defined as -

   •   Any work that pleads mainly to salacious interest.
   •   Any work that portrays or narrate sexual behaviour or conduct in a
       patently insulting and objectionable process.
   •   Legally the expression ‘obscenity’ is mentioned obscene as utterance
       and assertion, which includes words, images and actions.
       Presentation of an obscene act that conducts a widespread corruption
       of moral aggregate to the breach and infringement of Indian Law.
   •   For instance: There were significant public indignation, fury and
       annoyance when the famous painter, M. F. Hussain painted Goddess
       Saraswati nude. The painting was contemplated as ‘obscene’ by
       many Hindus while many others who observed it from artistic
       discernment saw nothing incorrect with it.



SECTION 292, INDIAN PENAL CODE COVERS OBSCENITY

Section 292 of the Indian Penal Code deals with the offences of Obscenity
in India. Freedom to expression is guaranteed by the Constitution of India
and thus the section of Obscenity seems to come in dispute with the
individual’s right to freedom of expression. To limit a citizen’s freedom of
expression the Indian law on obscenity is frequently misused. Nevertheless,
the right to freedom of expression can be limited to stop indecency in public
interest as provided by Article 19 (2) of the Indian Constitution.
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 75
The sale of a book, pamphlet, paper, writings, drawing, painting,
representation, figure or any object shall be contemplate as obscene, under
section 292 if the IPC if it is licentious, salacious or if it inclines to dishonest
persons, who are probable to get revealed to it.

The punishment of obscenity in India is 2 years or with fine which may
extend up to Rs. 2000 if any person encourages or assist obscenity, such as
vend, own, have, rent, lease, distributes, import, transport, makes gain from
business or buy or acquire an obscene matter or substance. If the same person
is found guilty for the second time he shall be responsible for an
imprisonment for a term of 5 years or with a fine which may extend to 5000
rupees.

If any work is proved to be done in the public interest, such as work
associated to science, literature, religious occasion or ancient monuments
than the provisions of Section 292 of Indian Penal Code is not applicable.

7.3.1 CASES OF OBSCENITY

    •     Hicklin’s Test R.v. Hicklin, (1868) LR 3 QB 360
    •     Amitabh Bachchan Corporation Ltd. V. Om Pal Singh Hoon on 26
          March, 1996
    •     Ranjit D. Udeshiv. The State of Maharashtra. AIR 1965 SC 881
    •     K.A.Abbas v. Union of India (1970) 2 SCC 780
    •     FB has always been a hot spot for political discussions, opinionated
          fights, and social critique. In 2012, two girls were arrested because
          of a post that one of them wrote. The post questioned why the entire
          city had to be shut down on account of the death of Shiv Sena’s Head,
          Bal Thackeray. The girls were arrested in Thane, under section
          505(2) – statements generating or encouraging hostility, dislike, or
          enmity between classes. They did not stop there; one of the girl’s
          uncles had his orthopaedic hospital vandalized as a group of
          40 shoved their way inside. The girls were ultimately released on
          bail, but it did spark a social media conversation on our rights to
          examine and critique our country and its government.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                   Page 76
7.4. INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION)
ACT, 1986

The preamble of the Act is to interdict obscene or indecent portrayal of the
women through advertisements or in publishing, by writing, through
paintings, figures or in any other form and for matter attached therewith or
subsidiary thereto.

“Indecent Representation of Women”- Meaning of- Section 2(c) of the
Act defines the term     ‘Indecent Representation of Women’. It means the
representation or portrayal in any manner of the figure of women, her body
or any other part in such a way as to have the consequence of being dirty or
vulgar or deprecatory to, or disparages, women or is likely to corrupt,
degrade, injure or harm the public ethics or signification.

Advertisements which accommodate indecent presentation of women are to
be forbidden or prohibited under Section 3 of the Act. Any advertisement
which carries indecent portrayal of women in any form produce or issue, or
causes to be produced, or arranges to take part in the distribution or
presentation is not allowed to any person.


Section 4 of the Act prohibits the publishing or sending which accommodate
indecent presentation of women by post of books, pamphlets, etc. this section
does not allow any person to produce or cause to be produced, sell, hire, let
to hire, issue, dispense, circulate, or send by post any books, paper, slide,
films, writings, pamphlet, drawing, painting, photograph, portrayal or
figures which hold indecent presentation of women.


This section shall not apply to such publication which is manifest to be
justified as being for the wellbeing of the general people or any other objects
of public importance or concern. If it is used for the interest of science, law,
literature, learning or religious purposes. Any presentation carving, statue,
inscribe, painted or represented on any ancient monument, any temple, and
idols or kept for any religious proposes.


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 77
Under Section 5 of the Act, any Gazetted Officer approved or permitted by
the State government may inside the local limits of the area are authorized
to search seizure and examine.


   a) Search: If the Gazetted Officer appointed by the State Government
       has reasonable grounds to trust that an offence has been committed
       under this Act he is authorized to enter and search at any time with
       such help and support.


   b) Seizure: the competent authority can seize any advertisement or any
       book or paper or pamphlet, film, drawing, photographs etc which
       contain any indecent representation or portrayal of women or if the
       concerned authority has reasonable grounds to believe that such
       publication or portrayal breach any other provision of the Act.


   c) Examination: the competent authority is authorized to examine the
       records, the register, documents or any such other object found in the
       place and he can seize the material objects if he has reasonable
       grounds to believe that it may enhance evidence of the undertaking
       or commission of an offence which is punishable under this Act.


Without a warrant, no entry can be made into a private dwelling house. Under
this act the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1972 is applied
for any search and seizure. Section 94 of the Code issue warrant to the
competent authority for any search and seizure. Under the Act of 1986 when
any person seizes anything he shall inform the nearest Magistrate and takes
his order as to the custody.


Section 6 of the Act state that a person shall be punished for breaking the
provisions of section 3 and 4 of the Act. On his first conviction, he shall be
punished with confinement for a term which may extend to two years or with
a fine of rupees two thousand. In the occurrence of the second succeeding

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 78
conviction, he shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which is
not less than six months but it may also extend to five years and also with
fine which is not less than 10,000/- but it may be extended to rupees one
lakh.


Under section 7 of the Act when any crime or misdemeanour has been
performed or accomplished by a company, every person who at the time of
enacting such crime was in charge of the company and was liable to the
company for the performance of the company’s business, as well as the
company shall be considered to be culpable of the offence and shall be
accountable to be proceeded against and penalize appropriately. The
offences under the Act under Section 8 of the Act are considered to be
Cognizable and Bailable.


7.5 THE CHILDREN ACT, 1960

The main objective of the Act is to contribute for the custody, care,
preservation, protection, continuation, well-being, teaching, instruction and
the rehabilitation or betterment of the abandon, neglected or criminal
children and for the trial of the criminal children in the Union Territories.


‘Child’ means a boy or a girl who have attained the sixteen years of age in
case of a boy and in case of a girl who has attained eighteen years of age
according to Section 2(e) of the Act.


One or more Child Welfare Boards may be composed for any area by
notifying in the Official Gazette for applying the powers and discharging the
duties granted or trusted on such Boards in relation to the neglected children
as included in the Act.


In any area, as may be specified in the Actone or more children court is to
be formed for executing the ability and discharging the duties granted or
imposed on the children’s court in relation to the delinquent children.


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 79
A person who in the opinion of the Administrator has a remarkable
knowledge of child psychology and child welfare shall be appointed in the
Children’s Court as a member of the Board or as a Magistrate.


When a Children’s Court or a Board has been composed for any area, the
Children court and the Board have the capability and the power to deal solely
with all the proceedings relating to the delinquent or the neglected children.
If the Board or the Children’s Court in their opinion if they think it necessary
having considered to the situation of the case they can transfer any
proceedings to any Board or Children’s Court.


For the acceptance of the neglected children under the Act, the Administrator
may institute, sustain and maintain as many Children’s home as required.
Every neglected child who is dispatch to a Children’s home shall be
providing the child with maintenance, accommodation and education
facilities. The child shall also be provided with the facilities for evolution
and growth of his character and potential and he will also be given necessary
instruction for safeguarding himself against moral hazard or ill-treatment. If
the Administrator thinks it necessary he can also execute and discharge such
other functions as may be prescribed. Special home can be established and
maintain by the administrator for the acceptance of criminal children and it
can also institute observation homes for the short-term acceptance of
children during the pending of any inquiry.


If any person of any police officer appointed by the Administrator is of the
belief that a person is evidently a neglected child such authorized persons or
police officer can take the charge of bringing and producing the child before
the Board. Within a period of twenty hours, the child should be produced
before the Board debarring the time that was needed for the journey from the
place from where the child is taken the charge of to the Board. The child
taken charge of cannot be sent to a jail or a police station. He must be sent to
an observation home until he is shown before the Board.

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 80
If an authorized person or a police officer is of the belief that a person is an
abandoned child, but the neglected child has a guardian or a parent who has
the genuine charge of the child or has a jurisdiction over the child, the
authorized person or the police officer may make a report to the Board to
begin an inquiry concerning the child instead of taking the charge of the
child.


The board may make an order to place the child under the care and guidance
of the parents or any other person who is suitable if the Board thinks it
competent, instead of sending the child to the observation home. The person
competent for or the parent taking the charge of the child is needed to
accomplish a bond with or without surety to be accountable for the good
behaviour or well-being of the child and the observance of such other
conditions impose by the Board.


When the Board receives a complaint from the parents or the guardian that
they are not able to take better control and care of the child. When the Board
is pleased on inquiry that proceedings should be commenced concerning the
child, the Board may send the child to an observation home or to a place of
protection and make such further inquiry if it is necessary.


When any person is condemned of a bailable or non-bailable offence and
evidently a child is apprehended or retarded or appears or is produced before
a children’s court, such person shall be free on bail with or without guarantor
but he shall not be so freed if there arrive reasonable grounds for trusting that
the freeing of such person is probable to involve him into alliance with any
reputed culprit or offender or reveal him to virtuous danger or that releasing
him would conquer the termination of justice such officer shall cause him to
be retained in an observation home or a safe place in the manner as advised
until he can be shown before a children's court. When such person is not
freed on bail by the children's court, it shall in spite of accomplishing him to
prison, prepare an order sending him to an observation home or a safe place

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 81
for such period during the pendency of the inquiry concerning him as may
be described in the order.


The officer-in-charge of the police station to which the child is brought shall
inform the parent or the guardian of the child as soon as the child is arrested
if the parents or the guardian is found. The police officer can direct the parent
or the guardian to be present in the Children’s court in which the child will
be appeared and the probation officer.
In conferring with the provisions of section 39 of this Act the Children’s
Court shall hold the inquiry. It can also make such orders in relation to the
child as it thinks necessary where a child who is being charged with an
offence appears or is brought before the children court. On enquire when the
Children’s Court contends that the child had enacted or performed an offence
the Children’s Court may-
    a. After advising or rebuke allow the child to go home;
    b. The child may be administered to be freed on probation of good
        behaviour and put under the care of any parent, guardian or other
        competent person accomplishing a bond, with or without surety as
        that court may need, for the good conduct and safety and protection
        of the child for any period not exceeding three years;
    c. Administering or directing the child to send to a special school.
No criminal child shall be convicted to death or confinement, or accomplish
to prison in non- payment of fine or in supplying security. Where any child
who is of fourteen years of age and the Children’s Court is pleased that the
offence which the child has committed is an offence of serious nature or that
the behaviour of the child is not in the interest of the other children in the
Special School to send him to the special school, or that no any other
measures given under the Act is acceptable, satisfactory or adequate. The
Children’s Court may order the criminal child to be kept in a secure care or
in such place as it deem fit and necessary. The case shall be reported to the
Administrator for the orders.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 82
No child shall be imposed with or endeavour for, any crime jointly with a
person who is not a child. A child who has executed a crime and has been
bestow with under the provisions of this Act shall not suffer elimination, if
any, connected to a sentence of a crime under such law.


Whenever the competent authority thinks fit or necessary the parent or the
guardian having the authentic charge of or authority of the child should be
present at any proceedings in respect of the child.


When the child brought before the competent authority is found to be
suffering from disease which need lengthen medical treatment or physical or
mental complaint that will respond to treatment, the authority may send the
child to an approved place for such time periods as it is necessary and needed
for the treatment.


A competent authority shall take into consideration the following listed
situations while making any order related to the child:
   i.    The child age;
 ii.     The child living condition or the position
 iii.    The probation officer’s report
 iv.     The child’s religious coercion
  v.     In the opinion of the competent authority if there are such other
         conditions which are required to be taken into account for the interest
         of the child.


The name of the child, the name of the school in which the child study and
the address of the child or the image of the child or any other things which
may lead to the identification of the child shall not be published in any report
in any newspapers, magazines or any news sheet of any inquiry regarding a
child.


Within 30 days from the date of passing of the order by the competent
authority any aggrieved person can prefer an appeal to the Session court. The

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 83
High court may at its own motion or maybe after receiving an application in
this behalf call the record of the proceeding in which an order has been
passed by the session court or the competent authority to satisfy itself as to
the lawfulness or decency or correctness of the order and it can also pass
such order as it thinks fit and if necessary.


Any person who is having the actual charge of the child, or jurisdiction of
the child, hit, strike, reveal or deliberately abandon the child or causes or
acquire him to be hit or strike, expose or neglect in a way probable to cause
the child unneeded mental and bodily suffering shall be punished with
confinement which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.


If any person utilizes or engages the child for the motive of begging or
causing any such child to beg shall be penalized with confinement for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.


If any person apparently acquires a child for the cause of any engagement
and take away or refuses to give the earnings to the child or if the person uses
the earning of the child for his own motives he shall be penalized with a fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees.
.
7.6 SUMMING UP
    •   The ‘Purity’ of women in India has been stated maximum
        significance. To assist a family’s social privilege and reputation it is
        like a social barometer. Whether the women is an ordinary women or
        a woman born in the royal family, the culture of India placed
        substantial significance on values such as loyalty.


    •   The Indecent Representation of Women is an Act is to interdict
        obscene or indecent portrayal of the women through advertisements
        or in publishing, by writing, through paintings, figures or in any other
        form and for matter attached therewith or subsidiary thereto.


MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 84
   •   The Children Act, 1960 is an Act is to contribute for the custody,
       care, preservation, protection, continuation, well-being, teaching,
       instruction and the rehabilitation or betterment of the abandon,
       neglected or criminal children and for the trial of the criminal
       children in the Union Territories.



7.7 QUESTIONS
   1. Discuss the law of obscenity
   2. Critically analyse the        Indecent Representation of Women
       (Prohibition) Act, 1986
   3. Elaborate on the Children Act, 1960
7.8 RECOMMENDED READINGS

Dance Frank (1967). Human Communication Theory: Original Essays, US:
       Rinerhart & Winston.

McQuail, Denis. (2005). McQuail’s Mass Communication Theory, Sage
       Publications. Stone, Gerald, Singletory, Michael & Richmond,
       Virginia P. (2003).

McQuail, Denis. (2006). Mass Communication (Four volume set). Sage
       publication Sereno K.K., and Mortensen (eds). Foundations of
       Communication Theory, Sage publication.


                                 ***********




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                         Page 85
UNIT 8 --FREEDOM AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF THE MEDIA

UNIT STRUCTURE

8.1. Introduction

8.2. Objectives

8.3. Freedom and Responsibility

8.4. Contempt of Court 1971

       8.4.1. Punishment for the Contempt of Court

       8.4.2. Defences allowed in Contempt Proceeding

       8.4.3 Norms to be followed by the media to avoid Contempt of
Course cases

8.5. Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955

       8.5.1. Main Provisions of the Act

8.6. Parliamentary Proceeding Act, 1977

8.7. Summing Up

8.8. Questions

8.9. Recommended Readings

8.1. INTRODUCTION

The unit introduces you to the basic concept of freedom and responsibility.
The purpose of this unit is to help students in understanding about the
freedom and accountability of the media. Some important Acts like The
Contempt of Court 1971, Protection of Civil Rights Act and Parliamentary
Proceedings Act, 1977 has been discussed.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                          Page 86
8.2. OBJECTIVES

The objective of this unit is to know about

    •   The freedom and responsibility
    •   The Contempt of Court, 1971
    •   The Protection of Civil Act
    •   The Parliamentary Proceedings Act,1977


8.3. FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY

The term “freedom” means many different things to people, for some it
means doing exactly as they want without thinking of other people. To a
person that lives in a country which is controlled by an oppressive regime, it
can mean not living in fear. To a child, it can be the freedom to choose what
to eat or when to brush his teeth. Freedom is the power or right to act, speak
or think as one wants without hindrance or restraint. Freedom cannot be
separated from responsibility. With freedom comes responsibility. It is
common for many people to seek freedom while trying to avoid
responsibility.

Responsibility- The word responsibility breaks down into two keywords:
response and ability i.e., ability to respond. It is the ability to respond to our
own self, to the situations and to the day to day interactions that we have
with our selves, or with others or with things around us. Responsibility is
thus a duty or obligation to satisfactorily perform or complete a task that one
must fulfil, and which has a consequent penalty for failure.

Responsibility and freedom go together. If one doesn’t want to take
responsibility, he can't have freedom either. The two come together or they
go together. It is a universal truth. Without responsibility freedom of any
type cannot be acquired.

We naturally desire freedom and independence, since we know that we have
this great prospective. But freedom comes with liability and influence.
People fell fulfilling to say that they live in a free world. It is true that people

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                   Page 87
are given the consent and authorization to think in their own way, speak and
act as they desire. But when such freedom is not carried by understanding
and sagacity, a human being can act worst than animals. When there is an
absence of wisdom the human being may frequently misapply their freedom
and independence for the incorrect purposes even though the human beings
are regarded as clever, brilliant and unique. They misuse their intelligence,
speech and their ability to act.

Majority of the people wants to be independent but they do not want to take
responsibility. But independence and freedom is indivisible from
responsibility. If one is given the freedom or the independent to think he has
the responsibility to think emphatically. If a person has the freedom to speech
to speak correctly and significantly. If he has the independence to act, he also
has the responsibility to act accurately. No person has the right to take the
decisions for the other person. The world will be a superior and better place
to live in if every person could sense responsibility in their own way. But
many of the people do not take the responsibility as to what they speak, think
and how they act. They always try to set the blame on another person or on
the situation and find excuses for themselves.

Freedom is realizing this bondage; these chains with which our response-
ability have been tied. Freedom is freeing it from the imprisonment of
notions, views, biases and preformed impressions of everything. When our
power of responding is in our own hands, solely controlled by us, by the
views that we have formed after exploring and experimenting with things,
then we allow ourselves to be free. And we allow ourselves to approach
things in our own way. Then we have complete responsibility for what we
do.




8.4. CONTEMPT OF COURT, 1971

In the twenty-second year of the republic the Contempt of Court Act, 1971
has been passed by the parliament of our country. It is a court order in the
ambience of a court lawsuit or hearing, which proclaims an organization or
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 88
a person to have contravened, disobeyed or been discourteous of the court’s
authority. Contempt of Court means when there is a failure to perform, obey
or discharge a lawful order of a court, presenting disrespect to the judges, or
publishing of any material which can endanger or threaten the mind of a
judge in discharging of his official duty. There are two contempt of courts
such as civil contempt of court and the criminal contempt of court.

When there is an intentional breach, indiscipline or disobedience to any
sentence, order, direction, decree, writ or other process of the court or
intentional violation of a pledge, agreement or undertaking given to a court,
it is termed as civil contempt of court. On the contrary criminal contempt of
court means any publication which obstruct with or erode the administration
of justice or which has a propensity to do so. It means the publication whether
by words which are either written or spoken, or by signs or symbols, or by
optical presentation or otherwise of any stuff or the performance of any act
which-

   1. Outrage or inclined to outrage or nether or incline to nether the
         authority of the court, or
   2. When the required course of any judicial proceedings is prejudice or
         impede or incline to obstruct, or
   3. When the administration of the justice is impede or incline to impede
         with, or clogs or tends to clog.

Though Press is entrusted with the liberty of expression, it should feel
responsible for the publication of its matter so that it does not offend against
the law. It should not influence or criticize any judicial decision unless the
case is closed or the verdict declared. Otherwise, the press can easily be a
powerful weapon of justice.

Section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971, states that no person should
be held guilty of contempt of court for publishing fair and accurate report of
judicial proceedings; or for publishing any fair comment on the merit of any
case that has already been heard and finally decided (Sec. 5).



MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                               Page 89
8.4.1. PUNISHMENT FOR THE CONTEMPT OF COURT

The ability to penalize for the Contempt of Court is granted to the Supreme
Court and the High Court. Under Section 12 of Contempt of Court Act, 1971,
the punishment for a contempt of court is simple confinement for a term of
six months or with fine up to two thousand rupees, or maybe with both. If
the contempt of court is committed by a company, then each person
responsible for running of that company will be liable for punishment.

However, in civil cases if the court examine that a fine for the contempt will
not be sufficient for meeting the end of the justice and that a sentence of
confinement is necessary to meet the ends of the justice than the court can
instead of convicting him to simple confinement, direct to retard the person
in a civil prison for a period not exceeding six month.

The court is not supposed to impose a sentence for contempt of court in
excess of what is prescribed under this section. If an apology is being made
by the accused to the gratification and contentment of the court the accused
may be discharged or the confinement awarded may be remitted by the court.
An apology is not assumed to be a decline or refuse entirely on the ground
that it is qualified or conditional if the accused makes it authentic or genuine.

8.4.2. DEFENSES ALLOWED IN CONTEMPT PROCEEDING
Clause (b) of Section 13 of Contempt of Court Act, 1971 that was introduced
recently by 2006 amendment, allows the accused to raise the defence of
justification by truth of such contempt, if the court is pleased and contended
that the contempt is in the regard of the public and the appeal for invoking
the said defence is legitimate.

Unless the court is satisfied that the contempt is of such a nature that it greatly
hinder, or tends greatly to obstruct with the due course of justice no court
shall impose a sentence for the contempt of court under the Act.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                  Page 90
8.4.3 NORMS TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE MEDIA TO AVOID
CONTEMPT OF COURT CASES

Following are the norms that are to be followed by the media in order to
avoid Contempt of Court cases, in accordance with the Supreme Court of
India.

   i.      Press/electronic media are allowed to publish/broadcast/telecast
           fair and accurate report of the court proceedings.
   ii.     The report about an order should only be made after acquiring the
           true copy of the order and the report’s headline should not be
           misleading.
   iii.    Any article/atter which is pending before the court for
           adjudication should not be published/broadcast/telecast by the
           press/electronic media.
   iv.     No person should be interviewed by the electronic media in
           regard to the merit of the case.


8.5. PROTECTION OF CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, 1955

The Protection of Civil rights Act is to give punishment for the (spread,
exercise and application of Untouchability) imposition of any disability
arising there from and of matters attached therewith.


By Article 17 of the Indian Constitution any rights occurring to a person by
cause of the abolition of ‘untouchability’ is the Civil rights.


Article 17 of the Constitution of India abolished the practice of
untouchability. The Article reads as follows: “Untouchability’’ is eradicated
and its exercise or execution in any other form is prohibited. In accordance
with the law the imposition of any disability emerging out of
“Untouchability’’ shall be an offence which will be punishable by the law.


8.5.1. MAIN PROVISIONS OF THE PROTECTION OF CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT, 1955, ARE AS UNDER:
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 91
For imposing religious disabilities -- On the ground of ‘untouchability’
whoever stops or intercepts any person to enter into any public worship place
which is open to other persons maintaining the same religion or any section.
Or from worshipping or offering prayers or executing any religious services
in any public worship place, or using the water or bathing, any holding tank,
well, spring or water-course.


For imposing social disabilities –On the ground of ‘untouchability’ whoever
stops any person –


   •   Entrance to any shop, hotels, inn, public restaurant, or a public
       entertainment place.
   •   Utilization of any utensils, and other articles which are placed in any
       hotel, inn, public restaurant, or Dharmshala.
   •    The exercise of any occupation or the carrying on of any profession,
       trade or work or engagement in any job.
   •   The utilization of, or entry to any river, stream, spring, well, tank,
       reservoir, water tap or other watering place or any ghat of bathing,
       burying or cremation ground, any hygienic convenience, any
       highway, or transit, or any other place of public retreat.
   •   Utilization of, or entry to, any place used for a beneficent purpose.
   •   Utilization of, or entry to, any public transportation.


   •   The denying to admitting a person to hospitals etc


   •   Declining to give admission to any person to any health centre clinic,
       hospital dispensary, educational organization or any inn or hostel.


   •   Execute any act which differentiates against any such person after
       admission to any of the forenamed organizations.


For refusing the sale or disposal of goods or services
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                             Page 92
       •   Whoever on the ground of “untouchability” decline to dispose of any
           goods or decline to provide service to any person but at the same time
           disposes of goods or provides services to any other persons in the
           usual course of business.

For the above said act, the person is punishable with an imprisonment which
is of not less than 1 months and not more than 6 months and a fine of not less
than Rs.100 and not more than Rs.500.


Unlawful compulsory labour – Any person who force or pressurize any other
person, on the ground of “untouchability” to undertake or discharge any
rummage or sweeping or to detach any corpse or to flay any animal or to
detach the umbilical cord or to do any other job of a similar nature, shall be
penalize with a confinement of not less than 3 months and not more than 6
months and a fine of not less than Rs.100 and not more than Rs.500.


Cancellation or suspension of licenses - When a person who is sentenced of
a crime or misdemeanour beneath the above sections, holds any license any
profession, trade, calling or employment the court trying the offence may
cancel or suspend the license for time being.


Adjournment of grants made by government - Where the executive,
administrator or the agent of a place of public worship or any educational
organization or inn which is in reception of a grant of land or money from
the Government is sentenced of a crime under this Act, the government can
in a straight way suspend such grants.


No Civil Court shall amuse or pursue any suit or proceeding related to this
act.




MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                                Page 93
8.6. PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS ACT, 1977

The Act was enacted to protect the distribution, notification and
dissemination of reports of proceedings of Parliament. The Act was enacted
by the Parliament in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic of India.

The Act extends to entire India but it does not include the state of Jammu
and Kashmir. The Act came into power on the 25th day of March, 1977.

In the Act, "newspaper" means any periodical work printed holdings news
of the public or remark or statement on the public news and comprises a news
agency contributing or providing material for announcement or publishing
in a newspaper.

   1. Publication of reports of Parliamentary proceedings confidential

   No person shall be responsible to any proceedings, either criminal or
   civil, in any court in respect of the announcement or publication in a
   newspaper of a significantly accurate report of any proceedings of either
   House of Parliament, unless the publication is manifest or demonstrate
   to have been made with hostility.

   2. Act also apply to Parliamentary proceedings transmitted by
       wireless telegraphy

   The Act shall apply in relation to reports or matters transmitted by way
   of wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by
   way of a transmitting station situate inside the territories to which this
   Act extends as it applies in relation to reports or matters published in a
   newspaper.

                        ASSESS YOUR PROGRESS

             1. What are the norms to be followed by the media
                to avoid Contempt of court?

         ______________________________________________

                  ___________________________________________
                  _________
MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 94
8.7. SUMMING UP
   •   Responsibility and freedom go together. If one doesn’t want to take
       responsibility, he can’t have freedom either. The two come together
       or they go together. It is a universal truth. Without responsibility
       freedom of any type cannot be acquired.


   •   Contempt of Court means when there is a failure to perform, obey or
       discharge a lawful order of a court, presenting disrespect to the
       judges, or publishing of any material which can endanger or threaten
       the mind of a judge in discharging of his official duty. There are two
       contempt of court such as civil contempt of court and the criminal
       contempt of court.



   •   The Protection of Civil rights Act is to give punishment for the
       (spread, exercise and application of Untouchability) imposition of
       any disability arising there from and of matters attached therewith.



8.8. QUESTIONS
   1. Discuss the relationship between freedom and responsibility.
   2. What is contempt of court? What are the two categories of contempt
       under the contempt of court act, 1971
   3. Discuss the main provisions of the protection of the civil right act,
       1955
   4. Discuss the parliamentary proceedings act, 1977


8.9. RECOMMENDED READINGS
   ➢ Facets of Media Law by Madhavi Goradia Divan




                            ******************

MMC 201: Media Law and Ethics                                            Page 95
        Programme                        Eligibility                  Programme Coordinator


MA in Mass Communication      Bachelor’s Degree in any          Ms. Madhusmita Boruah
                              discipline
                                                                madhu@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275359
                                                                Dr. Uttam Kr. Pegu
                                                                uttamkp@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275455
MA in English                 Bachelor’s Degree in any          Dr. Suchibrata Goswami
                              discipline
                                                                suchitu@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275358
                                                                Dr. Pallavi Jha
                                                                pjefl@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275215
MA in Sociology               Bachelor’s Degree in any          Ms. Ankita Bhattacharyya
                              discipline
                                                                ankita@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275359
                                                                Dr. Amiya Kr. Das
                                                                amiyadas@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275805

PG Diploma in Human           Bachelor’s Degree in any          Dr. Runumi Das
Resource Management           discipline
                                                                runumi@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275015
PG Diploma in Environmental   Bachelor’s Degree in any          Dr. N. Gogoi
& Disaster Management         discipline
                                                                nirmali@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275609
                                                                Dr. Dipak Nath
                                                                dipak@tezu.ernet.in
                                                                03712-275306
PG Diploma in Renewable       BE/B.Tech or M.Sc in Physics or   Dr. S. Mahapatra
Energy and Energy             Chemistry
                                                                sadhan@tezu.ernet.in
Management
                                                                03712-275306

PG Diploma in Child Rights    Bachelor’s Degree in any          Dr. Subhrangshu Dhar
and Governance                discipline
                                                                sdhar@tezu.ernet.in
The Centre for Open and Distance Learning (earlier Directorate of Distance Education) was established in 2011 with
the aim of disseminating knowledge and imparting quality education through open and distance learning mode. The
Centre offers various post-graduate, undergraduate, diploma and certificate programmes in emerging areas of
science & technology, social sciences, management and humanities with flexible system to cater to the needs of the
learners who otherwise cannot avail the regular mode of education. The basic focus of the Centre is to prepare
human resources of the region and the country by making them skilled and employable.



                                        Centre for Open and Distance Learning
                                       Tezpur University (A Central University)
                                                Tezpur, Assam -784028
                                                         India
                                    Visit us at: http://www.tezu.ernet.in/tu_codl
