                             SCHOOLS OF JURISPRUDENCE
There are four main divisions in schools of jurisprudence, namely (1) the Philosophical, (2) the
Analytical (including the comparative), (3) the Historical, and (4) the Sociological. Besides we
have the Realist School in the United States.

                        THE PHILOSOPHICAL SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE

GROTIUS (1583-1645)

Hugo Grotius was a Dutch national and a Republican philosopher. He is regarded as the father of
philosophic al school of jurisprudence. In his famous work 'The Law of War and Peace', Grotius
stated that natural law springs from the social nature of man and the natural law as well as
positive morality, both are based on the nation of righteousness. Natural justice is the justice
indeed with truth. The rules of human conduct emerge from right reason and they receive public
support of the coercive force of the state but the census of public disapprobation. The view of
Grotius was that the agreement of mankind concerning certain rules of conduct is an indication
that those rules originated in right reason.

In detaching the science of law from theology and religion, he prepared the ground for the
secular, rationalistic version of modern natural law. Among the traits characteristic of man, he
pointed out, was an impelling desire for society, that is, for the social life- "not of any and every
sort, but peaceful, and organised according to the measure of his intelligence l, with those who
are of his own kind." He refuted the assumption of the Greek Skeptic Carneades that man was
actuated by nature to seek only his own advantage, believing that there was an inborn sociability
in human beings which enabled them to live peacefully together in society. Whatever conformed
to this social impulse and to the nature of man as a rational social being was right and just;
whatever opposed it by disturbing the social harmony was wrong and unjust. Grotius defined
natural law as "a dictate of right reason which points out that an act, according as it is or is not in
conformity with rational nature, has in it a quality of moral baseness or moral necessity.” This
law of nature would obtain "even if we should concede that which cannot be conceded without
the utmost wickedness, that there is no God, or that the affairs of men are of no concern to Him."
Grotius thereby grounded the natural law on an eternal reason pervading the cosmos, although he
admitted the alternative possibility of a theist foundation.

Grotius pointed out that two methods existed for proving whether something was or was not in
accordance with the law of nature. “Proof a priori consists in demonstrating the necessary
agreement or disagreement of anything with a rational or social nature; proof a posteriori, in
concluding if not with absolute assurance, at least with every probability, that that is according to
the law of nature which is believed to be such among all nations, or among all those that are
more advanced in civilisation.” Grotius added that no conclusion unfavourable to human nature
needed to be drawn from the practices of nations that were savage or inhuman. He agreed with
Aristotle that in order to find out what was natural, we must look to those things which are in a
sound condition, not to those that are corrupted.

Among the chief axioms of natural law enumerated by Grotius are the following: to abstain from
that which belongs to other persons; to restore to another any goods of his which we may have;
to abide by pacts and to fulfill promises made to other persons; to repay any damage done to
another through fault; and to inflict punishment upon men who deserve it. Many of the more
detailed and special rules of the law, in his opinion, represented merely necessary derivations
from these general precepts.

The state was defined by Grotius as "a complete association of free men, joined together for the
enjoyment of rights and for their common interest." It originated in a contract, but usually the
people had transferred their sovereign power to a ruler who acquired it as his private right and
whose actions were ordinarily not subject to legal control. The ruler is bound, however, to
observe the principles of natural law and of the law of nations. If he misuses his power, his
subjects, as a general rule, have no right to revolt against him. But in some clear cases of
usurpation or flagrant abuse of power Grotius was willing to recognise a right of resistance.
EMMANUEL KANT (1724-1804)

Kant gave modern thinking a new basis which no subsequent philosophy could ignore. The
Copernican Turn' which he gave to philosophy was to replace the psychological and empirical
method by the critical method by an attempt to base the rational character of life and world not
on the observation of facts and matter but on human consciousness itself.
Kant, in his Critique of Pure Reason tried to draw a distinction between form and matter. He
observed that the impression of our senses is the matter of human experience which are brought
into order and shaped by human mind. According to him "the freedom of man act according to
his will and the ethical postulates are mutually co-relative because no ethical postulate is possible
without man's freedom of self determination". Kant calls substance of ethical postulate as
“Categorical Imperative" which is the basis of his moral and legal theory.

JOHANN GOTTLIEB FICHTE (1762-1814)

Transcendental idealism presented itself in a pure and uncompromising form in the philosophy
of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. To him, the starting point and center of all philosophical thinking is
and must be the intelligent human ego. Not only the forms of our cognition, as Kant had taught,
but also the content of our perceptions and sensations, were regarded by Fichte as the product of
our consciousness. “All being, that of the ego as well as that of the non-ego, is a certain modality
of consciousness; and without consciousness there is no being.” The non-ego, that is, the word of
objects, is in Fichte’s view, nothing but a target for human action, a domain for the exertion of
the human will which is able to shape and transform this world. Fichte’s philosophy is one of the
human activism without bounds, and it represents an enthusiastic affirmation of the sovereign
power of human intelligence.

The rational human ego is viewed as free by Fichte in the sense that it sets its own goals and is
capable of attaining them; in other words, the actions of human beings are determined solely by
their own will. Since, however, human egos stand in relations of interaction with other human
egos, their respective spheres of freedom must be adjusted and harmonised. Thus Ficthe, like
Kant, considered law as a device for securing the coexistence of free individuals. Every man
must respect the freedom of every other man.

The legal philosophy of Ficthe is deduced from the self consciousness of the reasonable being,
no reasonable being can think himself without ascribing the activity to himself. Freedom is a
necessity of mutual. The sphere of legal relation is that part of mutual personal relations which
regulates the recognition and definitions of the respective spheres of liberty on the basis of free
individuality as the relation between individual and the state. Fichte points out that it is regulated
by three basic principles, namely:-
      An individual becomes a member of the state through fulfillment of civic duties.
      The law limits and assures the rights of the individuals.
      Outside his sphere of civic duties, an individual is free and honky responsible to himself.

DEL VECCHIO

The Italian legal philosopher George Del Vecchio (1878-1970) distinguishes sharply between the
concept of law and the ideal of law. The concept of law he maintains, is logically anterior to
juridical experience, that is, constitutes a priori datum. The essential characteristics of law,
according to him, are first, objective coordination of the actions of several individuals pursuant
to an ethical principle, and sound of the actions of several individuals pursuant to an ethical
principle, and second, bilateralness, imperativeness, and coercibility.

Del Vecchio developed independently of Stammler, a theory of law on essentially similar
foundations. He was a jurist of much greater elegance and university than Stammler. His writings
display a professing of philosophical, historical and juristic learning.

According to Del Vecchio, the concept of law must have reference only to its form, to the logical
form of law is more comprehensive than the sum of judicial propositions. The concept of law is
juridical neutral. It cannot distinguish between good and bad law and just and unjust law. Law is
not only formal but has a special meaning and an implicit faculty of valuation. Law is a
phenomenon of nature and collected by history. It is also an expression of human liberty which
comprises and masters nature and directs it to a purpose. Law is the subject of a qualitative
progress of phenomenon from mere formless matter to progressive organisation and
individualization. The aim is perfect autonomy of the spirit.

The absolute value of the person, equal liberty of all men, the right of each of the associates to be
an active, not just a passive, participant in legislation, liberty of conscience, and in general the
principles in which is summed up, eve amid accidental fallacies, the true substance of the
classical philosophy of law, juris naturalis scientia, have already received important
confirmations in the positive juridical orders, and will receive others soon or in the course of
time, whatever may be the resistance and the oppositions which they still encounter.
HEGEL (1770-1831)

Hegel was the most influential thinker of the philosophical school. His system is a necrotic one.
According to him "the state and law both are evolutionary."

The great contribution of Hegel to philosophical school is the development of the idea of
evolution. According to him, the various manifestations of social life, including law are the
product of an evolutionary, dynamic process. This process takes on a dialectical form, revealing
itself in thesis, antithesis and synthesis. The human spirit sets a thesis which becomes current as
the leading idea of a particular historical epoch.

In this historical process, law and the state plays a vital role, according to Hegel. The system of
law, he asserted, is designed to realise the ideal of freedom in its external manifestations. It bears
emphasis, however, that for Hegel freedom did not signify the right of a person to do as he
pleased. A free person, in his view, is one whose mind is in control of his body, one who
subordinates his natural passions, irrational desires, and purely material interests to the superior
demands of his rational and spiritual self. Hegel admonished men to lead a life governed by
reason and pointed out that one of the cardinal postulates of reason was to accord respect to the
personality and rights of other human beings. The law was considered by him as one of the chief
instruments to devise to reinforce and secure such respect.



                            HISTORICAL SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE

The historical school antedates the work of Kelsen, but the reason for postponing discussion of
the historical thesis is that, in opposition to the doctrine of the pure science of law, the historical
school considered law in direct relationship to the life of the community and thus laid the
foundation on which the modern sociological school has built. The eighteenth century was an
age of rationalism; it was believed possible by arm-chair deliberation to construct a universal and
unchangeable body of laws that would be applicable to all countries, using as a premises the
reasonable nature of man. The historical school in part was a result of the surge of nationalism
that arose at the end of the eighteenth century. Instead of the individual, writers began to
emphasis the spirit of the people, the Volksgesit. In 1814 a programme for the school was
enunciated by Savigny. The central question was ‘how did law come to be?’ Law evolved, as did
language, by a slow process and, just as language is a peculiar product of a nation’s genius, so is
the law. The source of law is not the command of the sovereign, not even the habits of a
community, but the instinctive sense of right possessed by every race. Custom may be evidence
of law, but its real source lies deeper in the minds of men. ‘The living of law’ is the secret of its
validity. In those matters with which he is directly concerned every member of the community
has an instinctive sense as to what is right and proper, although naturally he will have no views
on matters which are beyond his experience. Thus the mercantile community will have an
intuitive appreciation of the rules that should govern bills of exchange, a peasant of the doctrines
that should be applied to agriculture. Such is the approach of the historical school, and it
naturally led to a distrust of any deliberate attempt to reform the law. Legislation can succeed
only if it is in harmony with the internal convictions of the race to which it is addressed. If it
goes farther, it is doomed to failure.

The contribution of the historical school to the problem of the boundaries of jurisprudence is that
law cannot be understood without an appreciation of the social milieu in which it has developed.
The slow evolution of law was stressed and its intimate connection with the particular
characteristics of people. Ever since Savigny wrote, the values which jurisprudence can gain
from a proper use of the historical method have been well recognised, and in England Maine and
Vinogradoff have kept the interest in these problems alive. Writers of legal history such as
Pollock and Maitland or Sir William Holdsworth have provided surveys whose value for the
jurist lies in the clear demonstration of the close connection between the common law and the
social and political history of England.

In particular the historical school destroyed forever the shibboleth of immutable rules of law,
discovered by abstract reason; they demonstrated that just as in the case of the human body,
transplants of legal systems or constitutions may be defeated by the immunological reaction of
the receiving country




.
FRIEDRICH CARL VON SAVIGNY (1779-1861)

Savigny was born in Frankfurt in 1779. His interest in Historical studies was kindled at the
university of Marburg and Gottingen and greatly encouraged when he came into contact with
great historians at the University of Berlin. He served university of Berlin as a teacher. He also
acquired a lasting veneration for Roman law. His works, (i) The law of possession. (ii) The
History of Roman law in the middle ages (iii) The system of modern roman law-testify his
genius. He attacked the idea of codification in Germany as he knew the defects of the
contemporary codes. According to him code was not a suitable instrument for the development
of German law at that time. Law is a product of the people's life-it is a manifestation of its spirit.
Law has its source in the general consciousness of the people.

Savigny's view of the law was first presented in his famous pamphlet "Of the Vocation of Our
Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence" 1814. This pamphlet was an answer to a proposal made
by a professor of civil law, A.F.J. Thibaut of Heidelberg University, to the effect that a
codification of the laws and customs of the various German states be undertaken in a coherent
arrangement, on the basis of Roman law and the Napoleonic code. Savigny vehemently attacked
this suggestion. In his view, the law was not something that should be made arbitrarily and
deliberately by a law maker. Law, he said, was a product of 'internal, silently-operating forces."
It was deeply rooted in the past of a nation, and its true sources were popular faith, custom, and
"the common consciousness of the people." Like the language, the constitution, and the manners
of a people, law was determined above all by the peculiar character of a nation, by its "national
spirit" (Volkgiest). In every people, Savigny pointed out, certain traditions and customs grow up
which by their continuous exercise evolve into legal rules. Only by a careful study of these
traditions and customs can the true content of law be found. Law in its proper sense is identical
with the opinion of the people in matter of right and justice. In the words of Savigny,

"In the earliest times to which authentic history extends the law will be found to have already
attained a fixed character, peculiar to the people, like their language, manners and constitution.
Nay, these phenomenons have no separate existence, they are but the particular faculties and
tendencies of an individual people, inseparably united in nature, and only wearing the semblance
of distinct attributes to our view. That which binds them into one whole is the common
conviction of the people, the kindred consciousness of an inward necessity, excluding all notion
of an accidental and arbitrary origin.

Thus, in the view of Savigny, law, like language, is a product not of an arbitrary and deliberate
will but of a slow, gradual, and organic growth. The law has no separate existence, but is simply
a function of the whole life of a nation. "Law grows with the growth, and strengthens with the
strength of the people, and finally dies away as the nation loses its individuality."

LAW DEVELOPS LIKE LANGUAGE

In all societies, it is found already established like their language, manners and political
organisation. These all are stamped with a national character. They are the natural manifestations
of popular life and by no means product of man's free will. Law, language, customs and
government have no separate existence. The organic evolution of law with the life and character
of the people develops with the ages and in this it resembles language. As in the latter, there can
be no instance of rest; there is always movement and development of law governed by the same
power of internal necessity as simple phenomenon. Law grows with nation, increases with it and
dies at its dissolution and is a characteristic of it.

The following passage in his essay, 'Vom Beruf' states in nutshell the fundamental thought of the
historical school;

“These phenomena- law, language, custom, government have no separate existence, there is but
one force and power in people bound together by its nature, and only our minds give them
separate existence. What makes it a single whole is the common conviction of the people, the like
feeling of inner necessity which all attributes a contingent and arbitrary origin…. The organic
evolution of law with the life and character of people develops with the ages, and in this it
resembles language. As in the latter, as in law, there can be no instant of rest, there is always
movement, and development of law is governed by the same power of internal necessity as simple
phenomena. Law grows with a nation, increases with it, and dies at its dissolution and is a
characteristic of it.”
EARLY DEVELOPMENT OF LAW IS SPONTANEOUS: LATER ON IT IS DEVELOPED BY JURISTS; -
About the development of law, Savigny says that in the earlier stages law develops
spontaneously according to the principle of internal necessity. After the society has reached a
certain stage of civilization, the different sides of national activities, hitherto developing as a
whole, divide in different branches and are taken up by specialists and jurists, linguists and
scientists. In the hands of specialists, these subjects become richer in ideas, more complete and
technical. Law, like other subjects now assumes a double existence, “on the one side a general
national life, on the other the distant science of jurists. The relation of law to the general life of
the people might be called its political elements, its connection with the juristic science, its
technical element. The correlation of these two elements varies with the elements of life of
people but both participate more or less in the development of law.”

SAVIGNY WAS OPPOSED TO CODIFICATION OF GERMAN LAW: Savigny’s contention is that
codification is highly dangerous because it checks the natural and unconscious growth of law.
Instead of the law being changed by a spirit operating silently and almost imperceptibly, we have
the violent and capricious act of a law giver. He quotes with approval the hard saying of Bacon
that codification should not be undertaken except in an age in which civilization and knowledge
surpasses that in which the laws were made which it is now proposed to codify.

In the strength of this view he protested against codification, which would imprison the
development of law in an iron cage, he protested against naturrecht and its entire works; he
sought to secure free course for the flood of people’s thought, flowing “with pomp of waters
unwithstood.”

In his tract on the vocation of the age for legislation and jurisprudence, which marks the
beginning of the historical school of law, Savigny manifestly attacked the three phases of the 18th
century legal thought, namely, the natural law philosophy, the identification of law with morals
and finally the rise of centralized absolute governments in western Europe in the 17th and 18th
centuries. But he attacked them as he saw them; particularly the results of the third in legal
thinking as they have fused with the Byzantine conception of law, drawn from the corpus juris
and handed down from the 12th century academic idea of the statutory authority of Roman law in
the Western Europe of that time.
LAW IS A CONTINUOUS AND UNBREAKABLE PROCESS: Savigny sees a nation and its state as
organism which takes birth, matures, declines and dies. Law is a vital part of that organism. Law
grows with the growth and strengthens with the strength of the people. It dies away as the nation
loses its nationality. Nations and their law go through three development stages. There are
principles of law which are not found in legislation but are a part of “national conviction”. These
principles are implicitly present in formal symbolic transactions which command the high
respect of the population, form a grammar of the legal system of a young nation and constitute
one of the system’s major characteristics.

THE HISTORY OF ROMAN LAW AS EXAMPLE: - As an example of this process he presents the
history of Roman law, a comparison of its early simple foundations with the complex and
technical law of the Pandects.

PRINCIPAL DOCTRINES OF SAVIGNY'S THEORY

The main proposition of the historical school, as expounded by Savigny and some of his
followers may be summarized as here under;-

   1. LAW IS FOUND, NOT MADE:- A pessimistic view has been taken of the power of human
       action. The growth of law is essentially an unconscious and organic process. Legislation,
       thus, is of subordinate significance as compared to custom, because the statute is always
       unyielding and takes less account of the circumstances of the individual cases.

   2. Law develops from a few easily gasped legal relations in primitive communities to the
       greater complexity of law in modern civilization, popular consciousness can no longer
       manifest itself directly, but comes to be represented by lawyers, who formulate the
       technical legal principal. But the lawyer remains an organ of popular consciousness,
       limited to the task of bringing into shape what he finds as raw material. Legislation
       appears at the last stage; the lawyer, therefore, is a more important law making agency.

   3. LAWS ARE NOT OF UNIVERSAL APPLICATION:- Each person develops its own legal habits,
       as it has its own peculiar language, manners and constitution. Savigny here has insisted
       upon the parallel between language and law. Neither is capable of application to other
       people and countries. The Volkgiest manifests itself in the law of the people; it is,
       therefore, essential to consider the evolution of Volkgiest by legal historical research.

   4. As laws grow into complexity, the common consciousness is represented by lawyers
       who formulate legal principles. But the lawyers remain only the mouthpiece of popular
       consciousness and their work is to shape the law accordingly. Legislation is the last stage
       of law making and, therefore, the lawyers or the jurists are more important than the
       legislator.

SUMMARY:

Savigny’s theory can be summarized as follows;

      That law is a matter of unconscious and organic growth. Therefore, law is found and not
       made.
      Law is not universal in its nature. Like language, it varies with people and age.
      Custom not only precedes legislation but it is superior to it. Law should always conform
       to the popular consciousness.
      As laws grow into complexity, the common consciousness is represented by lawyers who
       formulate legal principles. But the lawyers remain only the mouthpiece of popular
       consciousness and their work is to shape the law accordingly. Legislation is the last stage
       of law-making and, therefore the lawyers or the jurists are more important than the
       legislators.

CRITICISM AGAINST SAVIGNY’S THEORY

Savigny while advocating the role of evolution and growth in the development of law his
approach towards law was vitiated in the following manner;

   1. He laid excessive emphasis upon the unconscious forces which determine the law of a
       nation and ignored the efficacy of legislation as an instrument of deliberate, conscious
       and planned social change. In modern developing societies like India legislation is being
       created, enacted and used as an important instrument of social change and social reform.
       As he underestimated the importance of legislation and took a pessimistic view of human
       power for creation of law to bring about social change so he is criticised for his juristic
       pessimism.
   2. Savigny emphasised the national character of law. While advocating national character of
       law he entirely rejected the study of German law and took inspiration from Roman law.
   3. Volkgiest itself is an abstract idea as indeterminable and vague as the natural law itself.
   4. He did not encourage law reform including codification of law.
   5. His theory of law and society postponed the emergence of modern sociological school
       because most of the sociologists like Durkheim, Ehrlich, Kohler, Weber, etc. were
       confounded by the spell of Savigny’s Volkgiest which postponed the study of scientific
       appraisal of society in terms of its ends and goals.

SAVIGNY AND AUSTIN- COMPARISON

It is interesting to note that the two great jurists expounded two different legal theories in
England and Germany somewhat contemporaneously. Besides striking differences there are
some common features in their legal theories: these are;-

1. Both Austin and Savigny are against the rationalism and universalism of the natural law
philosophy.

2. Austin and Savigny's legal philosophy is a reaction and protest against the priori method of the
natural law. Both of them consider law as a scientific or factual reality based on a posteriori
method.

3. Both of them are comparative jurists-Austin basing his law on the study of Roman law and
English law and Savigny propounding his thesis too on the basis of German law and old Roman
law which had been to Germany in sixth century A.D.

4. Both are concerned with the nature of law rather than its functions.
                                  GEORGE FREDRICK PUCHTA
                                            1798-1856
Puchta was not only a disciple of Savigny but also a great jurist of the Historical School. His
work is considered to be more valuable as he made improvements upon the theory of Savigny by
making it more logical. He started from the evolution of human beings and traced the
development of law since that period. According to him, the idea of law came due to the conflict
of interests between the individual will and general will. That automatically forms the state
which delimits the sphere of the individual and develops into a tangible and workable system.

Puchta agreed with his teacher that the genesis and unfolding of law out of the spirit of the
people was an invisible process. "What is visible to us is only the product, law, as it has emerged
from the dark laboratory in which it was prepared and by which it became real." His
investigation on the popular origin of law convinced him that customary law was the most
genuine expression of the common conviction of the people, and for this reason, far superior to
legislation. He considered explicit legislation useful only insofar as it embodied the prevailing
national customs and usages.

The contribution of Puchta lies in the fact that he gave twofold aspects of human will and origin
of the state. It is true that there are some points of distinction between Puchta and Savigny but
mostly they are similar. On some points, Puchta improved upon the views of Savigny and made
them more logical.

                                        JOSEPH KOHLER
                                           (1849-1919)
A theory of law which contains components of a sociological character but which may also be
explained as an attempt to revive some of the ideas of Hegel was advanced by the German jurist
Joseph Kohler. Kohler taught that human activity was cultural activity, and that man’s task was
“to create and develop a new abundance of forms which shall be as a second creation, in
juxtaposition to divine creation.” The law, he pointed out, plays an important part in the
evolution of the cultural life of mankind by taking care that existing values are protected and new
ones furthered. Each form of civlisation, Kohler said, must find the law which best suits its
purposes and aims. There exists no eternal law; the law that is adequate for one period is not so
for another. Law must adapt itself to the constantly changing conditions of civilisation, and is the
duty of society, from time to time, to shape the law in conformity to new conditions.

Kohler is neo Hegelian. He was much influenced by the Hegelian legal theory. He conceded to
the Hegel’s idea of universal civilisation but did not agree with the view that there is an eternal
law of universal body of legal institutions uniformly suited to all the societies. He emphasized
that human society is ever changing and progressing and law is a means to respond favourably to
these changes. He says that there is no eternal law. Pound observes that Kohler’s formation of
the jural postulates of the time and place is one of the most important achievements of recent
legal science.

Kohler advocated a synthesis and reconciliation of individualism and collectivism in legal
control. Egoism, he maintained, “stimulates human activity, urges man on to constant effort,
sharpens his wit, and causes him to be unremitting in his search for new resources.” An attempt
by the legal order to uproot or combat egoism would therefore be foolish. He pointed out, on the
other hand, that social cohesion is also necessary, in order that humanity may not fall apart, and
turning into a collection of individuals and the community lose control over its members.
Nothing great can be accomplished, in his view, except by devoted cooperative effort. “the
individual should develop independently but the tremendous advantage of collectivism should
not therefore be lost.”

An eminent American jurist, Dean Pound, considers that Kohler’s “formation of the jural
postulates of the time and place is one of the most important achievements of recent legal
science”. The natural law of the most philosophical school loses its rigidity and becomes charged
with a charging or growing content being conceived as something relative and not as something
that shall stand forever.
                               ANALYTICAL SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE

Positivism

The French mathematician and philosopher Augste Comte (1798-1857), who may be regarded as
the philosophical founder of modern positivism, distinguished three stages in the evolution of
human thinking. The first stage, in his system, is the theological stage, in which all phenomenons
are explained by reference to supernatural causes and the intervention of a divine being. The
second is the metaphysical stage, in which thought has recourse to ultimate principles and ideas,
which are conceived as existing beneath the surface of things and as constituting the real moving
forces in the evolution of mankind. The third and last stage is the positivistic stage, which rejects
all hypothetical constructions in philosophy, history, and science and confines itself to the
empirical observation and connection of facts under the guidance of methods used in the natural
sciences.

The emergence of the modern state as the more and more exclusive repository of political and
legal power not only produced class of civil servants, intellectuals and others, but it also
demanded more and more organisation of the legal system, a hierarchical structure of legal
authority and the systematization of the increasing mass of legal material. The task of organizing
and systematizing legal system can nonetheless be attributed to one of the vital school of
jurisprudence, namely, analytical’ which set for itself a task of separating the law as ‘it is’ and
the law as it ‘ought to be’.

The separation of law as ‘it is’ and the law as ‘it ought to be’ is the most fundamental
philosophical assumption of legal positivism. It represents a radical departure both from the
scholastic hierarchy of values in which positive law is only an emanation of a higher natural law,
and from the fusion of the philosophy of law and the science of law. Separation of ‘is’ and
‘ought’ does not imply any contempt from the importance of values in law, as is manifest from
the work of Austin, Kelsen and others.

The mission throughout of the analytical jurisprudence has been to isolate from the great mass of
available legal material, the enduring elements which recur endlessly in the concrete legal
phenomenon and to analyse and arrange these elements into an abstract system or classification.
While the chief function of analytical jurisprudence has been, as the name suggests, analysis or
decomposition of the subject matter of law into irreducible elements, that is not its only function.

The other purpose of formal or analytical jurisprudence is to ascertain the exact relation and
points of contact between the larger parts of our jural system, for example, law and equity. A
quite similar object under consideration is, of course, to understand, to explain and to improve, if
necessary, the leading sub-divisions of the whole field of law considered as an integral,
harmonious and symmetrical body of doctrines. This sort of study is of great value if we are to
bring order out of chaos and develop something like a real system out of the present
conglomerate of judicial precedents and piecemeal statutes, partly with the immediate purpose of
making new legislation fit in more harmoniously and partly with a view to what has been called
‘tacit codification’ and finally, perhaps ‘legislative codification’.

The chief exponents of the positivist or Analytical School in England are Bentham, Austin, Sir
William Markby, Sheldon Amos, Holland, Salmond and Professor H.L.A Hart.

In the United States, John Chipman Gray, Wesley N. Hohfeld, and Albert Kocourek made
contributions to analytical jurisprudence. Gray, in an influential work, modified the Austinian
theory by shifting the seat of sovereignty in lawmaking from the legislative assemblies to the
members of the judiciary. “The law of the state or of any organised body of men,” he maintained,
“is composed of the rules which the courts, that is the judicial organ of that body, lay down for
the determination of legal rights and duties”. It was his opinion that the body of rules the judge
lay down was not the expression of pre existing law but the law itself, that the judges were
creators rather than the discoverers of the law, and that the fact must be faced that they are
constantly making law ex post facto. Even the statutory law laid down by a legislature gains
meaning and precision, in his view, only after it has been interpreted by a court and applied in a
concrete case. Although the judges, according to Gray, seek the rules laid down by them not in
their own whims, but derive them from sources of a general character (such as statutes, judicial
precedents, opinions of expert, customs, public policies and principles of morality), the law
becomes concrete and positive only in the pronouncements of

the courts. Judge-made law thus was to Gray the final and most authoritative form of law, and
this conviction led him to the sweeping declaration that “it is true, in the civil as well as in the
common law, that the rules laid down by the courts of a country state the present law
correctively.”

                                       JEREMY BENTHAM
                                           1748-1832
Jermy Bentham heralded a new era in the history of legal thought in England. He is considered to
be the founder of positivism in the modern sense of the term. It has been rightly said that Austin
owes much to Bentham and on many points his propositions are merely the “Para-phrasing of
Bentham’s theory”. Bentham’s classic work reveals that truly speaking he should be considered
to be the father of analytical positivism and not John Austin as it is commonly believed.

Bentham was the son of a wealthy London Attorney. His gene was of rarest quality. He was a
talented person having the capacity and acumen of a jurist and a logician. Dicey in his book,
“law and Public opinion in 19th century”, has sketched Bentham’s ideas about individualism, law
and legal reforms which have affected the growth of English law in the positive direction. The
contribution of Bentham, to the English law reforms can be summarized thus-

“He determined in the first place, the principles on which reforms should be based.

Secondly, he determined the method, i.e., the mode of legislation by which reforms should be
carried out in England.”

He defined law as;

“A law may be defined as an assemblage of signs declarative of a violation conceived or adopted
by the sovereign in a state, concerning the conduct to be observed in a certain case by a certain
person or class of persons, who in the case in question are supposed to be subject to his power:
such volition trusting for its accomplishment to the expection of certain events which it is
intended such declaration should upon occasion be a means of bringing to pass, and the prospect
of which it is intended should act as a motive upon those whose conduct is in question.”

Individualism; Utilitarianism.- Bentham’s legal philosophy is called ‘utilitarian individualism’.
He was an individualist. He said that the function of law is to emancipate the individual from the
bondage and restraint upon his freedom. Once the individual was made free, he himself shall be
looking after his welfare. In this way, he was a supporter of ‘lassiez faire’ principle of
economics. He pleaded for codification and condemned judge-made law and customs etc. he was
a utilitarian also. According to him, the end of legislation is the ‘greatest happiness of the
greatest number.’ He defined utility as the property or tendency of a thing to prevent some evil or
to procure some good. The consequences of good and evil are respectively pleasure and pain. His
philosophy may be summed up, in his own words, as follows;-

“Nature has placed man under the empire of pleasure and pain. We owe to them all our ideas; we
refer to them all our judgments, and all the determination of our life. He who pretends to
withdraw himself from his subjection knows not what he says. His only object is to seek pleasure
and to shun pain… These eternal and irresistible sentiments ought to be the great study of the
moralist and the legislator. The principle of utility subjects everything to these two motives.”

The purpose of law is to bring pleasure and avoid pain. Pleasure and pain are the ultimate
standards on which a law should be judged. All consideration of justice and morality disappear
from this approach. For Bentham the right relationship between positive law and morality or
moral criticism was expressed in the maxim: “Obey punctuality, censure freely”.

Bentham was a realist and his activities were many sided. His keen desire for law reform based
on the doctrine of utility, his ambition for codification based on complete dislike for judge-made
law filled his work with a sense of mission. “His work was intended to provide the indispensable
introduction to a civil code. He criticised the method of law making, corruption and inefficiency
of the administration of justice and restraints on the individuals liberty.

Bentham despite his occasional naivetes, was a profound thinker, an acute social critic, and
untiring campaigner for the reform of antiquated law, and he became, and had indeed remained,
one of the cardinal influences on modern society. By rejecting both natural law and subjective
values and replacing these by standards based on human advantages, pleasures and satisfactions,
he provided what may be, as many think, an insufficient substitute for ethics of aesthetics, but
was at least a valuable sign post by which men in society might direct the external welfare of the
society. Bentham himself was a believer in Laissez faire once the antiquated legal system had
been renovated, but ironically, his emphasis on reform and social welfare has made him one of
the creators of the modern collectivist welfare state.
BENTHAM’S CONTRIBUTION

Bentham’s contribution to legal theory is epoch making. “The transition from the peculiar brand
of natural law doctrine in the work of Blackstone to the rigorous positivism of Bentham
represents one of the major developments in the history of modern legal theory.” He gave new
directions for law making and legal research.

“With Bentham came the advent of legal positivism and with it, the establishment of legal theory
as a science of investigation as distinct from the art of rational conjecture. Bentham laid the
foundations of this new approach, but, far from containing the solution to problems involving the
nature of positive law, his work was only the beginning of a very long and varied series of
debates, which are still going on today.”

Commenting on the Bentham’s philosophy, Sir Henry Maine, observed;

“Bentham was in truth neither jurist nor a moralist in the proper sense of the word. The theories
are not on law but on legislation. When carefully examined, he may be seen to be a legislator
even in morals. No doubt his language seems sometimes to imply that he is explaining moral
phenomenon, but in reality he wishes to alter or rearrange them according to a working rule
gathered from his reflection on legislation.”

Bentham proceeded from the axiom that nature has placed mankind under the governance of two
sovereign masters, pleasure and pain. They alone point out to us what we ought to do, and what
we should refrain from doing. The good or evil of an action, according to him, should be
measured by the quantity of pain or pleasure resulting from it.

The business of the government, according to Bentham, was to promote the happiness of the
society by furthering the enjoyment of pleasure and affording security against pain. “It is the
greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong.” He was
convinced that if the individuals composing the society were happy and contented, the whole
body politic would enjoy happiness and prosperity.

Bentham never questioned the desirability of economic individualism and private property. A
state, he said, can become rich in no other wise than by maintaining an inviolable respect for the
rights of property. Society should encourage private initiative and private enterprise. The laws of
the state, he argued, can do nothing to provide directly for the subsistence of the citizens; all they
can do is to create motives, that is, punishments and rewards, by whose force men may be led to
provide subsistence for them. Nor should the laws direct individuals to seek abundance; all they
are capable of doing is to create conditions that will stimulate and reward man’s efforts towards
making new acquisitions.

Bentham’s philosophy of law created two schools-the pure analyst interested in the analysis of
positive law and the theological writers interested in the ends or purposes of law which it should
serve. It was a disaster for English jurisprudence that Bentham’s work was not taken in its
eternity. This disaster was related by Austin who viewed law without social purposes or goals in
its barren and isolated fashion. Many of the modern jurists consider Austin as the father of
analytical jurisprudence. But it was much before Austin that Bentham had adopted and refined
the analytical approach in discovering the good laws from those which were inconvenient and
unnecessary. It is, therefore, Bentham who should be rightly designated as the real father of
analytical jurisprudence.

CRITICISM AGAINST BENTHAM

Bentham’s theory has its weaknesses. “The main weakness of Bentham’s work” says Friedmann,
“derive from two shortcomings- one is Bentham’s abstract and doctrinaire rationalism which
prevents him from seeing man in all his complexity, in his blend of materialism and idealism, of
nobility and baseness, of egoism and altruism. Bentham underestimates the need for individual
discretion and flexibility in the application of law over estimating the power of the legislator.
Secondly, his theory fails to balance individual interests with the interests of the community.
Bentham’s theory suggested that interests of an unlimited number of individuals shall be
conducive to the interest of the community. This means that freedom of enterprise will
automatically lead to greater equality. Bentham advocated that law should be made exclusively
by legislation which was supposed to remove inroad to individual’s freedom and provide him
opportunities for development of the self. Bentham’s view that the law should be made
exclusively by legislation has been adopted in most of the countries in the world but it has not
remained confined only to the sphere proposed by Bentham. According to him, the aim of the
legislation was only to remove the shackles from the individual’s freedom and provide him
opportunity for his self-progress. But the legislation, in later times, was used restrict the
individual’s freedom in economic matters and Dicey correctly puts the paradox that the apostle
of individualism was destined to become the founder of state socialism.

Whatever may be the shortcomings of Bentham’s theory, which every theory is bound to have,
his constructive thinking and zeal for legal reform heralded a new era of legal reforms in
England. Legislation has become the most important method of law-making in modern times. In
the field of jurisprudence, his definition of law and analysis of legal terms inspired many jurists
who improved upon it and laid down the foundations of new schools. A book written by
Bentham, “The Limits of Jurisprudence Defined” (though written in 1782, was published in
1945) makes it clear.




                                           JOHN AUSTIN

Born in 1790 John Austin served as an army officer for five years until 1812, when he was called
to the bar by the Inner temple in 1818. But ill health and inability to work efficiently and
promptly prevented him from succeeding at the bar. He was elevated to the chair of
jurisprudence in the University of London in 1826. Thereafter he went to Germany to study
Roman law in Heidelberg and Born universities. He was much inspired by the scientific
treatment of Roman law and drew inspiration to introduce the same method to the legal
exposition of law in England. He, however, avoided metaphysical approach to law which was a
peculiar character of law in Germany. His lectures delivered in London University were
published under the title of “The province of Jurisprudence determined”. In his lectures he deals
with the nature of law and its proper bonds. He wrote another book “A Plea for the
Constitution”, it was rather an answer to an essay by Gray “on Parliamentary Government”. But
his main contribution to jurisprudence is his first book and on it rests his personality.

J.S. Mill, who heard his lectures, writes that his lectures left “an indelible impression on those
who heard them.

The method which Austin applied is called analytical method and he confined his field of study
only to the positive law. Therefore the school founded by him is called by various names-
Analytical; positivism, analytical positivism. Some have objected to all the three terms. They say
that the word ‘positivism’ was started by Augste Comte to indicate a particular method of study.
Though this positivism, later on, prepared the way for the 19th century, legal though, it does not
convey exactly the same sense at both the places. Therefore, the word positivism alone will not
give a complete idea of Austin’s school. In the same way ‘analysis’ also did not remain confined
only to the school, therefore, it alone cannot give a separate identity to the school. Analytical
positivism too may create confusion. The Vienna School in its ‘pure theory of law’ also applies
analytical positive although in many respects they vitally differ from Austin’s school. To avoid
confusion and to give clarity which is the aim of classification, Professor Allen thinks it proper
to call the Austin’s school as ‘imperative school’. This name he gave on the basis of Austin’s
conception of law ‘law is command’.

                                   AUSTIN’S CONCEPTION OF LAW

Austin’s most important contribution to the legal theory was the substitution of the command of
the sovereign i.e., the state, for any ideal of justice in the definition of law.

Law in the common use means and includes things which can’t be properly called ‘law’. Austin
defined law as a rule laid down for the guidance of an intelligent being by an intelligent being
having power over him.

The substitution of the command of the sovereign by Austin led him to write at a time when
England was actually in dire need of vast legislative reforms. There was no school of
jurisprudence which could share in the handiwork, whereas full confidence was reposed in the
power and wisdom of parliament as a legislative assembly. In these circumstances, it was not
strange that he should have adopted sovereignty as his principle to build on this a science of
jurisprudence sufficient to subserve the requirements of the people.

Law is thus, strictly divorced from justice and instead of being based on the ideas of good and
bad, is based on the power of a superior. This inevitably associates Austin with Hobbes and other
theorists of sovereignty, but it was left to Austin to follow up this conception into the
ramifications of a modern legal system.
                                  AUSTIN’S CLASSIFICATION OF LAW

Austin’s classification of law falls under two heads, namely, laws set by God, and Laws set by
men to men (human laws).

LAWS SET BY GOD: This category of laws is of no real juristic significance in Austin’s system,
compared, for example, with the scholastic teachings which establish an organic relation between
divine and human law.

HUMAN LAWS: Human laws may be divided into two classes-

  I.       Positive law (laws properly so called):- These are the laws set by political superior as
           such or by men not acting as political superior but acting in pursuance of legal rights
           conferred by political superiors. Only these laws are the proper subject-matter of
           jurisprudence.
 II.       Other laws: These laws which are not set by political superior or by men in pursuance of
           a legal right. In this category are multiple types of rules such as, rules of clubs, law of
           fashion, laws of natural science, and the rules of international law. Austin names all these
           ‘positive morality’.

Contrary to the above, laws properly so called are a species of commands. But being a command,
every law properly so-called flows from a determinate source. Whenever a command is
expressed or intimated, one party signifies a wish that another shall do or forbear; and the later is
obnoxious to an evil which the former intends to inflict in case the wish be disregarded. Every
sanction properly so called is an eventual evil annexed to a command. Every duty properly so
called supposes a command by which it is created….and duty properly so called is obnoxious to
evils of the kind.

The laws properly so-called, with laws improperly so called, may be aptly divided into the
following four kinds-

          The divine laws, or the laws of God; that is to say, the laws which are set by God to his
           human creatures.
          Positive laws, or the laws which are simply and strictly so called, and which from the
           appropriate matter of general and particular jurisprudence.
      Positive morality, rules of positive morality or positive moral rules.
      Laws metaphorical or figurative, or merely metaphorical or figurative.

The science of jurisprudence, according to Austin, is concerned with positive laws or with laws
as considered without regard to their goodness or badness. All positive law is deduced from a
clearly determinable law-giver as sovereign. In other words, every positive law, or every law
simply and strictly so-called, is set by a sovereign or a sovereign body of persons to a member or
members of the independent political society wherein that person or body of persons is sovereign
or supreme.

LAW EMANATES FROM SOVEREIGN

Austin’s most important contribution to legal theory according to Friedmann was his substitution
of the command of sovereign for any ideal justice in the definition of law. The first jurist to make
jurisprudence as a ‘science’ was John Austin who is often described as Father of jurisprudence.

Sovereign defined and analyzed:- While defining a sovereign Austin said, “if a determinate
human superior, not in a habit of obedience to alike superior, receives habitual obedience from
the bulk of a given society, that determinate superior is sovereign in that society and the society
(including the superior) is a society political and independent.

According to Austin, the superior may be either an individual or a body or aggregate of
individuals. Thus, English sovereign for him is merely the ‘person’ who has the last word in a
particular connection. His conception of sovereignty asserts that in every human society where
there is law, there is to be found latent beneath the variety of political forms, in a democracy as
well as in an absolute monarchy, a relationship between subjects rendering habitual obedience
and a sovereign who renders habitual obedience to none. Involved in this are two main points of
special importance viz., the idea of obedience and due position occupied by the sovereign above
the law. The expression obedience often suggests deference to authority and not merely
compliance with orders backed by threats. The idea of obedience in-fact fails in two different
though related ways, to account for the continuity to be observed in every normal legal system
when one legislator succeeds another. An illustration of this kind is the change in law of incest
made in Rome by the then emperor Claudius for his own private purposes. Desiring to marry
Agrippina, the daughter of his brother, he procured a change in the law which permitted a
marriage between a niece and her parental uncle, leaving the law unaltered as to other marriages
between uncles and nieces or aunts and nephews, so that these remained incestuous. secondly,
habitual obedience to the old law giver cannot by itself render probable, or find any presumption,
that the new legislator’s orders will be obeyed. If there is to be this right and this presumption at
the movement of succession during the reign of the earlier legislators, there must have been the
acceptance of the rule under which the new legislator is entitled to succeed.

The dictum, therefore, that English sovereign is merely the person who has the last word is not in
the least true to any federation, where the legislatures are bound by the constitution and in most
cases a court has the power to decide whether a particular statute is constitutional or not.

LAW AS A COMMAND

Austin defines command as “if you express or intimate a wish that I shall do or forbear from
some act and if you will visit me with an evil, in case I comply with your wish-it is a command”.
A command is different from other significations of desire, not by the style in which the desire is
signified but by the power and the purpose of the partly commanding to inflict an evil or pain in
case the desire be disregarded. Thus, a command is significance of desire. But a command is
distinguished from other significations of desire by this peculiarity that the party to whom it is
directed is liable to evil from other, in case he complies not with the desire.

According to Austin law, therefore, signifies a command which obliges a person or persons to a
course of conduct. The person who receives the command must realise that there is a possibility
of incurring some evil in the event of disobedience. For Austin, every command does not create a
law. A law determines acts of a class, a particular command determines merely a specific act.
Austin, therefore suggests that a statute issued by Parliament that corn then shipped and import
should not be a law, since it relates merely to a specific case but he hares that in popular speech
it would be called a law. Generality is a normal mark of law because of the impossibility and
undesirability of issuing particular commands for each specific act.

Now, if we regard a law as a command, then every act done must either be permitted or
forbidden. Further, if we consider law as a command or an order, it must also be seen in the first
sight to be orders given to the judges to do or abstain from doing anything and there should, of
course, be no choice why the law should not by special rules prohibit a judge under penalty from
exceeding his jurisdiction or trying a case in which he has some financial interest. These rules
imposing such legal duties would be conducive to those conferring judicial powers on him and
defining his jurisdiction.

SANCTION

Austin said, “Sanction operate upon the desires and that men are obliged to do or forbear through
the desires. For, he is necessarily averse from every evil whatsoever. That every sanction
operates upon the will of the obliged is not true. If the duty be positive, and if he fulfills the duty
out of regard to the sanction, it may be said with propriety that the sanction operates upon his
will. For his desire of avoiding the evil which impends from the law, makes him do and
therefore, will the act which is the object of the command and duty. But if the duty be negative
and if he fulfills the duty out of regard to the sanction, it can scarcely be said with propriety that
the sanction operates upon his will. His desire of avoiding the evil which impends from the law
makes him forbear from the act which the law prohibits. But though he intends the forbearance,
he does not will the act forborne, or he remains in a state of inaction which equally excludes it.
In the former case he does not will the forbearance. In the later case he wills nothing.”

Only General Commands are law:

However, all the commands are not law, it is only the general commands, which obliges to a
course of conduct, is law.

Exceptions:

The general commands are the proper subject of study of jurisprudence. But according to Austin,
there are three kinds of laws which though not commands, are still within the province of
jurisprudence. They are.-

      Declaratory or Explanatory Laws: - Austin does not regard them as commands, because
       they are passed only to explain laws already in force.
      Laws to repeal laws: - These too are not commands but are rather the revocation of a
       command.
      Laws of imperfect obligation: - These laws have no sanction attached to them.
                            CRITICISM AGAINST AUSTIN’S THEORY

Austin’s theory has been criticised by a number of jurists and by some of them very bitterly.
Bryce went to the extent of saying that ‘his contributions to juristic science are so scanty and so
much entangled in error that his nook ought no longer to find a place among those prescribed for
student.’ However, this is an extreme view. The main points of criticism against Austin’s theory
are as follows;

   a) CUSTOMS OVERLOOKED:- ‘Law is the command of sovereign’, as Austin says, is not
       warranted by historical facts. In the early times, not the command of any superior, but
       customs regulated the conduct of the people. Even after the coming of the state into
       existence, customs continue to regulate the conduct. Therefore, customs should also be
       included in the study of jurisprudence, but Austin ignored them.
   b) LAW CONFERRING PRIVILEGES:- The law which is purely of a permissive character and
       confers only privileges, as the Wills Act, which lays down the method of drawing a
       testamentary document so that it may have legal effect is not covered by Austin’s
       definition of law.
   c) NO PLACE FOR JUDGE MADE LAW:- Austin ignored them. In Austin’s theory there is no
       place for judge-made law. In the course of their duty judges make law. though an
       Austinian would say that judges act under the powers delegated to them by the sovereign,
       therefore, their acts are the commands of the sovereign, nobody, in modern times, will
       deny that judges perform a creative function and Austin’s definition of law does not
       include it.
   d) CONVENTIONS:- Conventions of the constitution, which operate imperatively, though not
       enforceable by court, shall not be called law, according to Austin’s definition, although
       they are law and are subject matter of a study in jurisprudence. Austin does not treat
       international law as law because it lacks sanction. Instead, he regards international law as
       mere positive morality.
   e) RULES SET BY PRIVATE PERSONS:- Austin’s view that ‘positive law’ includes within
       itself rules set by private persons in pursuance of legal rights is an undue extension
       because their nature is very vague and indefinite.
    f) SANCTION IS NOT THE ONLY MEANS TO INDUCE OBEDIENCE:- According to Austin’s
        view, it is the sanction alone which induces the man to obey law. It is submitted that it is
        not a correct view. Lord Bryce has summed up the motives as indolence, deference,
        sympathy, fear and reason that induces a man to obey law. The power of the state is ratio
        ultima-the force which is the last resort to secure obedience.
    g) COMMAND OVER EMPHASIZED:- The Swedish jurist Olivercrone has denounced Austin’s
        theory of law because of its over-emphasis on command as an inevitable constituent of
        law. in modern progressive democracies law is nothing but an expression of the general
        will of the people. Therefore, a command aspect of law has lost its significance in the
        present democratic setup.


                                SALIENT POINTS OF AUSTIN’S THEORY

    Austin’s theory prominently brings out the following four points;

           That every law is a species of command;
           That all positive laws are command of the sovereign either directly or indirectly;
           That every law prescribes a course of conduct; and
           That every law has for its sanction the physical force of the state.

                                            H. L. HART

Professor Hart is regarded as the leading contemporary representative of British positivism. His
identical book “the concept of law” was published in 1961 and that shows that he is a linguistic,
philosopher, barrister and a jurist.

Professor Hart has criticised the Austinian conception of law by linking it with his own original
concept of law viewed from the positivists standpoint. He has rejected any system of law based
simply on coercive orders on the ground that this view is patterned on criminal law when to a
large extent the modern legal system confers both public and private legal powers, for instance,
in the case of the law relating to wills, contracts, marriage etc. According to him many laws do
not have sanction attached to them for instance customary laws, enabling laws and laws
imposing duties on public authorities.
Hart instead pleads for a dual system consisting of two types of rules, viz., primary and
secondary rules.

The primary rules which impose duty upon individuals are binding because of the popular
acceptance such as rule of kinship, family sentiments etc. These being unofficial rules, they
suffer from three major defects namely-

      Uncertainty
      Static character
      Insufficiency

Primary rules lay down standards of behaviour and are rules of obligation, that is, rules that
impose duties.

The secondary rules which are power conferring enable the legislators to modify their policies
according to the needs of the society. In fact they seek to remedy the defects of primary rules,
primary rules are ancillary to and concern the primary rules in various ways; for instance; they
specify the ways in which primary rules may be ascertained, introduced, eliminated or varied and
the mode in which their violation may be conclusively determined.

Hart takes the view that a society which is so legally undeveloped as to have no secondary rules
but only primary rules of obligation, would not really possess a legal system at all but a mere
‘set’ of rules. For Hart, therefore it is the union of primary rules and secondary rules which
constitute the core of a legal system.

For a legal system to exist there must be general obedience by the citizens to possess ‘an internal
point of view’. In such a case, according to Hart, the importance of the internal point of view
relates not to a body of citizens but to the officials of the system. These officials must not merely
‘obey’ the secondary rules but must take on ‘inner view’ of these rules, and this is a necessary
condition for the existence of a legal system. Official compliance with the secondary rules must
therefore, involve, both a conscious acceptance of these rules as standards of official behaviour,
and a conscious desire to comply with these standards.

Hart refers to the internal aspects or “inner point of view” that human beings take towards the
rules of a legal system. According to him, law depends not only on the external social pressure
which are brought to bear on human beings to prevent them from deviating from the rules but
also on the inner point of view that human beings take towards a rule imposing an obligation.

RULE OF RECOGNITION


It appears from the above that Professor Hart has subscribed to the theory of the union of
primary and secondary rules. The primary rules lay down standard Of behavior (duties), while the
secondary rules relate to the identification, creation, change, and application of the powers. He
has dealt with law as equivalent to ‘legal system’. Dias observes that Professor Hart
distinguishes between rules imposing duties and rules creating powers. A very large part of law
consist of prescriptive patterns of conduct, and they are accordingly assigned pride of place as
‘primary rules.’ i.e., those imposing duties. The means by which these are created, extinguished
and modified are ‘secondary rules’ i.e., those conferring powers. Included in this category is the
important ‘rule of recognition’ which is used ‘for the identification of primary rules of
obligation.’ It refers only to formal criteria and thus excludes morality. Only with the union of
these two sorts of rules can there be a legal system as a self-propagating thing.”

Dias, while commenting on the above view of Professor Hart, observes that a club may prescribe
patterns of behavior for its members and may also possess machinery whereby such prescriptions
are added to, modified applied and identified as the rules of that club. There is no reason why the
structure of the system, which respectively prevails in the club and in the state, should not exhibit
analogous characteristics by way of patterns of conduct, sanctions and provision for
development. What is needed, therefore, is some means of identifying the one as ‘the law f the
club’ and the other as the ‘law of the land.’ For this purpose some references to the courts as
parts of the means of identification would appear to be unavoidable. Secondly, the ‘rule of
identification’ does not appear to be a power so much as the acceptance of a power (or powers)
to invest primary rules with the quality of ‘laws’. Hence it does not fit quite snuggly into a
category containing powers. Thirdly, acceptance of a rule of recognition, i.e., criterion of validity
rests on social facts. If Professor Hart is talking, as he purports to do in terms of a system, which
is a continuing thing, then all factors that bring about each and every part of it and keep them
going enter into account. In this way social and moral considerations may well set limits on the
rule of recognition at the time of its acceptance precisely in order to provide certain fundamental
safeguard. If so, the rule will have built-in limitations that prevent it from validating certain
forms of abuse of power. So Professor Hart’s exclusion of morality from his ‘rule of recognition’
is open to question. But, with reference to a continuum, morality is an indispensable factor, not
only in the genesis, but also in the continuation of laws. The fourth criticism is that there is a
basic confusion in his frames of reference. The result is that for the limited purpose of
identifying ‘laws’ his concept seeks to accomplish more than is necessary for the purpose of
portraying law, it is inadequate. Fifthly, he distinguishes between rules creating duties and rules
creating powers, and bases a legal system on their union. But it is questionable whether so sharp
distinction can be drawn. For example, it has been pointed out that the same rule may create a
power plus a duty to exercise it, or a power plus a duty not to exercise it. Finally, Professor
Dworkin has pointed to the importance of ‘legal doctrines’ (principles, standards ad policies),
e.g., unjust enrichment, presumption of innocence, etc., which do not derive their quality of law
from the criterion of validity. To regulate them to ‘discretion’ is inconsistent with the judicial
acceptance of them as ‘legal’. Professor Hart’s concept is applicable only to rules, not to
everything that is contained in a legal order. Professor Hart’s picture of law is thus incomplete in
certain respects. It is certainly less definite and suggestive than that unfolded by Kelsen’s
conception.




.
POINTS OF DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ANALYTICAL SCHOOL AND HISTORICAL SCHOOL OF
JURISPRUDENCE:

     Analytical School                           Historical School
1    Law is the creation of state.               Law is found and not made. Law is self-
                                                 existent.
2    Without a sovereign, there can be no law.   Law is an antecedent to the state and exists
                                                 even before a state organisation comes into
                                                 being.
3    The hall-mark of law is enforcement by Law is independent of political authority and
     the sovereign.                              enforcement. It is enforced by the sovereign
                                                 because it is already law; it does not become
                                                 law      because   of   enforcement   by   the
                                                 sovereign.
4    The typical law is statute.                 The typical law is custom.
5    Judges should confine themselves to a In constructing a statute judges should
     purely syllogistic method.                  consider the history of the legislation in
                                                 question.
6    Law rests upon the force of politically Law rests on the social pressure behind the
     organised society.                          rules of conduct which it enjoins.
7    Emphasis is on empirical a priori method.   Emphasis is no comparative method.
8    Law is the command of the sovereign.        Law is the rule whereby the invisible border
9
                                          SIR HENRY MAINE
                                             1822-1888
Maine made a comparative study of legal institution of various communities and laid down a
theory of evolution of law. His method was a great improvement upon historical school and
yielded fruitful results.

Maine mad every valuable contribution to legal philosophy by way of historic comparative
method. He was an erudite scholar of law. He started his career as Regis Professor of civil law in
the University of Cambridge at an early age of twenty five. He was law member in the council of
the Governor General of India between 1861 and 1869. This provided him an opportunity for the
study of Indian legal system. From 1869 to 1877 he occupied the chair of historical and
comparative jurisprudence in Corpus Christi College, Oxford. After that he held the
distinguished post of the master of trinity Hall, Cambridge.

The founder of English historical school of jurisprudence was Maine. His important works are
Ancient Law 1861, Village Communities in the East and West 1871, Lectures on the Early
History of Institution, 1874, and Dissertation on Early law and Custom, 1883. Maine made a
significant contribution to law by indicating that there has been a parallel and alike growth and
development of legal institution and law in the societies of the east and west up to a certain stage.

DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIETIES

Sir Henry Maine through his comparative study came to a conclusion that the development of
law and other social institution has been more or less as an identical palta in almost all the
ancient societies belonging to Hindu, Roman, Anglo-Saxon, Hebrew and Germanic
communities. Most of these communities are founded on Patriarchal pattern wherein the eldest
male parent called the Pater familias dominated the entire family. There were some communities
which followed matriarchal pattern in which the eldest female of the family was the central
authority to manage the family affairs.

According to Maine, Pater familias constituted the lowest unit of primitive communities. A few
families together formed the family group. An aggregation of families constituted gens which in
turn led to the formation of tribes and collection of tribe formed the community. The individual
member of the family had no individual existence then his status.

Maine arrived at his often quoted conclusion that “the movement of the progressive societies has
hitherto been a movement from Status to Contract.” Status is a fixed condition in which an
individual finds himself without reference to his will and from which he cannot divest himself by
his own efforts. It is indicative of a social order in which the group, not the individual, is the
primary unit of social life; every individual is enmeshed in a network of a family and group ties.
With the progress of civilisation this condition gradually gives away to a social system based on
contract. This system is characterized by individual freedom, in that “the rights, duties and
liabilities flow from voluntary action and are consequences of exertion of the human will.” A
progressive civilisation, in the view of Maine, is manifested by the emergence of the
independent, free, and self-determining individual as the primary unit of social life.

Maine’s “status to contract” doctrine is by no means his only outstanding contribution to
jurisprudence. He has enriched our knowledge and understanding of legal history in several
aspects. Very interesting, for example, is his theory of law and lawmaking. He believed that in
the earliest period law was created by the personal commands of patriarchal rulers, who were
considered by their subjects to at under divine inspiration. Then followed a period of customary
law, expounded and applied by an aristocracy or small privileged class which claimed a
monopoly of legal knowledge. The third stage was marked by a codification of these customs as
the result of social conflicts. The fourth stage, according to Maine, consists in the codification of
strict archaic law by the help of fiction, equity and legislation; these instrumentalities are
designed to bring the law into harmony with a progressing society. Finally, scientific
jurisprudence weaves all these various forms of law into a consistent and systematic whole. Not
all societies, said Maine, succeed in passing through all these stages, and their legal development
in its particular aspects does not show a uniform line. Maine merely wished to indicate certain
general directions and trends of development in the evolution of law. Modern research has
shown that, on the whole, he has succeeded remarkably well in tracing some of the fundamental
lines of a natural history” of the law.

Maine’s comparative analysis of legal evolution was supplemented in the early twentieth century
by the historical studies of Sir Paul Vinogradoff. English historical research also produced such
ripe fruits as Pollock and Maitland’s’ History of English Law before the time of Edward I and
Holdsworth’s History of English Law, as well as a host of specialized treatises and monographs.
What is lacking up to this day is a history of English law which closely correlates legal
developments with the general political, social and cultural history of England.

DEVELOPMENT OF LAW

LAW MADE BY THE RULER UNDER DIVINE INSPIRATION OR DIVINE LAW OR DOOMS OR
THEMESTERS: In the beginning, law originated from themes which meant the Goddess of justice.
It was generally believed that while pronouncing justice the king was acting under the divine
inspiration of Goddess of justice to be executed by the king as custodian of justice under divine
inspiration.

Themesters are the awards pronounced by judges as divinely dictated to him. Themesters are not
laws but judgments or dooms. The king happened to be the administrator of judgments -of course
he was not the maker of law as the themester were divinely inspired by Goddess of justice.

CUSTOMARY LAW: The next stage was reached when the office of the king or judge was inspired
by the councils of chiefs. The priest became the depositories of law who circumscribed the
king’s power and claimed the sole monopoly of knowledge. Therefore, the priestly class
attempted to preserve the customs of the race or caste intact. Since the art of writing had not been
invented so customs of the community became law for the people who were united by blood
relationship. Thus we notice a particular important phenomenon. Maine’s theory of legal
development conception of customs emerging posterior to that themester or judgments.

KNOWLEDGE OF LAW IN THE HANDS OF PRIEST: In the next stage of development of law, the
authority of the king to enforce and execute law inspired by the priestly class claimed themselves
to be learned in law as well as religion. The priestly class claimed that they memorized the rules
of customary law because the art of writing had not developed till then.

ERA OF CODES (CODIFICATION): The era of codification marks the fourth and perhaps the final
stage of development of law. With the discovery of the art of writing, a class of learned men and
jurists came forward to denounce the authority of priests as law givers. They advocated
codification of law to make it accessible and easily knowable. This broke the monopoly of priest
class in matters of administration of law. most important codes of the era were Twelve Tables of
Rome, Manu’s code which were mixture of moral, religion and civil laws, Twelve Tables in
Rome, Solon’s Attic code, Hebrew Code, the Codes of Hammurabi etc.

TYPES OF SOCIETIES

According to Maine, there are two types of societies, Progressive Societies and Static societies

According to Henry Maine, when the primitive law has been embodied in a code, there is an end
to its spontaneous development and such communities or societies which do not progress or go
beyond the fourth stage are called static societies.

Those societies which go beyond the fourth stage as developing their laws, by new methods are
called progressive societies. There are three methods by which progressive societies develop
their laws. They are;

LEGAL FICTION: According to this method, legal fictions, changes the law according to the
changing needs of the society without aiming any change in the latter of law.

Maine defines legal fiction as any assumption which conceals or affects to conceal the fact that a
rule of law has undergone alteration, its letter remaining unchanged, its operation being
modified. Legal fiction satisfies the desire for improvement but at the same time they do not
offend the superstition, fear and dislike of change. At a particular stage of social development
they are invaluable expedients of social progress for overcoming the rigidity of law.

EQUITY: Equity consists of principles which are considered to be invested with a higher
sacredness than those of the positive law.

Equity belongs to a more advanced stage than fictions. The interference with the law is open and
avowed. It is a body of law existing by the side of the original civil law, founded on distinct
principles claiming incidentally to supersede the civil law by virtue of a superior sanctity
inherent in these principles.

LEGISLATION: Legislation is the most effective method of law making, it is considered to be the
most systematic and direct method of introducing reform through new laws. The power of the
legislature to make laws has been widely accepted by the courts and the people all over the
world.

                        THE SOCIOLOGICAL SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE

Sociology of law is defined in many ways, but its main difference from functional jurisprudence
is that it attempts to create a science of social life as a whole and to cover a great part of general
sociology and political science. The emphasis of the study is on society and law as a mere
manifestation, whereas Pound rather concentrates on law and considers society in relation to it.

Huntington Cairns also attempt to create a legal science with a dominant emphasis on sociology.
He considers that modern jurisprudence is a meaningless and fruitless pursuit of a goal incapable
of achievement.’ Jurisprudence is really an applied science, and no technology has ever
succeeded unless it was based on the findings of a pure science. No universal propositions can be
laid down concerning legal concepts or rules because they differ from race to race. If
jurisprudence wishes to become scientific, it must create a science of society. The basis must be
human behaviour as influenced by, and in relation to, disorder. It is impossible to discover how
law operates unless we have greater knowledge of the factors that cause change in society and
govern its evolution. When this is understood, jurisprudence as a technology can apply these
rules to reach useful results. At present jurists are attempting to build a house before the
foundations have been laid. Montesquieu laid the seeds of the sociological method in
jurisprudence. In his “Esprit des Lois” (Spirit of the laws), published in 1748, Montesquieu used
the historical method. Montesquieu researched into the laws and institutions of all kinds of
human society. He considered that law should be based on historical observations, and not
merely on reason or belief.




.
                                            LEON DUGIT

The French jurist Leon Dugit was a professor of constitution law in the University of Bordeaux
in France. He made substantial contribution to the sociological jurisprudence in early twentieth
century. Dugit carried forward the belief that scientific progress can be accelerated by individual
behavior in order to satisfy common social needs and interests. Dugit was inspired by Durkheim
who himself had taken inspiration from Comte. Durkheim’s main point, on which Dugit built
upon, was that he made a distinction between two kinds of needs of men in society. Firstly, there
are common needs of individuals which are satisfied by mutual assistance and secondly, there
are diverse needs of individuals which are satisfied by the exchange of services. Therefore, the
division of labour was pre-eminent factor of social cohesion as an indisputable fact beyond
ideology, beyond religious or metaphysical speculation…. The constant realisation of social fact
which is simply inter-dependence of individuals could at least replace ideological quarrels by
observable facts.

Dugit attacked traditional concepts of state, sovereignty and law and sought to fashion a new
approach to these matters from the angle of society. Dugit was much influenced by Augste
Comets ‘Theory of law as a fact” which denounced individual rights of man and subordinated
them to social interest. Completed that “the only right which man can possess is the right always
to do his duty.” This formed the basis of Dugit’s legal theory.




                                       SOCIAL SOLIDARITY

Dugit built his theory on social solidarity. He insisted on the necessity of viewing social life as it
is actually lived. The most important fact of the society is the interdependence of men. In the
present day society, man exists by his membership of the society. Each man cannot manufacture
and pronounce the necessities of life himself. Functions are so specialized that each in his turn
depends on other for his necessities. The end of all human activities and organisations should be
to ensure the interdependence of men. This is Dugit’s theory of social solidarity.
Dugit puts forth in definite and clear term that law arises of the fact of social existence.
Therefore, if man wishes to live and act in society he must act in conformity with the social law
of solidarity. Solidarity is not a rule of conduct; it is a fact- the fundamental fact of all human
society. In other words solidarity is neither a charity nor fraternity. These are moral duties. It is a
fact. It means that in fact men are ‘solidarity’ with one another that is they have common needs
which they can only satisfy in common. That they have different capabilities and different needs
which they can satisfy by exchange of needs and division of labour. This solidarity is mutual
interdependence is the product of social reality of social life. As such it is the duty of one and all
to conform his conduct according to fact of social solidarity. It is a coincidence of purposes and
facts- the unhappiness of one affect all, the happiness of one profits all. He says, man must so act
that he does nothing which may injure social solidarity upon which he depends, and more
positively, he must do all which naturally tends to promote social solidarity.

Dugit’s principle of social solidarity is however not free from criticism. Aware of the growing
complexity of modern social life, Dugit attacks individualism as reflected in the conception of
inalienable individual rights. He also rejects the alternative of strengthening the central power of
the state. Instead he advocates decentralized group environment and the link between the
different groups is to be an objective rule of law, the principle of social solidarity. This savors of
natural law although Dugit emphatically rejects any such metaphysical conception as
incompatible with scientific positivism, yet his idea of social solidarity is a s strong a natural law
ideal as any ever conceived.

As Allen puts it, “although Dugit disregards the ethical element in law, he is considered to be
really postulating a content of ideal law “the natural law with valuable content”.

Again the meaning of the term ‘social solidarity’ is not clear from the analysis of Dugit. We may
admit that the mutual interdependence of men in society and the need to collaborate for the
functioning of social life is a scientific fact. But as many of these who have examined the
comparative precision of facts in the social and natural sciences have observed, social facts are
much less clearly determined than natural facts and Dugit’s solid facts are, as one critic has
observed, facts of a highly metaphysical order.
Dugit launched a vigorous attack on the myth of state sovereignty. The social solidarity is the
touch stone of judging the activities of individuals and all organisations. State is also a human
organisation and it is no way different from other organisations. The state stands in no special
position or privilege and it can be justified only so long as it fulfills its duty. Dugit has no faith in
all powerful illimitable authority-‘sovereign’. He strongly pleads for the check on the state
power. His plea is for the decentralization and ultimately he develops an idea of syndicalism.

Dugit denies the distinction between public and private law. Both are to serve the same end i.e.,
social solidarity. So there is no difference in their nature.

.

                                           EUGEN EHRLICH
                                              1862-1922
While Kohler’s philosophy of law moved on the borderline between sociological jurisprudence
and legal idealism, a thoroughly sociological type of legal theory was propounded by the
Austrian thinker Eugen Ehrlich. Ehrlich was a professor of Roman law at the University of
Czernowits in Austria. Like Savigny, he believed in spontaneous evolution of law but he did not
hang on the past but conceived law in the context of existing society and thus evolved his theory
of living law. According to him, the institution of marriage, domestic life, inheritance,
possession, contract etc., govern the society through living law which dominates the human life.
By living law he meant extra legal controls which regulate social realities of me.

Genuine sociological jurisprudence teaches, in the words of Northrop, that the “positive law
cannot be understood apart from the social norms of the living law.”

The central point of Ehrlich’s thesis is that the law of a community is to be found in social facts
and not in formal sources of law. He says “at present as well as at any other time, the centre of
gravity of legal development lies not in legislation nor in juristic science, nor in judicial
decisions, but in society itself.” Thus living law is the fact which governs life and a proper study
of law requires the study of all the social conditions in which the law functions in the society. A
statute which is habitually disregarded is no part of living.
According to Ehrlich there is no substantial difference between formal legal norms and the
norms of customs or usages, because the sanction behind them is the same (that is social
pressure). If a statute is not observed in practice, it is not a part of living law.

Ehrlich meets the facts of growing increasing state activity and a parallel increase of state norms
by distinguishing three types of legal norms. All legal norms regulate in some way the relation
between command and prohibition and the underlying facts of law”. They do so in different
ways;

       The protection may simply be given to legal norms purely based on facts of law such as
        by laws of association or corporations, or contracts. Closely connected are norms directly
        derived from social facts, such as the remedies for damages, unjust enrichment etc.
       Legal commands or prohibitions (imposed by the state) may create or deny social facts in
        the case of expropriation or multiplication of contracts.
       Norms may be entirely detached from social facts, such as imposition of taxes or the
        granting of trade concessions and privileges.

His use of the term ‘sociological jurisprudence’ means that law in a society should be made and
administered with the utmost regard to its requirements. To achieve this end, a very close study
of the social conditions of the society, in which the law is to function, is, indispensible.

In view of the Ehrlich, a court trial is an exceptional occurrence in comparison with the
innumerable contracts and transactions which are consummated in the daily life of the
community. Only small morsels of real life come before the officials charged with the
adjudication of disputes. To study the living body of law, one must turn to marriage contracts,
leases, contracts of purchase, wills, and the actual order of succession, partnership articles and
the bylaws of corporations.
AUGUST COMTE (1798-1857)

The honour of being the founder of the science of sociology belongs to another French
philosopher August Comte. The legitimate object of scientific study, according to Comte, is
society itself and not any particular institution of government. He stressed the fact that men have
ever been associated in groups and that it was in the social group and not in isolated individuals
that the impulses originated which culminated in the establishment of law and government. He
defiantly rejected the view that society rests upon an individualistic basis and that the individual
is the focal point of law. His philosophy is thus in sharp contracts to the mechanistic philosophy
current before his time.

                                               THE

                           THE VIENNA SCHOOL OF JURISPRUDENCE

Analytical positivism has been restated, developed and put on a theoretical philosophical basis in
our own time by the very potential theory of the ‘Vienna School’. Legal theory of this school is
indeed dynamic and pluralistic. The school regards it as a mark of error to think of the law as
completed within the stage of statute and to bar the door of the law which is made in the judicial
and administrative process. It regards it also as a mark of error to think of the law as completed
at the stage of judicial decisions and to neglect the legal material which is already present as the
product of the legislative process. “To attempt to view the law as a whole from one or the other
category is equally arbitrary. Both are passive objects of cognition for legal science, although
taken together they only make possible a partial knowledge of law as a whole, as it is presented
to legal science.”

Viennese school, in fact, has had a powerful intellectual influence and its chief exponent is
Professor Hans Kelsen.
                                          HANS KELSEN

Kelson was born at Prague in Austria in 1881 and was a Professor of law at the Vienna
University. He was also the judge of the supreme constitutional court of Austria for ten years
during 1920-1930. Thereafter, he shifted to England. He came to United States and worked as
professor of law in several American universities and authored many books. He was emeritus
Professor of Political science in the California University when expounded his ‘Pure theory of
law’ which is considered to be Kelsen’s unique contribution to legal theory.

Kelsen’s pure theory of law is akin to that of Austin’s theory of law, although Kelsen, when he
began to develop his theory was quite unaware of Austin’s work. He nevertheless recognised the
essential identity of his own objectives with Austin’s, namely, to base a theory of law on a
positive legal order or on a comparison of the contents of several legal orders and thus by
confining jurisprudence to a structural analysis of positive law to separate legal science from
philosophy of justice and sociology of law. He wished to free the law from the metaphysical mist
with which it has been covered all times by the speculations on justice or by the doctrine of ‘jus
naturale’. In this sense Kelsen’s theory is called the ‘pure theory of law’. As a theory, thus, it is
exclusively concerned with the accurate definition of its subject matter. It endeavors to answer
the question, what is the law? But not the question, what it ought to be? It is a science and not a
politics of law.

The theory of Kelsen says Dias has represented a development in two different directions. On
one hand, it makes the highest development to date of analytical positivism. On the other hand,
characterised the close of 19th century and the beginning of 20th century. This is not to suggest
that Kelsen reverted to ideology. For Kelsen and his followers any such legal idealism is
unscientific.

Nearly a century separates the work of Hans Kelson from that of Austin. If Austin was driven to
make his jurisprudence rigid because of the confusion of previous writers, Kelsen represents a
reaction against the modern schools which have so far widened the boundaries of jurisprudence
that they seem almost conterminous with those of social science. But while Austin did not
consciously formulate a detailed philosophy, Kelsen admittedly builds on the doctrine of Kant.
Most philosophers emphasize that jurisprudence must study the relationship between law and
justice, but Kelsen wishes to free the law from metaphysical mist with which it has been covered
at all times by the speculations on justice or by the doctrine of ius naturae. He is thus a
philosopher in revolt from the tendencies to which philosophy had led so many writers. He
desires to create a pure science of law, stripped of all irrelevant material, and to separate
jurisprudence from the social sciences as rigorously as did the analysts. The mathematician is not
interested in the way in which men thinks nor is he directly concerned whether his work is to be
used to build a bridge or to work out a new system to break the bank at Monte Carlo: so the
jurist, if he is to be scientific, must study the legal rules abstracted from all social conditions.
Kelsen refuses to define law as a command, for that introduces subjective and political
considerations and he wishes his science to be truly objective.

An interesting example by which to test Kelsen’s theory is the Unilateral Declaration of
Independence by Rhodesia. The Privy Council, as part of the English legal order, naturally
decided against the validity of the Rhodesian emergency powers which had not been laid down
in accordance with the Grundnorm the court accepted. The Rhodesian courts looked at the
problem in the light of the new legal order created by the declaration of independence and relied
partly on the theory of necessity and of the actualities of politics. In other words, these courts in
effect accepted a new Grundnorm for Rhodesia.

LAW IS A NORMATIVE SCIENCE

Law norms are ‘ought norms’. According to Kelsen, law is a normative science. But law norms
have a distinctive feature. They may be distinguished from science norms on the ground that
norms of science are norms of being of is’ (sein), while the law norms are ‘ought’(sollen) norms.
Law does not attempt to describe what actually occurs but only prescribe certain rules. It says, if
one breaks the laws, then he ought to be punished.’ These legal ‘ought’ norms differ from
morality norms in this respect that the former are backed by physical compulsions which the
latter lack, but Kelsen does not admit the command theory of Austin as it introduces a
psychological element into the definition of law which Kelsen avoids.
HIERARCHY OF NORMATIVE RELATIONS

The science of law to Kelsen is the knowledge of hierarchy of normative relations. He builds on
Kant’s theory of knowledge and extends this theoretical knowledge to law also. He does not
want to include in his theory 'what the law ought to be' and speaks of theory of law as a structural
analysis, as exact as possible, of the positive law, an analysis free of all ethical or Practical
judgment of value.

According to Kelsen, a legal order is comprised of norms placed in a hierarchical manner, one
norm placed above another norm and every norm deriving its validity from the norm above it.
The hierarchy takes a pyramid shape and symbolizes the legal order. In this way there comes a
final stage of highest norm which serve basis for all infertile norms, that is known as the basic
norm or Grund Norm. The Grund norm is the basic point of the philosophy of Kelsen. The
legality or validity of all the norms can be tested against the Grund norm. The validity of Grund
norm can't be objectively tested. The Grund norm is the common source for the validity to the
positive legal order or all norms that belong to the legal order. The Grund norm must be
efficacious i.e., it must be obeyed by the people at large. Efficacy is the validity of the Grund
norm.

                                           Basic Norm
                                          (Grundnorm)

                                 Enabling Act (Tertiary Norm)

                                   By Law (Secondary Norm)

                                    Special official Action
                                   Particular Primary Norm
GRUND NORM

The Grund norm is the starting point in a legal system. From this base, a legal system broadens
down in gradation becoming more and more detailed and specific as it progresses. Kelsen calls it
‘general concentrisation’ of ‘Grund norm’ or the basic norm thus focusing the law to specific
situations.

Kelsen’s pure theory of law is based on pyramidal structure of hierarchy of norms which derive
their validity from the basic norm which he termed as Grund norm. Thus, Grund norm as basic
norm determines the content and gives validity to other norms derived from it. Kelsen has no
answer to the question as to whereupon the basic norm derives its validity. He considers it to be a
meta-legal question in which jurist need not to intrude.

The task of legal theory is only to clarify the relation between Grund norm and all other inferior
norms and not to enter into other questions as goodness or badness of Grund norm. This is the
task of political science, or ethics or of religion.

Jullius Stone rightly comments that as Austin's sovereign in a particular society is a mere starting
point for his legal theory, so also basic norm has to be accepted as a hypothetical starting point or
fiction which gives a legal system countenance and a systematic form.

Thus, while all norms derive their validity from the basic norm, the validity of basic norm cannot
be objectively tested, instead, it has got to be presumed or pre-supposed. Kelsen however
considers Grund norm as a fiction rather than a hypothesis.

Kelsen recognised the Grund norm need not to be the same in every legal order, but a Grund
norm of same kind there will always be, whether in the form, e.g., of a written constitution or the
will of a dictator. There appears no reason why there need not to be one Grundnorm. For
example, in England, the whole legal system is traceable to the propositions that the enactments
of the Crown in Parliament and Judicial precedents ought to be treated as ‘law’ with immemorial
custom as a possible third. This is not in contradiction of Kelsen’s theory of law. Kelsen has
firmly said that a system of law cannot be grounded on two conflicting Grundnorm. In England,
obviously, there is no conflict between the authority of the King in Parliament and of judicial
precedents, as the former precedes the latter. The pure theory of law thus operates with this basic
norm as with a hypothesis, but where no such explicit formulation exists, Kelsen is by no means
clear in guiding our search. For him the only task of legal theory is to clarify the relation between
the fundamental and all lower norms, but not to say if this fundamental norm is good or bad. This
is the task of Political science or ethics or of religion.

NORM

To Kelsen, a norm is the meaning of an act of willing by which a certain behaviour is
commanded or permitted or authorized. The meaning of such act of will cannot be described by
the sentiment that the other individual will behave in that way only but he ought to behave in that
way.

ESSENTIALS OF KELSEN’S SYSTEM

The essential foundations of Kelsen’s system maybe enumerated as follows;

       The object of a theory of law, as of any science, is to reduce chaos and multiplicity to
        unity.
       Legal theory is a science and not volition. It is knowledge of what the law is and not of
        what it ought to be.’
       The law is normative and not a natural science.
       Legal theory is a theory of norms, and is not concerned with the effectiveness of legal
        norms.
       A theory of law is formal, a theory of the ordering, changing contents in a specific way.
       The relation of legal theory to a particular system of positive law is that of possible to
        actual law.

FEATURES OF KELSEN’S THEORY

       The theory of law must be ideal with the law as it is and not with the law as it ought to
        be. i.e., it must concern with the existing law.
       The theory of law is different from the law itself. Law is a mass of heterogeneous rules.
        The function of the theory is to distinguish between the different types of the law.
       A theory of law must be pure. It must be free from all ambiguities. A theory must explain
        all the aspects of law without reference with other subjects like sociology, political
        science, economics, history etc., because they are subject to variation from one place to
        another and from one time to another. The pure theory which would have the ingredient
        of only one discipline, i.e., law.
       Law is a norm, which is a prescription norm, the function of which is to prescribe.
       Law is the hierarchy of the norms, and each norm derives its validity from the superior
        norm.
       Finally there comes the highest norm to which all inferior norms derive their validity i.e.,
        known as Grund norm.
       Kelsen’s approach is much wider than that of Austin, as Kelsen includes; policy, rule,
        doctrine and standards in addition to the commands within the purview of the norm.

IMPLICATIONS OF THE KELSEN’S THEORY

The implications of Kelsen’s theory are wide and many. It covers concepts of state, sovereignty,
private and public law, legal personality, right and duty and international law.

LAW AND STATE NOT TWO DIFFERENT THINGS: The most significant feature of Kelsen’s
doctrine is that both the law and state are identical; for him the state is nothing but a system of
human behaviour, an order of social compulsion. This compulsive order is different from the
legal order, for the reason that within one community only one and not two compulsive orders
can be valid at the same time. It is therefore, redundant to distinguish between law and state,
because every act of state is a legal act. A human act is only designated act of state by virtue of a
legal norm which qualifies it as such; on the basis of the norm the act is imputed to the state, is
related to the unity of the legal order.

The state as person is simply the personification of the law. Kelsen, thus, rejects any dualism by
saying that dualism of state and law is one of those tautologies which double the object of
knowledge. Legal dualism, for him, is nothing but a reflection of and substitute for theology,
with which it has substantial identities.

The reality of state is that it is a system regulating the social behaviour in a normative order. But
such a working can be discovered only in a legal system. Really speaking, law and state are the
same and the difference between them appears because we look at them from two different
points.

NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE LAW: Another very significant feature that
comes out of the hierarchal structure of law is Kelsen’s attack upon the traditional distinction
between public and private law. Behind the division of public and private law Kelsen suspects,
not without a reason, a political ideology which wishes this sphere of private law to appear as
being beyond politics, whereas in reality private law institutions consist of a political ideology as
strongly as public law institutions and relations.

According to Kelsen, there is no difference between public and private law when all law derives
its force from the same Grund norm. No distinction between them can be made on the ground
that they protect interests of different nature. Private interests are protected in public interest. He
traces a political ideology behind this distinction- a motive to elevate public law and justice
authoritarianism’. On this point, though from different premises, Kelsen reaches the same
conclusion as Dugit and Renner.

NO DIFFERENCE BETWEEN NATURAL AND JURISTIC PERSON: Kelsen does not admit any legal
distinction between physical and juristic person. Since, state is nothing but a legal construction;
this leads us to the nest part of Kelsen’s theory, the denial of any distinction between physical
and juristic persons. As law is a system of normative relations and uses personifications merely
as a technical device to constitute points of unification of legal norms, so the distinction between
natural and juristic persons is irrelevant, while all legal personality is artificial and deduces its
validity from superior norm. To Kelsen, the concept of person is merely a step in the process of
concretization, e.g., totality of claims, etc., and nothing else.

NO INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS: As law is a system of norm relations, so Kelsen and his followers
recognise no individual right, except as a technical device which the law may or may not
recognise in order to carry out legal transactions. Legal duties are the essence of law, for law is a
system of ‘oughts’, whereas legal rights are by an incident. This necessarily severs law from any
associations with political theory of the law, for example, from those which affirm certain
inalienable rights of the individual.
                         CRITICISM AGAINST KELSEN’S THEORY

   NO PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Sociological jurists criticize it on the ground that it lacks
    practical significance. Professor Laski, says, Granted its postulates, I believe the pure
    theory to be unanswerable but I believe also that its substance is an exercise in logic and
    not in life’. Some see Kelsen as “beating his luminous wings in vain within his ivory
    tower.”
   PURITY OF NORMS CANNOT BE MAINTAINED: Although Kelsen’s theory has warmly been
    recognised, yet most writers point out that it provides no guidance whatever to a person
    in the actual application of the law. The quality of purity claimed by Professor Kelsen for
    all norms dependent on the basic norm had always been subject of serious attack. In the
    most enchanting language of Jullius stone: “….Since that basic norm itself is obviously
    most impure, the very ‘purity’ of the subsequent operations must reproduce that original
    impurity in the inferior norms, we are invited to forget the illegitimacy of the ancestor in
    admiration of the pure blue-blood of the progeny. Yet the genes are at work down to the
    lowliest progeny.”
    As absolute purity of any theory of law is a far cry, so Kelsen had to admit his defeat
    when it comes to the question of conflicting fundamental norms. The question which is
    the valid fundamental norm, his pure theory cannot avoid, for without it the whole
    structure would collapse. Similarly, the “minimum of effectiveness” formulae which
    Kelsen chose for him is at bottom nothing else but Jellink’s normative Kraft des
    Faktischen. How can the minimum of effectiveness be proved except by an inquiry into
    socio-political facts? Writing as late as 1942, he himself suspected if his pure theory of
    law is a foundation without which the sociological and evaluative inquiries cannot
    proceed. Sociological jurisprudence according to him, presupposes normative
    jurisprudence, since until the later has determined what are legal norms, sociological
    jurisprudence has no definite province. The truth is, however, something else. It is his
    pure theory of law which is important as an instrument until the other approaches to law
    provide the hypothesis of the basic norm.
   HIS GRUND NORM VAGUE AND CONFUSING: The first point in Kelsen’s theory which is
    greatly criticised is his conception of Grund norm. Though Kelsen has given its
    characteristics as possessing ‘minimum effectiveness’ it is very vague and confusing and
    it is difficult to trace it out in every legal system. But its discovery is a condition
    precedent for a successful application of Kelsen’s theory to a legal system. Kelsen seems
    to have given his thesis on the basis of the written constitutions as Austin created his
    ‘sovereign’ on the basis of the English system of government but eve in written
    constitutions. ‘Grund norm’ is made up of many elements and any one of these elements
    alone cannot have the title of Grund norm. Another criticism against the conception of
    Grundnorm is from the point of view of the Historical school. It says that the origin of
    law is in customs and Volkgiest and not in any other source, such as ‘Grund norm’. But
    on this point Kelsen finds in Professor Friedmann and stone very strong advocates of his
    view. Friedmann says, “The fact that the ultimate authority in any given legal order may
    be a composite one, as in the United States of America, or Great Britain, does not alter
    the fact that such an ultimate authority must exist”. So far as the criticism by the jurists of
    the Historical School is concerned, Kelsen is decidedly a positivist and therefore, this
    criticism does not hold good against him.
   NATURAL LAW IGNORED: Lauterpacht, an ardent follower of Kelsen, has also from a
    different side questioned if the theory of hierarchy of legal norms does not imply a
    recognition of natural law principles, despite Kelsen’s blatant warning of natural law
    ideology. Many natural law theories do not establish absolute ideals but affirm the
    principle of higher norm superior to the positive law. as mankind become legally
    organised, natural law rules would become positive norms of a higher order, and the
    difference between Kelsen’s theory and those of modern law theories would disappear.
    Hagerstorm, too, appears to have unfolded the natural law philosophy concealed in
    Kelsen’s assumption of the unconditional authority of the supreme power, or, in verdross,
    “constitution of the law of nations” as the formulation on which the principle of
    international law (Pacta Sunt Servanda) is supposed to ground.
                             THE REALIST MOVEMENT-LEGAL REALISM

Legal realism implies that judicial decisions must conform to socio-economic factors and
questions of policy and values. In America we have the Realist School of jurisprudence. This
school fortifies sociological jurisprudence and recognises law as the result of social influences
and conditions, and regards it as judicial decisions.

                                          OLIVER HOMES
                                             1841-1935
Oliver Holmes is, in a sense, an exponent of the realist school. “Law is what the courts do; it is
not merely what the courts say.” Emphasis is on action. As Holmes would have it, “The life of
the law has not been logic; it has been experience.”

                                         K. N LLEWELLYN

Karl Llewellyn, in his earlier writings was a spokesman for orthodox realist theory. He argued
that the rules of substantive law are for less importance in the catula practice of law than had
hitherto been assumed. “The theory that rules decide cases seems for a century to have fooled,
not only library-ridden recluses, but judges.” He proposed that the focal point of legal research
should be shifted from the study of rules to the observance of the real behaviour of the law
officials, particularly the judges. “What these officials do about disputes is, to my mind, the law
itself.”

This last statement, however, was withdrawn by Llewellyn in 1950. In his more recent writings,
he has placed a somewhat greater stress on the importance of normative generalization in law,
pointing out that the rule part of law is “one hugely developed part” of the institution, but not the
whole of it. He has also, in keeping with the postulates of sociological jurisprudence, sought to
explore the relations and contacts between the law and the other social sciences, coming to the
conclusion that the lawyers as well as the social scientists have thus failed to make an “effective
effort at neighborliness.”

K. N Llewellyn concentrated rather on the uncertainty in the actual operation of the rules in
appellate courts- he wished to make a sustained and realistic examination of the best practice and
art of the best judges and their judging and he had, in a major work attempted just such a study.
In America, sociological jurisprudence has developed an extreme wing under the name of the
Realist School. The sociological method has brought legal science into intimate relation with the
facts of social life and made jurists recognise law a product of social forces.

Llewellyn, one of the exponents of the realist movement, has set forth the following points as the
cardinal features of American realism;

      Realism is not so much a new school of jurisprudence as a new methodology in
       jurisprudence.
      Realists regard law as dynamic and not as static. They regard law as serving certain social
       ends and study any given cross-section of it to ascertain to what extent these ends are
       being served.
      Realists, for the purpose of observation of the functioning of any part of the legal system
       accept a ‘divorce of is from ought”. This means that the ethical purposes which,
       according to the observer, should underlie the law, are ignored and are not allowed to
       blur the vision of the observer.
      Realism emphasises the social effects of laws and of legal decisions.

Another leading realist was Frank (1889-1957) who was known as a “constructive legal sceptic.”
Mr. Justice Cardzo, in his “The Nature of the Judicial Process”, points out that law never is, but
is only about to be. Even existing decisions may be overrules. Law is not something certain- not
what the judges have said, but what they will do.
