   STUDY MATERIAL


EXECUTIVE PROGRAMME



JURISPRUDENCE,
INTERPRETATION
& GENERAL LAWS
       GROUP 1
       PAPER 1




                      (i)
                © THE INSTITUTE OF COMPANY SECRETARIES OF INDIA




                                        Timing of Headquarters :
                                            Monday to Friday
                                  Office Timings : 9.00 A.M. to 5.30 P.M.


                                        Public Dealing Timings :
                         Without financial transactions – 9.30 A.M. to 5.00 P.M.
                          With financial transactions – 9.30 A.M. to 4.00 P.M.


                                                Phones :
                                     011-45341000 / 0120-4522000


                                                Website :
                                              www.icsi.edu


                                                 E-mail :
                                info@icsi.edu / academics@icsi.edu
               For Academic Updates please visit : https://www.icsi.edu/academic-portal/



            For any suggestions/clarifications students may write to academics@icsi.edu


                                               Disclaimer
       Although due care and diligence have been taken in preparation of this Study Material, the
       Institute shall not be responsible for any loss or damage, resulting from any action taken on
       the basis of the contents of this Study Material. Anyone wishing to act on the basis of the
       material contained herein should do so after cross checking with the original source.



                                        Laser Typesetting by :
                              AArushi Graphics, Prashant Vihar, New Delhi




(ii)
                                  EXECUTIVE PROGRAMME

           JURISPRUDENCE, INTERPRETATION &
                    GENERAL LAWS
This paper consists of three components, namely Jurisprudence, Interpretation and General Laws. Jurisprudence
is the study of the science of law. The study of law in jurisprudence is not about any particular statute or a rule
but of law in general, its concepts, its principles and the philosophies underpinning it.

The primary object of the interpretation is to discover the true intention of the Legislature. The necessity of
interpretation arises where the language of a statutory provision is ambiguous, not clear or where two views are
possible or where the provision gives a different meaning defeating the object of the statute.

The General Laws is an important pre-requisite for professional course like Company Secretary. Reading and
understanding of the Law has become an important aspect for professional assignments. Interpretation of
Statutes covers the essentials principles of understanding Laws. Constitutional Law deals with powers, functions
and responsibilities of various organs of the State; Administrative law deals with day to day governance
mechanism, Arbitration Mediation and Conciliation deals with Alternate Dispute Resolution Mechanism and Civil
and Criminal Procedure, Information Technology Act, Right to Information Act, 2005, Contract Law, Negotiable
Instrument Act etc., spreads into approximately every phase of modern life.

Fundamental objective of this Study Material enable the students to understand and acquire working knowledge
of Jurisprudence, Interpretation and General Laws. After studying this study material the student will be able
to analyse principles underlying the legal postulates and propositions, and connection between theory of law
and practice.

This study material has been published to aid the students in preparing for the Jurisprudence, Interpretation
and General Laws paper of the CS Executive Programme. It is part of the educational kit and takes the students
step by step through each phase of preparation emphasizing key concepts, principles, pointers and procedures.
Company Secretaryship being a professional course, the examination standards are set very high, with focus on
knowledge of concepts, their application, procedures and case laws, for which sole reliance on the contents of
this study material may not be enough. This study material may, therefore, be regarded as the basic material
and must be read alongwith the Bare Acts, Rules, Regulations, Case Law.

The subject of Jurisprudence, Interpretation and General Laws is inherently fundamental to evolution and
refinement of legislations, rules and regulations. It, therefore becomes necessary for every student to constantly
update with legislative changes made as well as judicial pronouncements rendered from time to time by
referring to the Institute’s monthly journal ‘Chartered Secretary’ and e-bulletin ‘Student Company Secretary’ as
well as other law/professional journals and reference books.

The legislative changes made upto November, 2025 have been incorporated in the study material. The
students are advised to refer to the updations at the Regulator’s website, Supplement relevant for the subject
issued by ICSI and ICSI Journal Chartered Secretary and other publications. Specifically, students are advised

                                                                                                               (iii)
to read “Student Company Secretary” e-Journal which covers regulatory and other relevant developments
relating to the subject. In the event of any doubt, students may contact the Directorate of Academics
at academics@icsi.edu.

The amendments to law made upto 31st May of the Calendar Year for December Examinations and upto 30th
November of the previous Calendar Year for June Examinations shall be applicable.

Although due care has been taken in publishing this study material, the possibility of errors, omissions and/or
discrepancies cannot be ruled out. This publication is released with an understanding that the Institute shall not
be responsible for any errors, omissions and/or discrepancies or any action taken in that behalf.


                                                Important Note:

 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023 and
 Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure Code 1973
 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.

 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws, unless
 a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.




(iv)
                                  EXECUTIVE PROGRAMME
                                                  Group 1
                                                   Paper 1

           JURISPRUDENCE, INTERPRETATION &
                    GENERAL LAWS
                                                   SYLLABUS

 OBJECTIVES:
   l    To provide understanding, application and working knowledge of jurisprudence and general laws.

   l    To inculcate interpretational skills and to teach the manner of reading law.

Level of Knowledge : Working Knowledge

   1.   Sources of Law : l Meaning of Law and its Significance l Relevance of Law to Civil Society
        l Jurisprudence & Legal Theory l Schools of Law propounded by Austin, Roscoe Pound, Salmond,
        Kelsen, Savigny, Bentham and others l Statutes, Subordinate Legislation, Custom, Common Law,
        Precedent, Stare decisis

   2.   Constitution of India : l Broad Framework of the Constitution of India l Fundamental Rights, Directive
        Principles of State Policy and Fundamental Duties l Legislative framework and Powers of Union
        and States l Judicial framework l Executive/Administrative framework l Legislative Process l Writ
        Jurisdiction of High Courts and the Supreme Court l Different types of writs

   3.   Interpretation of Statutes : l Need for interpretation of a statute l Meanings of Interpretation of Statutes
        l A state and the casus omissus l Interpretation of Definition Clause l Principles of Interpretation
        including Heydon’s Rule of Interpretation, Golden Rule of Interpretation l Aids to Interpretation l Legal
        Terminologies l Reading a Bare Act & Citation of Cases l Pari Materia l Harmonious Construction
        l Prospective and retrospective operation l Use of “May” and “Shall” l Use of “And” and “or”
        l Interpretation of proviso l Latin maxims used to interpret words and phrases l Contemporanea
        Expositio l Deeming provisions l Repugnancy with other statutes l Conflict between general
        provision and special provision l Socially beneficial construction l Interpretation of Procedural Law
        l Interpretation of fiscal and taxing statutes l Delegated legislations l Conflict between Statute,
        Rules and regulations l Doctrine of substantial compliance l Doctrine of impossibility of performance
        l Strict Construction of penal statutes l Brief of General Clause Act, 1897 l Reading Methodology of the
        Companies Act, 2013 and its Legal Aura

   4.   Administrative Laws : l Conceptual Analysis l Source and Need of Administrative Law l Principle of
        Natural Justice l Administrative Discretion l Judicial Review & Other Remedies l Liability of Government,
        Public Corporation

   5.   Law of Torts : l General conditions of Liability for a Tort l Strict and Absolute Liability l Vicarious


                                                                                                                 (v)
            Liability l Torts or wrongs to personal safety and freedom l Liability of a Corporate Entity/Company in
            Torts l Remedies in Torts

       6.   Law relating to Civil Procedure : l Structure and Jurisdiction of Civil Courts l Basic Understanding of
            Certain Terms - Order, Judgment and Decree, Stay of Suits, Cause of Action, Res Judicata, Sub-judice
            l Summary Proceedings/Procedures, Appeals, Reference, Review and Revision l Powers of Civil Court
            and their exercise by Tribunals l Institution of Suit l Law relating to Commercial Courts

       7.   Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure : l Introduction l Classes of Criminal Courts l Power of Courts
            l Arrest of Persons l Mens Rea and Actus Reus l Cognizable and Non-Cognizable Offences l Bail
            l Continuing Offences l Compounding of Offences l Summons and Warrants l Searches l Summary
            Trial l Offences against Property l Criminal Breach of Trust l Cheating, Fraudulent Deeds and
            Dispositions of Property l Offences relating to Documents and Property Marks l Forgery l Defamation

       8.   Law relating to Evidence : l Concept of Relevant Evidence and Admissible Evidence l Statements
            about the facts to be proved l Relevancy of facts connected with the fact to be proved l Opinion of
            Third Persons l Facts of which evidence cannot be given l Oral, Documentary and Circumstantial
            Evidence l Burden of proof l Presumptions l Estoppel l Witness l Improper admission & rejection of
            evidence l e-evidence

       9.   Law relating to Limitation : l Computation of the Period of Limitation l Bar of Limitation l Effect of
            acknowledgment l Acquisition of ownership by Possession l Classification of Period of Limitation

   10.      Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation : l Arbitration Law in India l Appointment
            of Arbitrators l Judicial Intervention l Award l Recourse against Award l Commencement of
            conciliation proceedings l Laws relating to conduct of conciliation proceedings l Termination of
            conciliation proceedings l Role of conciliator in other proceedings l Power of High Court to make rules
            l Development of Mediation Law l Mediation rules made by Higher Courts

   11.      Right to Information Law : l Key Definitions l Public Authorities & their Obligations l Role of Central/
            State Governments l Central Information Commission l State information Commission

   12.      Law relating to Information Technology : l Introduction, definition, important terms under the IT Act
            l Digital Signatures, Electronic Record, Certifying Authority, Digital Signature Certificate l Cyber
            Regulation Appellate Tribunal l Offences and Penalties l Rules relating to sensitive personal data
            under IT Act l Development and Law of Data Protection

   13.      Contract Law : l Formation of an Agreement, Intention to create legal relationship l Offer and invitation
            to offer l Kinds of offer, communication, acceptance and revocation of offer and acceptance l Modes
            of revocation of offer l Consideration l Basis and the nature of consideration l Doctrine of Privity of
            Contract and of consideration l Exceptions of consideration l Capacity to Contract l Free Consent
            l Void and Voidable Contracts l Discharge of Contracts l Remedies for breach of Contract l Quasi
            Contracts l e-contracts
   14.      Law relating to Negotiable Instruments : l Negotiable Instruments and Parties l Material Alteration
            l Crossing and bouncing of Cheques l Dishonour of Cheques & its Remedies l Presumption of Law as
            to Negotiable Instruments




(vi)
              ARRANGEMENT OF STUDY LESSONS
       JURISPRUDENCE, INTERPRETATION & GENERAL LAWS
                                   GROUP 1 l PAPER 1

S. No.     Lesson Title
  1.       Sources of Law
  2.       Constitution of India
  3.       Interpretation of Statutes
  4.       Administrative Laws
  5.       Law of Torts
  6.       Law relating to Civil Procedure
  7.       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure
  8.       Law relating to Evidence
  9.       Law relating to Limitation
 10.       Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation
 11.       Right to Information Law
 12.       Law relating to Information Technology
 13.       Contract Law
 14.       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments




                                                                     (vii)
                                  LESSON WISE SUMMARY
                     JURISPRUDENCE, INTERPRETATION &
                              GENERAL LAWS

 Lesson 1: Sources of Law
Law is not static. As circumstances and conditions in a society change, laws are also changed to fit the
requirements of society. At any given point of time the prevailing law of a society must be in conformity with
the general statements, customs and aspirations of its people. The object of law is to form an order which in
turn provides hope of security for the future. Law is expected to provide socio-economic justice and remove the
existing imbalances in the socio-economic structure and to play special role in the task of achieving various
socio-economic goals enshrined in our Constitution. It has to serve as a vehicle of social change and as a
harbinger of social justice.

The objective of the lesson is to introduce the students regarding:

     l   Meaning of law and its significance;

     l   Relevance of Law to Civil Society;

     l   School of Laws

     l   Jurisprudence; and

     l   Legal Theory.

 Lesson 2: Constitution of India
The preamble to the Constitution sets out the aims and aspirations of the people of India. It is a part of the
Constitution. The preamble declares India to be a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, Democratic, Republic and
secures to all its citizens Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. It is declared that the Constitution has been
given by the people to themselves, thereby affirming the republican character of the polity and the sovereignty
of the people. All public authorities – legislative, administrative and judicial derive their powers directly or
indirectly from it and the Constitution derives its authority from the people.

It is expected that, at the end of this lesson, students will, inter alia be in a position to:

     l   Understand Broad Framework of the Constitution of India;

     l   Fundamental Rights;

     l   Directive Principles of State Policy;

     l   Fundamental Duties;

     l   Powers of Union and States;

     l   Judicial framework;

     l   Legislative Process;

(viii)
    l   Writ Jurisdiction of High Courts and the Supreme Court; and
    l   Different types of writs.

 Lesson 3: Interpretation of Statutes
The primary object of the interpretation of statutes is to discover the true intention of the Legislature; and
where the intention can be undoubtedly ascertained the courts are bound to give effect to it regardless of their
opinion about its wisdom. The phrase “Interpretation of Statutes” implies the judicial process of determining,
in accordance with certain rules and presumptions, the true meaning of the Acts of the Parliament and State
Legislatures. In this context, the phrase would mean a process or manner that conveys one’s understanding of
the ideas of the creator, or understand as having a particular meaning or significance, explanation, explication
or a clarification for a particular statute or law.
The lesson aims at:
    l   Familiarizing students with Need for interpretation of a statute;
    l   Help students learn the Principles of Interpretation; and
    l   Equip the students with the Aids to Interpretation.
    l   Rules applicable while interpreting different type of legislations

 Lesson 4: Administrative Laws
The modern state typically has three organs- legislative, executive and judiciary. Traditionally, the legislature
was tasked with the making of laws, the executive with the implementation of the laws and judiciary with the
administration of justice and settlement of disputes. This has led to an all pervasive presence of administration
in the life of a modern citizen. In such a context, a study of administrative law assumes great significance.
The objective of this lesson is to introduce the students regarding:
    l   Source and Need of Administrative Law;
    l   Principle of Natural Justice;
    l   Rule of Law
    l   Administrative Discretion; and
    l   Judicial Review.

 Lesson 5: Law of Torts
In general, a tort consists of some act or omission done by the defendant (tortfeasor) whereby he has without
just cause or excuse caused some harm to plaintiff. To constitute a tort, there must be a wrongful act or omission
of the defendant; the wrongful act must result in causing legal damage to another and the wrongful act must be
of such a nature as to give rise to a legal remedy.
It is expected that, at the end of this lesson, students will, inter alia, be in a position to understand:
    l   The general conditions of Liability for a Tort;
    l   Strict and Absolute Liability;
    l   Vicarious Liability;
    l   Relation of Law of Torts and Consumer Protection


                                                                                                              (ix)
      l   Torts or wrongs to personal safety and freedom; and
      l   Liability of a Corporate Entity/Company in Torts; Remedies in Torts.

 Lesson 6: Law relating to Civil Procedure
The Civil Procedure Code consolidates and amends the law relating to the procedure of the Courts of Civil
jurisdiction. The Code does not affect any special or local laws nor does it supersede any special jurisdiction
or power conferred or any special form of procedure prescribed by or under any other law for the time being in
force. The Code is the general law so that in case of conflict between the Code and the special law the latter
prevails over the former. Where the special law is silent on a particular matter the Code applies, but consistent
with the special enactment.
The objective of the lesson is to familiarize the students with:
      l   Structure and jurisdiction of Civil Courts;
      l   Basic Understanding of Certain Terms Order, Judgment and Decree;
      l   Stay of Suits;
      l   Cause of Action;
      l   Res Judicata;
      l   Summary Proceedings;
      l   Appeals;
      l   Review and Revision; and
      l   Summary Procedure.

 Lesson 7: Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) is the substantive law of crimes. In India, the base of the crime and
punitive provision has been laid down in BNS. With the proliferation in juristic persons and a growth in their
activities which increasingly touch upon the daily lives of ordinary people, criminal law has evolved to bring
such persons within its ambit. For example, according to section 2(26) of the BNS, the word “person” includes
any company or association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not. Thus companies are covered
under the provisions of the BNS. The procedural part of the Law of Crimes in contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita that creates the necessary machinery for apprehending the criminals, investigating the
criminal cases, their trials before the criminal courts and imposition of proper punishment on the guilty person.
The Sanhita enumerates the hierarchy of criminal courts in which different offences can be tried and then it
spells out the limits of sentences which such Courts are authorized to pass.
It is expected that, at the end of this lesson, students will, inter alia, be in a position to understand:
      l   Classes of Criminal Courts;
      l   Power of Courts;
      l   Cognizable and Non-Cognizable Offences;
      l   Summons and Warrants;
      l   Summary Trial;
      l   Offences against Property;


(x)
    l   Criminal Breach of Trust;
    l   Cheating;
    l   Forgery; and
    l   Defamation

 Lesson 8: Law relating to Evidence
The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 is a law to consolidate, define and amend the Law of Evidence. In
general the rules of evidence are same in civil and criminal proceedings but there is a strong and marked
difference as to the effect of evidence in civil and criminal proceedings. In the former a mere preponderance
of probability, due regard being had to the burden of proof, is sufficient basis of a decision, but in the latter,
especially when the offence charged amounts to felony or treason, a much higher degree of assurance is
required. The persuasion of guilt must amount to a moral certainty such as to be beyond all reasonable doubt.
This lesson is designed to familiarize the students with:
    l   Statements about the facts to be proved;
    l   Relevancy of facts connected with the fact to be proved;
    l   Facts of which evidence cannot be given;
    l   Oral, Documentary and Circumstantial Evidence;
    l   Burden of proof;
    l   Improper admission & rejection of evidence; and
    l   E-evidence

 Lesson 9: Law relating to Limitation
The Courts in India are bound by the specific provisions of the Limitation Act and are not permitted to move
outside the ambit of these provisions. Limitation Act prescribes different periods of limitation for suits, petitions
or applications. Court may also admit an application or appeal even after the expiry of the specified period of
limitation if it is satisfied with the applicant or the appellant, as the case may be as to sufficient cause for not
making it within time.
The objective of the lesson is to facilitate the students to acquaint with:
    l   Computation of the Period of Limitation;
    l   Bar of Limitation;
    l   Effect of acknowledgment;
    l   Acquisition of ownership by Possession; and
    l   Classification of Period of Limitation.

 Lesson 10: Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 aims at streamlining the process of arbitration and facilitating
conciliation in business matters. The Act recognizes the autonomy of parties in the conduct of arbitral
proceedings by the arbitral tribunal and abolishes the scope of judicial review of the award and minimizes the
supervisory role of Courts. Mediation is another emerging mode for settlement of disputes through Alternate
Dispute Resolution. These modes facilitate the resolutions of disputes out of the court.


                                                                                                                 (xi)
The objective of this lesson is to facilitate the students to acquaint with:
        l   Arbitration Law in India;
        l   Appointment of Arbitrators;
        l   Judicial Intervention;
        l   Arbitral Award; and
        l   Conciliation
        l   Mediation

 Lesson 11: Right to Information Law
The Right to Information Act, 2005 is an Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for
citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency
and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution of a Central Information Commission
and State Information Commissions and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act, allowing
transparency and autonomy, and access to information in public authorities.
The objective of the lesson is to facilitate the students to acquaint with:
        l   Public Authorities & their Obligations;
        l   Right to Information;
        l   Role of Central/State Governments;
        l   Central Information Commission; and
        l   State information Commission.

 Lesson 12: Law relating to Information Technology
The General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162 dated the 30th January, 1997 has
adopted the Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law. The said resolution recommends inter alia that all States give favourable consideration to the said
Model Law when they enact or revise their laws, in view of the need for uniformity of the law applicable to
alternatives to paper based methods of communication and storage of information.
It is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient delivery of Government
services by means of reliable electronic records, Parliament enacted Information Technology Act, 2000 to
provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other
means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as “electronic commerce”, which involve the use
of alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic
filing of documents with the Government agencies and further to amend the laws including the Banker’s Books
Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
This lesson is designed to familiarize the students with:
        l   Digital Signatures;
        l   Electronic Record;
        l   Certifying Authority;
        l   Digital Signature Certificate;
        l   Appellate Tribunal; and


(xii)
    l   Offences and Penalties.

 Lesson 13: Contract Law
The Law of Contract constitutes the most important branch of Mercantile or Commercial Law. It affects everybody,
more so, trade, commerce and industry. It may be said that the contract is the foundation of the modern world.
The Indian Contract Act, 1872 regulates all the transactions of a company.
    l   It lays down the general principles relating to the formation and enforceability of contracts; rules
        governing the provisions of an agreement and offer;
    l   Various types of contracts including those of indemnity and guarantee, bailment and pledge and
        agency; and
    l   It also contains provisions pertaining to breach of a contract.

 Lesson 14: Law relating to Negotiable Instruments
A negotiable instrument may be defined as an instrument, the property in which is acquired by anyone who
takes it bona fide, and for value, notwithstanding any defect of title in the person from whom he took it, from
which it follows that an instrument cannot be negotiable unless it is such and in such a state that the true owner
could transfer the contract or engagement contained therein by simple delivery of instrument.
The objective of the lesson is to introduce the students regarding:
    l   Negotiable Instruments and Parties;
    l   Effect of Negotiability;
    l   Crossing and bouncing of Cheques;
    l   Dishonour of Cheques & its Remedies; and
    l   Presumption of Law as to Negotiable Instruments.




                                                                                                             (xiii)
                                            CONTENTS


                                                LESSON 1
                                            SOURCES OF LAW

Introduction                                                       2
Meaning of Law                                                     2
Significance of Law                                                2
Relevance of Law to Civil Society                                  3
Jurisprudence & Legal Theory                                       3
Natural School of Law                                             12
Analytical School of Law                                          13
Historical School of Law                                          14
Philosophical/Ethical School                                      14
Sociological School of Law                                        15
Realist School of Law                                             15
Sources of Indian Law                                             16
Primary Sources of Indian law                                     16
Secondary Sources of Indian Law                                   24
Mercantile or Commercial Law                                      26
Branches of Mercantile Law                                        26
Sources of Mercantile Law                                         26
Mercantile Law in India                                           27
Sources of Indian Mercantile Law                                  27
Lesson Round-Up                                                   28
Glossary                                                          29
Test Yourself                                                     29
List of Further Readings and References                           30


                                                LESSON 2
                                          CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

Broad Framework of the Constitution                               32
Preamble                                                          32


(xiv)
Structure                                                         33
Judicial View                                                     33
Peculiar Features of Indian Federalism                            33
The Concept of Fundamental Rights                                 34
Inclusion of Fundamental Rights in Part III of the Constitution   35
Definition of State                                               36
Justifiability of Fundamental Rights                              38
Doctrine of Severability                                          39
Doctrine of Eclipse                                               39
Waiver                                                            40
Right of Equality                                                 40
Rights Relating to Freedom                                        45
Protection in respect of conviction for offences                   51
Protection of life and personal liberty                           52
Right to Education                                                55
Preventive Detention                                              55
Right against Exploitation                                        56
Right to Constitutional Remedies                                  56
Remedies for enforcement of Fundamental Rights                    57
Supplementary provisions                                          58
Amendability of the Fundamental Rights                            58
Directive Principles of State Policy                              60
Conflict between a Fundamental Right and a Directive Principle     61
Important Directive Principles                                     61
Fundamental Duties                                                63
Ordinance Making Powers                                           64
Legislative Powers of the Union and the States                    66
Freedom of Trade, Commerce and Intercourse                        74
Constitutional Provisions Relating to State Monopoly              76
The Supreme Court                                                 76
High Courts                                                        77
Subordinate Courts                                                 77
Special Tribunals                                                  77


                                                                  (xv)
Writ Jurisdiction of High Courts and Supreme Court                                                      78
Types of Writs                                                                                          80
Delegated Legislation                                                                                   82
Classification of delegated legislation                                                                 82
Classification of Subordinate Legislation                                                               82
Separation of Powers                                                                                    84
Legislative Functions                                                                                   85
Law making process (How a Bill becomes an Act)                                                          85
Lesson Round-Up                                                                                         87
Glossary                                                                                                88
Test Yourself                                                                                           89
List of Further Readings and References                                                                 89


                                                   LESSON 3
                                          INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES

Introduction                                                                                            92
Need for interpretation of a statute                                                                    93
Meanings of Interpretation of Statutes                                                                  94
Casus Omissus Rule                                                                                      94
Interpretation of Definition Clause                                                                     94
Principles of Interpretation including Heydon’s Rule of Interpretation, Golden Rule of Interpretation   95
Presumptions                                                                                            101
Aids to Interpretation                                                                                  102
Legal Terminologies & Legal Maxims                                                                      109
Reading a Bare Act & Citation of Cases                                                                  113
Prospective and Retrospective Operation                                                                 114
Interpretation of Statutory and Procedural provisions                                                   114
Use of “May” and “Shall”                                                                                115
Use of “And” and “or”                                                                                   115
Interpretation of proviso                                                                               116
Deeming Provisions                                                                                      116
Repugnancy with other statutes                                                                          117
Conflict between general provision and special provision                                                117

(xvi)
Socially beneficial construction                                     118
Interpretation of Procedural Law                                     119
Interpretation of Fiscal and Taxing Statutes                         119
Delegated legislations                                               119
Conflict between Statute, Rules and Regulations                      120
Doctrine of Substantial Compliance                                   120
Doctrine of Impossibility of Performance                             121
Strict Construction of penal statutes                                122
Brief of General Clause Act, 1897                                    122
Importance of the General Clauses Act, 1897                          122
Reading Methodology of the Companies Act, 2013 and its Legal Aura    125
Lesson Round-Up                                                      128
Glossary                                                             129
Test Yourself                                                        130
List of Further Readings                                             130


                                                  LESSON 4
                                             ADMINISTRATIVE LAWS

Introduction – Conceptual Analysis                                   134
Need and Sources of Administrative Law                               135
Rule of Law                                                          137
Administrative Discretion                                            138
Judicial Review and other Remedies                                   139
Principles of Natural Justice                                        146
Exceptions to Natural Justice                                        150
Effect of Failure of Natural Justice                                 152
Liability of the Government, Public Corporation                      153
Liability of State or Government in Contract                         153
Effect of a valid contract with Government                           153
Quasi-Contractual Liability                                          154
Suit against State in Torts                                          154
Damages                                                              154
Liability of the Public Servant                                      155

                                                                    (xvii)
Examples of Public Corporation                                          155
Lesson Round-Up                                                         157
Glossary                                                                157
Test Yourself                                                           158
List of Further Readings and References                                 158


                                                     LESSON 5
                                                   LAW OF TORTS

Introduction to Law of Torts                                            160

Elements of Tort                                                        160

Kinds of Tortious Liability & General Conditions                        161

Exceptions to the Rule of Strict Liability                              166

Applicability of the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher                        168

Role of the State in Law of Torts                                       171

Torts or Wrongs to Personal Safety and Freedom                          175

Liability of a Corporate Entity/Company in Torts                        179

Consumer Protection Act and liabilities of torts                        179

Remedies in Torts                                                       181

Judicial Remedies                                                       181

Extra Judicial Remedies                                                 182

Lesson Round-Up                                                         183

Glossary                                                                184
Test Yourself                                                           184

List of Further Readings and References                                 185


                                                     LESSON 6
                                      LAW RELATING TO CIVIL PROCEDURE

Introduction                                                            188
Aim and Scope of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 [C.P.C.]                    188
Scheme of the Code                                                      189
Structure of Civil Courts                                               192
Stay of Suit (Doctrine of Res Sub Judice)                               192

(xviii)
Res Judicata                                                              194
Jurisdiction of Courts and Venue of Suits                                 197
Place of Suing (Territorial)                                              198
Set-Off, Counter-Claim and Equitable Set-Off                              199
Temporary Injunctions and Interlocutory Orders                            201
Detention, Preservation, Inspection etc. of Subject-matter of Suit        202
Institution of Suit                                                       202
Important Stages in Proceedings of a Suit                                 205
Delivery of Summons by Court                                              206
Appeals                                                                   212
Reference, Review and Revision                                            214
Suits by or Against a Corporation                                         215
Suits by or against Minors and Lunatics                                   215
Summary Proceedings/Procedure                                             216
Summary Judgment                                                          219
Saving of inherent powers of Court.                                       219
Commercial Courts Act, 2015                                               222
Commercial Courts                                                         223
Jurisdiction                                                              223
Determination of Specified Value                                          223
Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement                                  223
Appeals                                                                   224
Lesson Round-Up                                                           226
Glossary                                                                  227
Test Yourself                                                             228
List of Further Readings and References                                   228


                                                   LESSON 7
                               LAWS RELATING TO CRIME AND ITS PROCEDURE

Introduction                                                              230
Jurisdiction of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023                             231
The Stages of Crime                                                       233
Type of Punishments                                                       234

                                                                          (xix)
Difference between Fine and Penalty                                                           236

The Fundamental Elements of Crime                                                             237

Exception of mens rea                                                                         238

Corporate Body and mens rea                                                                   239

Cognizable Offence and Non-cognizable Offence                                                 239

Classes of Criminal Courts                                                                    240

Power of Courts                                                                               240

Inherent Powers of the Court                                                                  241

Arrest of Person                                                                              242

Procedure of Arrest                                                                           244

Summons and Warrants                                                                          246

Summons                                                                                       246

Service of summons on corporate bodies, firms, and societies                                  247

Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided/Substituted Service of Summons   247

Service of summons on Witness                                                                 248

Proclamation and Attachment                                                                   248

Summons to Produce                                                                            248

Search Warrant                                                                                249

Summary Trials                                                                                250

Compounding of Offences                                                                       251

Bail                                                                                          252

Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest (Anticipatory Bails)                253

Limitation for Taking Cognizance of Certain Offences                                          253

Commencement of the Period of Limitation                                                      254

Exclusion of time in certain cases                                                            254

Continuing Offences                                                                           254

Offences against Property                                                                     255

Theft                                                                                         256

Snatching                                                                                     258

Extortion                                                                                     258

Robbery                                                                                       259

Dacoity                                                                                       260

(xx)
Criminal Misappropriation of Property                                                                261

Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his death         263
Criminal breach of trust                                                                             263
Essential Ingredients of Criminal Breach of Trust                                                    264
Punishments for the criminal breach of trust                                                         265
Receiving Stolen Property                                                                            266
Cheating                                                                                             267
Cheating by personation                                                                              268
Fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property                                                        269
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among creditors   269
Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors                            269
Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of consideration    270
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property                                           270
Offences relating to Documents and Property Marks                                                    271
Forgery                                                                                              271
Punishment for Forgery                                                                               271
Offences relating to Property Mark                                                                   271
Defamation                                                                                           272
Punishment for defamation                                                                            274
Kinds of Defamation                                                                                  274
General Exceptions                                                                                   275
Right of Private Defence                                                                             278
Lesson Round-Up                                                                                      281
Glossary                                                                                             284
Test Yourself                                                                                        284
List of Further Readings and References                                                              284


                                                    LESSON 8
                                        LAW RELATING TO EVIDENCE

Introduction                                                                                         286
Judicial Proceedings                                                                                 286
Scheme of the Adhiniyam                                                                              287
Relevant Fact                                                                                        288

                                                                                                     (xxi)
Logical relevancy and legal relevancy                                                           288
Legal relevancy and admissibility                                                               288
Facts in Issue                                                                                  288
Facts in issue and issues of fact                                                               289
Classification of Relevant Facts                                                                289
Fundamental Rules                                                                               290
Closely Connected Facts                                                                         290
Admissions and Confessions                                                                      293
Opinion of Third Persons                                                                        300
Facts of which Evidence Cannot be Given (Privileged Communications)                             301
Oral Evidences                                                                                  302
Direct Evidence                                                                                 303
Documentary Evidences                                                                           303
Primary evidence                                                                                303
Secondary evidence                                                                              304
Presumptions                                                                                    305
Estoppel                                                                                        306
Principle of Estoppel                                                                           306
Different kinds of Estoppel                                                                     307
Electronic Evidence (E-Evidence)                                                                307
Admissibility of Electronic Records                                                             307
Treatment of activity regularly carried on over a period by means of one or more computers or   308
communication
Submission of certificate along with the electronic record                                      308
Lesson Round-Up                                                                                 309
Glossary                                                                                        310
Test Yourself                                                                                   310
List of Further Readings and References                                                         310


                                                   LESSON 9
                                        LAW RELATING TO LIMITATION

Introduction                                                                                    312
Computation of the Period of Limitation for Different Types of Suits                            312


(xxii)
Bar of Limitation                                                                  312
Extension of Time in Certain Cases                                                 313
Doctrine of Sufficient Cause                                                       313
Persons under Legal Disability                                                     316
Continuous Running of Time                                                         317
Computation of Period of Limitation                                                318
Effect of acknowledgement on the Period of Limitation                             322
Effect of Payment on Account of Debt or of Interest on Legacy                     323
Computation of Time Mentioned in Instruments                                      323
Acquisition of Ownership by Possession                                            324
Limitation and Writs Under the Constitution                                       324
The Schedule                                                                      325
Classification of Period of Limitation                                            340
Lesson Round-Up                                                                   340
Glossary                                                                           341
Test Yourself                                                                      341
List of Further Readings and References                                            341


                                                  LESSON 10
                       LAW RELATING TO ARBITRATION, MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION

Introduction                                                                      345
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996                                            345
Types of Arbitration                                                              346
Essentials of Arbitral Process                                                    347
Cases that do not fall under purview of arbitration                               347
Important Definitions                                                             347
Arbitration Agreement                                                             348
Power to Refer Parties to Arbitration where there is an Arbitration Agreement     350
Interim Measures by Court                                                          351
Number of Arbitrators                                                              351
Appointment of Arbitrators                                                        352
Power of Central Government to Amend Fourth Schedule                              356
Grounds for Challenge                                                             356

                                                                                 (xxiii)
Challenge Procedure                                                    357

Failure or Impossibility to Act as an Arbitrator                       357

Termination of Mandate and Substitution of Arbitrator                  358

Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction            359

Interim Measures Ordered by Arbitral Tribunal                          359

Equal Treatment of Parties                                             360

Place of Arbitration                                                   360

Commencement of Arbitral Proceedings                                   362

Statements of Claim and Defence                                        362

Hearings and Written Proceedings                                       362

Default of a Party                                                     363

Expert Appointed by Arbitral Tribunal                                  363

Court Assistance in Taking Evidence                                    364

Rules Applicable to Substance of Dispute                               364

Decision Making by Panel of Arbitrators                                365

Essential of Awards                                                    365

Arbitral Award                                                         365

Types of Arbitral Awards                                               366

Time Limit for Arbitral Award                                          367

Fast Track Procedure                                                   368

Settlement                                                             369

Form and Contents of Arbitral Award                                    369

Regime for Costs                                                       371

Termination of Proceedings                                             372

Correction and Interpretation of Award; Additional Award               372

Application for Setting Aside Arbitral Award                           373

Finality of Arbitral Awards and Enforcement                            374

Enforcement                                                            374

Appealable Orders                                                      375

Deposits                                                               376

Lien on Arbitral Award and Deposits as to Costs                        376

Arbitration Agreement not to be Discharged by Death of Party Thereto   377

(xxiv)
Provisions in case of Insolvency                                   377
Confidentiality of Information                                     377
Protection of action taken in Good Faith                           377
Limitations                                                        377
Arbitration Council of India (ACI)                                 378
Establishment and incorporation of Arbitration Council of India    378
Composition of Council                                             378
Duties and functions of Council                                    379
Enforcement of Certain Foreign Arbitral Awards                      381
New York Convention Awards                                         382
Geneva Convention Awards                                           384
Conciliation                                                       386
Mediation                                                           391
Mediation Act, 2023                                                393
Mediation under Various Laws                                       396
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)                               397
Areas in which ADR Works                                           398
Lesson Round-Up                                                    398
Glossary                                                           399
Test Yourself                                                      399
List of Further Readings and References                            400


                                                   LESSON 11
                                        RIGHT TO INFORMATION LAW

Introduction                                                       402
Right to Know                                                      402
The Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005                           403
Salient Features of the Act                                        403
Objective                                                          403
Obligations of Public Authority                                    405
Designation of Public Information Officers (PIO)                   406
Request for Obtaining Information                                  406
Duties of a PIO                                                    407

                                                                   (xxv)
Exemption from Disclosure                                                    409
Rejection of Request                                                         411
Partial Disclosure Allowed                                                   411
Who is excluded?                                                             411
Information Commissions                                                      411
Central Information Commission                                                411

Term of office and conditions of service of Central Information Commission   412
State Information Commission                                                 413

Term of office and conditions of service of State Information Commission     413
Powers of Information Commissions                                            414
Appellate Authorities                                                        415
Penalties                                                                    416
Jurisdiction of Courts                                                       416
Role of Central/State Governments                                            416
Lesson Round-Up                                                              418
Glossary                                                                     419
Test Yourself                                                                419
List of Further Readings and References                                      420


                                                 LESSON 12
                             LAW RELATING TO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

Introduction                                                                 422
Documents or Transactions to which the Act shall not Apply                   422
Definitions of Basic Expressions                                             423
Digital Signature and Electronic Signature                                   425
Electronic Governance (Legal Recognition of Electronic Records)              426
Retention of Information                                                     427
Audit of Documents Maintained in Electronic Form                             427
Publication of Subordinate Legislation in Electronic Gazette                 427
Validity of Contracts formed through Electronic Means                        428
Attribution and Dispatch of Electronic Records                               428
Time and Place of Dispatch Etc.                                              429
Secure Electronic Records and Signatures                                     429

(xxvi)
Certifying Authorities                                                                          430
Electronic Signature Certificates                                                               431
Penalties and Adjudications                                                                     432
Compensation for Failure to Protect Data                                                        433
Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.                                        433
Residuary Penalty                                                                               434
Power to adjudicate                                                                             434
Cyber Regulation Appellate Tribunal                                                             435
Offences                                                                                        435
Tampering with computer source documents                                                        435
Computer related offences                                                                       435
Extraterritorial operation                                                                      437
Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases                                       437
Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal     437
Data or Information) Rules, 2011
Law of Personal Data Protection                                                                 439
Lesson Round-Up                                                                                 442
Glossary                                                                                        443
Test Yourself                                                                                   443
List of Further Readings and References                                                         444


                                                     LESSON 13
                                                  CONTRACT LAW

Formation of an Agreement, Intention to create legal relationship                               446
Meaning and Nature of Contract                                                                  446
Agreements which are not Contracts                                                              447
Intention to Create Legal Relations                                                             448
Other Important Types of Contracts                                                              448
Essential Elements of a Valid Contract                                                          449
Kinds of offer, communication, acceptance and revocation of offer and acceptance                450
Offer or Proposal and Acceptance                                                                450
What is an Offer or a Proposal?                                                                 450
Kinds of Offers                                                                                 451


                                                                                              (xxvii)
Rules Governing Offers                                                   452
Offer and invitation to offer                                            453
Lapse of Offer                                                           453
Revocation of Offer by the Offeror                                       454
Mode of Revocation                                                       454
Acceptance                                                               454
Rules Governing Acceptance                                               454
Consideration                                                            455
Need for Consideration                                                   455
Doctrine of Privity of Contract and of Consideration                     456
Kinds of Consideration                                                   457
Rules Governing Consideration                                            458
Exceptions of Consideration                                              458
When Consideration not Necessary                                         458
Void, Voidable & Illegal Contracts: Flaws in Contract and Free Consent   460
Capacity to contract                                                     461
Misrepresentation                                                        467
Wilful Misrepresentation or Fraud                                        468
Coercion                                                                 469
Undue Influence                                                          469
Legality of Object                                                       470
Void and Illegal Contracts                                               471
Consequence of Illegal Agreements                                        471
Agreements Void as being Opposed to Public Policy                        472
Agreements in restraint of trade void                                    472
Wagering Agreements                                                      474
Void Agreements                                                          475
Restitution                                                              475
Certain relations Resembling Those of Contract (Quasi Contracts)         476
Nature of Quasi-Contracts                                                476
Suit for money had and received                                          477
Quantum Meruit                                                           477
Obligations of finder of lost goods                                      477


(xxviii)
Obligation of a person enjoying benefit of non-gratuitous act            477
Discharge or termination of contracts                                    478
Assignment                                                               479
Remedies for Breach of Contract                                          482
Contract of Indemnity and Guarantee (Sections 124 to 147)                486
Meaning of Indemnity                                                     486
Meaning of Contract of Guarantee                                         486
Distinction between Indemnity and Guarantee                              487
Extent of Surety’s Liability                                             487
Kinds of Guarantees                                                      488
Revocation of Continuing Guarantee                                       488
Rights of Surety                                                         488
Discharge of Surety                                                      489
Contract of Bailment and Pledge                                          489
Law of Agency                                                            494
Meaning of Authority Coupled with Interest                               499
Termination of Agency                                                    500
When Agency is Irrevocable                                               500
When Termination Takes Effect                                            500
Joint Venture/ Foreign Collaboration/Multinational Agreements            501
E-Contract                                                               502
Lesson Round-Up                                                          503
Test Yourself                                                            504
List of Further Readings and References                                  505


                                                 LESSON 14
                               LAW RELATING TO NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS

Definition of a Negotiable Instrument                                    508
Effect of Negotiability                                                  509
Important Characteristics of Negotiable Instruments                      509
Classification of Negotiable Instruments                                 509
Kinds of Negotiable Instruments                                           511
Parties to bills of exchange                                             512

                                                                        (xxix)
Distinction between Bill of Exchange and Promissory Note   513
Inland Bills                                               514
Foreign Bills                                              514
Trade Bill                                                 514
Accommodation Bill                                         514
Bills in Sets                                              515
Right to Duplicate Bill                                    515
Bank Draft                                                 515
Essentials of a Cheque                                     517
Banker                                                     518
Customer                                                   518
Liability of a Banker                                      518
When Banker must Refuse Payment                            519
When Banker may Refuse Payment                             519
Protection of Paying Banker                                519
Payment in due Course                                      520
Collecting Banker                                          520
Overdue, Stale or Out-of-date Cheques                      521
Liability of Endorser                                      521
Rights of Holder against Banker                            522
Modes of Crossing                                          522
Maturity                                                   524
Holder                                                     525
Holder in Due Course                                       525
Capacity of Parties                                        525
Liability of Parties                                       526
Negotiation                                                527
Negotiability and Assignability Distinguished              527
Importance of Delivery                                     527
Negotiation by Mere Delivery                               528
Negotiation by Endorsement and Delivery                    528
Endorsement                                                528
Classes of Endorsement                                     528


(xxx)
Negotiation Back                                                               529
Negotiation of Lost Instrument or that Obtained by Unlawful Means              530
Forged Endorsement                                                             530
Acceptance of a Bill of Exchange                                               530
Acceptance for Honour                                                          531
Presentment for Acceptance                                                     531
Presentment for Acceptance when Excused                                        532
Presentment for Payment                                                        532
Presentment for Payment when Excused                                           532
Dishonour and its Remedies                                                     533
Notice of Dishonour                                                            533
Noting and Protest                                                             534
Discharge                                                                      534
Discharge of the Instrument                                                    534
Discharge of a Party or Parties                                                534
Material Alteration                                                            535
Retirement of a Bill under Rebate                                              536
Hundis                                                                         536
Presumptions of Law                                                            537
Payment of Interest in case of dishonour                                       537
Penalties in case of dishonour of cheques                                      537
Dishonour of Cheque for Insufficiency, etc., of Funds in the Account           538
Presumption in Favour of Holder                                                539
Defence which may not be Allowed in any Prosecution under Section 138          539
Offences by Companies                                                          539
Cognizance of Offences                                                         541
Validation for Transfer of Pending Cases                                       542
Power of Court to try Cases Summarily                                          542
Power to Direct Interim Compensation                                           542
Mode of Service of Summons                                                     544
Evidence on Affidavit                                                          544
Offences to be Compoundable                                                    544
Power of Appellate Court to Order Payment Pending Appeal against Conviction    544


                                                                              (xxxi)
National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)   545
Lesson Round-Up                                                                   547
Glossary                                                                          547
Test Yourself                                                                     547
List of Further Readings and References                                           548


Test Paper                                                                        550




(xxxii)
Sources of Law
                                                                                               Lesson
                                                                                                 LESSON 1
Sources of Law
                                                                                                  1
 KEY CONCEPTS
 n Legislature n Codification of Law n Interpretation n Construction of provision(s) n Proviso n Stare Decisis
 n Jurisprudence n Natural Justice



 Learning Objectives
 To understand:
    Importance of law for the society
    How the law has evolved
    The legal theory propounded by various jurists and scholars and their criticisms
    Different School of Laws
    Origin of Indian Laws
    Custom as a Source of Law
    ‘Statute made law’ as Source of Law
    ‘Personal laws’ as a Source of Law
    Secondary Sources of Law
    The Genesis and coverage of mercantile laws



 Lesson Outline
        Introduction
        Meaning of Law
        Significance of Law
        Relevance of Law to Civil Society
        Jurisprudence and Legal theory
        Schools of Law
        Sources of Indian Law
        Mercantile or Commercial Law
        Lesson Round-Up
        Glossary
        Test Yourself
        List of Further Readings and References



                                                                                                            1
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Sources of Law


    The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
    and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
    Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
    Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
    unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 INTRODUCTION
The nature and meaning of law has been described by various jurists. However, there is no unanimity of opinion
regarding the true nature and meaning of law. The reason for lack of unanimity is that the subject has been
viewed and dealt with by different jurists at different times and from different point of views, that is to say, from
the point of view of nature, source, function and purpose of law, to meet the needs of some given period of legal
development. Therefore, it is not practicable to give a precise and definite meaning to law which may hold
good for all times to come. However, it is desirable to refer to some of the definitions given by different jurists
so as to clarify and amplify the term ‘law’. The various definitions of law propounded by legal theorists serve to
emphasize the different facets of law and build up a complete and rounded picture of the concept of law.

 MEANING OF LAW
The term law refers to specific and concrete laws. These laws are laid down by specific legal system. Example:
Indian Laws follow Indian legal system. It is precisely a body or cluster of rules and regulations promulgated
by governmental bodies. The purpose of making laws is to regulate the human activities and to define what is
permissible and what is not permissible.
In broader sense law refers to the whole process, or legal system which is applied by the governmental
personnel and bodies in society so as to establish and maintain peaceful and orderly relation between people.
Under the Constitution of India, the inclusive definition of the term “Law” and “Laws in force” has been provided
under Article 13(3). Which says:
     (a)   “Law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in
           the territory of India the force of law;
     (b)   “Laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the territory
           of India before the commencement of the Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding
           that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
Jurists/philosophers defined the term “Law” differently as for instance:
Ulpine defined Law as “the art or science of what is equitable and good”
Cicero said that Law is “the highest reason implanted in nature”
Justinian’s Digest defines Law as “the standard of what is just and unjust”
So, the meaning of law may differ from person to person but the purpose is to provide a set of rules for regulation
human conduct and maintain peaceful and orderly relations between people.

 SIGNIFICANCE OF LAW
The law, and the system through which it operates, has developed over many centuries into the present
combination of statutes, judicial decisions, customs and conventions. By examining the sources from which we
derive our laws and legal system, we gain some insight into the particular characteristics of our laws.
Law is not static. As circumstances and conditions in a society change, laws are also changed to fit the
requirements of society. At any given point of time, the prevailing law of a society must be in conformity with the
general statements, customs and aspirations of its people.

2
Sources of Law                                                                                                LESSON 1

Modern science and technology have unfolded vast prospects and have aroused new and big ambitions in
humans. Materialism and individualism are prevailing at all spheres of life. These developments and changes
have tended to transform the law patently and latently. Therefore, law has undergone a vast transformation –
conceptual and structural. The idea of abstract justice has been replaced by social justice.
The object of law is to form an order which in turn provides hope of security for the future. Law is expected to
provide socio-economic justice and remove the existing imbalances in the said structure and to play special
role in the task of achieving various socio-economic goals enshrined in our Constitution. It has to serve as a
vehicle of social change and as a harbinger of social justice.

 RELEVANCE OF LAW TO CIVIL SOCIETY
Numerous duties are carried out by law to assist civil society. These need to be differentiated in practise as well
as theory. The failure to draw the required distinctions—whether deliberate or unintentional—leads to the law’s
restriction, distorting, or suppression of civil society.
In actuality, for civil society to function to its full potential, an enabling legal environment is required. It promotes
and defends civic society. But only if it also supports and empowers. Due to the fact that it obstructs, restricts,
and even suppresses people’s freedoms, law has a poor reputation in many sectors of civil society.

 JURISPRUDENCE & LEGAL THEORY

 Jurisprudence
The word “Jurisprudence” is derived from the word ‘juris’ meaning law and ‘prudence’ meaning knowledge.
Jurisprudence is the study of the science of law. The study of law in jurisprudence is not about any particular
statute or a rule but of law in general, its concepts, its principles and the philosophies underpinning it. According
to B.E. King, jurisprudence is not concerned with the exposition of law but with disquisitions about law. For
example, substantive laws teach us about our right, duties and obligations and the procedural laws talk about
the legal process through which those rights can be enforced or obligations met but jurisprudence would go into
the analysis of what rights, duties and obligations are; how and why do they emerge in a society? Jurisprudence
also improves the use of law by drawing upon insights from other fields of study.
Different jurists/ legal philosophers have used the term in different ways. The meaning of ‘jurisprudence’ has
changed over a period of time as the boundaries of this discipline are not rigid. This amorphous nature is a
subject of intense controversy among the scholars. In England, ‘jurisprudence’ came close to mean almost
exclusively the analysis of the formal structure of law and its concepts because of the analytical exposition
done by Bentham and Austin who were its pioneers. But as dissatisfaction with their conception of law grew in
the later years and alternative conceptions were offered, the term ‘jurisprudence’ came to acquire a broader
meaning but a concrete delineation of the boundary of the subject has proved elusive.
Howsoever, the term jurisprudence is defined; it remains a study relating to law. The word ‘law’ itself is used to
refer more than one thing. Hence one of the first tasks of jurisprudence is to attempt to throw light on the nature
of law. However, various theorists define law in their own ways and this leads to a corresponding jurisprudential
study. For example, law has two fold aspect: it is an abstract body of rules and also a social machinery for
securing order in the community. However, the various schools of jurisprudence, instead of recognizing both
these aspects, emphasize on one or the other.
Analytical jurisprudence concentrates on abstract theory of law, trying to discover the elements of pure science
which will place jurisprudence on the sure foundation of objective factors which will be universally true, not on
the shifting sands of individual preference, of particular ethical or sociological views.
Sociological jurisprudence highlights the limitations of pure science of law and says that since the very purpose
for the existence of law is to furnish an answer to social problems, some knowledge of these problems is

                                                                                                                       3
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Sources of Law

necessary if one seeks to understand the nature of law. One can understand what a thing is only if one examines
what it does.
The teleological school of jurisprudence emphasizes that a mere collection of facts concerning social life is
of no avail. Law is the product of human reason and is intimately related to the notion of purpose. Hence, this
school seeks to find the supreme ends which law should follow.
According to Salmond in the widest of its applications the term jurisprudence means the science of law, using
the word law in that vague and general sense, in which it includes all species of obligatory rules of human
action. He said that jurisprudence in this sense can be further divided into three streams: civil jurisprudence,
international jurisprudence, and natural jurisprudence. In a slightly narrower sense, the term jurisprudence
applied to the study of the science of civil law. Civil jurisprudence was further divisible into systematic
jurisprudence (legal exposition), historical jurisprudence (legal history) and critical jurisprudence (science of
legislation). Jurisprudence, in its narrowest sense includes only a part of the science of the civil law, which can
also be called the science of the ‘first principles’ of civil law. These first principles are fundamental concepts and
principles which serve as the basis of concrete details of the law.
English jurist Jeremy Bentham had used ‘jurisprudence’ in two sense- one as ‘law’ referring to the substance and
interpretive history of a given legal norm, consisting of case laws, precedents, and other legal commentary and
the other as ‘theory’ or the study of general theoretical questions about the nature of laws and legal systems.
Jurisprudence in this use refers to a set of philosophical principles, or interpretive theories, for making sense
of laws. Bentham also distinguished between ‘expository’ and ‘censorial jurisprudence’. The former ascertains
what the law is, and the latter, what it ought to be. Bentham made a sub-division of expository jurisprudence,
distinguishing between its ‘authoritative’ and ‘unauthoritative’ modes- the first given by the state and the second
by any other authority.
Prof. Julius Stone defined ‘jurisprudence’ as the lawyer’s extraversion. According to him jurisprudence is
the lawyer’s examination of the precepts, ideals and techniques of the law in the light derived from present
knowledge in disciplines other than the law.
According to Prof. G.W. Paton, jurisprudence is founded on the attempt, not to find universal principles of law,
but to construct a science which will explain the relationship between law, its concepts, and the life of society.
Jurisprudence is not primarily interested in cataloguing uniformities, or in discovering rules which all nations
accept. In all communities which reach a certain stage of development there springs up a social machinery
which is called law and the task of jurisprudence is to study the nature of law, the nature of legal institutions,
the development of both the law and the legal institutions and their relationship to society. In each society
there is an interaction between the abstract rules, the institutional machinery existing for their application, and
the life of the people. Legal systems seem to have developed for the settlement of disputes and to secure an
ordered existence for the community. They still exist for those purposes but in addition they are part of the
social machinery used to enable planned changes and improvements in the organization of society to take
place in an ordered fashion. In order to achieve these ends each legal system develops a certain method, an
apparatus of technical words and concepts, and an institutional system which follows those methods and uses
that apparatus. The pressure of the social needs which the law must satisfy will vary from one community to
another and jurisprudence studies the methods by which these problems are solved, rather than particular
solutions.

 Legal Theory
Legal theory is a field of intellectual enterprise within jurisprudence that involves the development and analysis
of the foundations of law. Two most prominent legal theories are the normative legal theory and the positive
legal theory. Positive legal theory seeks to explain what the law is and why it is that way, and how laws affect
the world, whereas normative legal theories tell us what the law ought to be. There are other theories of law
like the sociological theory, economic theory, historical theory, critical legal theory as well.


4
Sources of Law                                                                                            LESSON 1

JEREMY BENTHAM
Jeremy Bentham was the pioneer of analytical jurisprudence in Britain. According to him ‘a law’ may be
defined as an assemblage of signs, declarative of volition, conceived or adopted by a sovereign in a state,
concerning the conduct to be observed in a certain case by a certain person or a class of persons, who in
the case in question are or are supposed to be subject to his power. Thus, Bentham’s concept of law is an
imperative one.
Bentham was of the initial contributors on the function that laws should perform in a society. He claimed that
nature has placed man under the command of two sovereigns- pain and pleasure. ‘Pleasure’ in Bentham’s theory
has a somewhat large signification, including altruistic and obligatory conduct, the ‘principle of benevolence’;
while his idea of ‘interest’ was anything promoting pleasure. The function of laws should be to bring about
the maximum happiness of each individual for the happiness of each will result in the happiness of all. The
justification for having laws is that they are an important means of ensuring happiness of the members of
community generally. Hence, the sovereign power of making laws should be wielded, not to guarantee the
selfish desires of individuals, but consciously to secure the common good.
Bentham said that every law may be considered in eight different respects:
    1.   Source: The source of a law is the will of the sovereign, who may conceive laws which he personally
         issues, or adopt laws previously issued by sovereigns or subordinate authorities, or he may adopt laws
         to be issued in future by subordinate authorities. Sovereign according to Bentham is any person or
         assemblage of person to whose will a whole political community is supposed to be in a disposition to
         pay obedience, and then in preference to the will of any other person.
   2.    Subjects: These may be persons or things. Each of these may be active or passive subjects, i.e., the
         agent with which an act commences or terminates.
   3.    Objects: The goals of a given law are its objects.
   4.    Extent: Direct extent means that a law covers a portion of land on which acts have their termination;
         indirect extent refers to the relation of an actor to a thing.
   5.    Aspects: Every law has ‘directive’ and a ‘sanctional’ part. The former concerns the aspects of the
         sovereign will towards an act-situation and the latter concerns the force of a law. The four aspects
         of the sovereign will are command, prohibition, non-prohibition and non-command and the whole
         range of laws are covered under it. These four aspects are related to each other by opposition and
         concomitancy.
   6.    Force: The motivation to obey a law is generated by the force behind the law.
   7.    Remedial appendage: These are a set of subsidiary laws addressed to the judges through which the
         judges cure the evil (compensation), stop the evil or prevent future evil.
   8.    Expression: A law, in the ultimate, is an expression of a sovereign’s will. The connection with will raises
         the problem of discovering the will from the expression.
Having listed the eight different respects through which a law can be considered, Bentham went on to analyse
the ‘completeness’ of law in jurisprudential sense. He said that a complete law would have the features of
integrality as well as unity. Integrality means that a law should be complete in expression, connection and
design. A law is complete in expression when the actual will of the legislation has been completely expressed.
A law is complete when various parts of it dealing with various aspects are well co-ordinated. If a law does
not cover a specific situation that it might have wanted to cover while being enacted, it is incomplete in design.
According to Bentham the unity of a law would depend upon the unity of the species of the act which is the
object of the law.

                                                                                                                  5
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Sources of Law

Criticism of Bentham’s theory of Law

    1.   Due to Bentham’s strait-jacketing of laws into an imperative theory- all laws have to be either command
         or permission, it does not take proper account of laws conferring power like the power to make contracts,
         create title etc.

    2.   Bentham did not give a fair treatment to custom as a source of law. He said customs could never be
         ‘complete’.

    3.   Bentham’s theory did not allow for judge made laws and hoped that such laws would be gradually
         eliminated by having ‘complete laws’.

    4.   To judge an action according to the pleasure- pain criterion is to judge it subjectively. The theory did
         not provide how a subjective criterion of pain and pleasure can be transmuted into an objective
         one.

    5.   It is not always true that an increase in the happiness of a certain segment of society will lead to
         an increase in the overall happiness level because it might be associated with a diminution in the
         happiness of some other rival section of the society.

JOHN AUSTIN

John Austin a noted English legal theorist was the first occupant of the chair of Jurisprudence at the University
of London. Austin is known for the Command Theory of law. Austin was a positivist, meaning that he concerned
himself on what the law was instead of going into its justness or fairness.

Austin differentiated between ‘Law properly so called’ and ‘laws improperly so called’ and said that laws
properly so called are general commands but not all of it is given by men for men. A specie ‘Laws properly so
called’ are given by political superiors to political inferiors.

According to Austin, law is the command of sovereign that is backed by sanction. Austin has propagated that
law is a command which imposes a duty and the failure to fulfil the duty is met with sanctions (punishment).
Thus Law has three main features:

    1.   It is a command.

    2.   It is given by a sovereign authority.

    3.   It has a sanction behind it.

In order to properly appreciate Austin’s theory of law, we need to understand his conception of command and
sovereign.

Command

It is an expression of wish or desire of an intelligent person, directing another person to do or to forbear from
doing some act, and the violation of this wish will be followed by evil consequences on the person so directed.
Command requires the presence of two parties- the commander (political superior) and the commanded
(political inferior).

Sovereign

In Austin’s theory, sovereign is politically and legally superior. He is independent, He has defined sovereign as
an authority that receives habitual obedience from the people but itself does not obey some other authority
habitually. According to Austin, the sovereign is the source of all laws.

6
Sources of Law                                                                                            LESSON 1

Sanction
It is the evil consequence that follows on the violation of a command. To identify a law, the magnitude of the
sanction is not relevant but the absence of sanction disentitles an expression of the sovereign from being a law
in Austinian sense. Sanction should not also be confused with a reward that might be on offer if a given conduct
is followed or refrained from. Reward confers a positive right whereas a sanction is a negative consequence.
Criticism of Austin’s Command Theory of Law
    1.   Welfare states pass a number of social legislations that do not command the people but confer rights
         and benefits upon them. Such laws are not covered under the command theory.
   2.    According to Austin the sovereign does not have to obey anyone but the modern states have their
         powers limited by national and international laws and norms. For example, the Government of India
         cannot make laws that are violative of the provisions of the Constitution of India.
   3.    Austin does not provide for judges made laws. He said that judges work under the tacit command of the
         sovereign but in reality judges make positive laws as well.
   4.    Since the presence of sovereign is a pre-requisite for a proposition to be called law, Austin did not
         recognize international laws as such because they are not backed by any sovereign.
JOHN WILLIAM SALMOND
John William Salmond was a law professor in New Zealand who later also served as a judge of the Supreme
Court of New Zealand. He made seminal contribution in the field of jurisprudence, law of torts and contracts law.
Salmond claimed that the purpose of law was the deliverance of justice to the people and in this sense he
differed from Bentham and Austin who went into the analysis of law as it stood without going into its purpose.
But Salmond also necessitated the presence of the state for implementation of laws just like Bentham and
Austin.
Salmond differentiated between ‘a law’ and ‘the law’ and said that the former refers to the concrete and the
latter to the abstract. According to him this distinction demands attention for the reason that the concrete term
is not co-extensive with the abstract in its application. In its abstract application we speak of civil law, the law
of defamation, criminal law etc. Similarly we use the phrases law and order, law and justice, courts of law. In its
concrete sense, on the other hand, we talk about specific laws like the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita or the Right to
Information Act. Law does not consist of the total number of laws in force.
According to Salmond law is the body of principles which are recognized and applied by the state in the
administration of justice. His other definition said that law consists of a set of rules recognized and acted on in
courts of justice. ‘Law’ in this definition is used in its abstract sense. The constituent elements of which the law
is made up are not laws but rules of law or legal principles.
Since law was defined by a reference to the administration of justice, it needs to be understood as well. Salmond
says that human experience has made it clear that some form of compulsion is required to maintain justice. It
is in the nature of things to have conflict, partly real, partly apparent, between the interests of man and man,
and between those of individuals and those of society at large; and men cannot be left to do what they believe
is right in their own eyes. Therefore, if a just society is to be maintained, it is necessary to add compulsion so
as to complement to walk on the desired path. Hence, there exists various regulative or coercive systems, the
purpose of which is the upholding and enforcement of right and justice by some instrument of external constraint.
One of the most important of such systems is the administration of justice by the state. The administration of
justice may therefore be defined as the maintenance of right within a political community by means of physical
force of the state. Another is the control exercised over men by the opinion of the society in which they live.
Censure, ridicule, contempt are the sanctions by which society (as opposed to the state) enforces the rules of
morality.

                                                                                                                  7
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Sources of Law

He argued that the administration of justice was the primary task of a state and the laws were made to achieve
that objective. Administration of justice was thus antecedent to the laws. Laws thus are secondary, accidental,
unessential. Law consists of the pre-established and authoritative rules which judges apply in the administration
of justice, to the exclusion of their own free will and discretion. Salmond further said that the administration
of justice is perfectly possible without laws though such a system is not desirable. A court with an unfettered
discretion in the absence of laws is capable of delivering justice if guided by equity and good conscience.
Salmond says that development and maturity of a legal system consists in the progressive substitution of
rigid pre-established principles for individual judgment, and to a very large extent these principles grow up
spontaneously within the courts themselves. That great aggregate of rules which constitutes a developed legal
system, is not a condition precedent of the administration of justice but a product of fit. Gradually from various
sources- precedent, custom, statute—there is a collected body of fixed principles which the courts apply to the
exclusion of their private judgment. Justice becomes increasingly justice according to law, and courts of justice
become increasingly courts of law.
Criticism of Salmond’s theory
    1.   Salmond’s assertion that justice is the end and law is only a medium to realize it does not always hold
         true because there are a number of laws that can be called ‘unjust’.
    2.   The pursuit of justice is not the only purpose of law, the law of any period serves many ends and these
         ends themselves change with the passage of time.
    3.   There is a contradiction when Salmond says that the purpose of law is the administration of justice but
         limits ‘jurisprudence’ to the study of the ‘first principles’ of civil law of a national legal system because
         justice is a universal concept, the jurisprudential analysis of law should not be constrained by national
         boundaries.
ROSCOE POUND
Roscoe Pound a distinguished American legal scholar was a leading jurist of 20th century and was one of
the biggest proponents of sociological jurisprudence which emphasized taking into account of social facts in
making, interpretation and application of laws.
Roscoe Pound drew a similarity between the task of a lawyer and an engineer and gave his theory of social
engineering. The goal of this theory was to build such a structure of society where the satisfaction of wants
of maximum was achieved with the minimum of friction and waste. Such a society according to Roscoe Pound
would be an ‘efficient’ society. Realisation of such a social structure would require balancing of competing
interests. Roscoe Pound defined interests as claims or wants or desires which men assert de facto, and about
which law must do something, if organised societies are to endure. For any legal order to be successful in
structuring an efficient society, there has to be:
    1.   A recognition of certain interests- individual, public and social.
    2.   A definition of the limits within which such interest will be legally recognized and given effect to.
    3.   Securing of those interests within the limits as defined.
According to Roscoe Pound, for determining the scope and the subject matter of the legal system, following five
things are required to be done:
    1.   Preparation of an inventory of interests and their classification.
    2.   Selection of the interests which should be legally recognized.
    3.   Demarcation of the limits of securing the interest so selected.


8
Sources of Law                                                                                                LESSON 1

   4.    Consideration of the means whereby laws might secure the interests when these have been
         acknowledged and delimited, and
   5.    Evolution of the principles of valuation of interests.
Roscoe Pound’s classification of interests are as follows:
    1.   Individual interest: These are claims or demands determined from the standpoint of individual’s life
         and concern. They are-
          (i) Interest of personality: This includes physical integrity, freedom of will, honour and reputation,
              privacy and freedom of conscience.
          (ii)   Interest in domestic relations: This includes relationships of parents, children, husbands and
                 wives.
         (iii)   Interest of substance: This includes interests of property, freedom of association, freedom of
                 industry and contract, continuity of employment, inheritance and testamentary succession.
   2.    Public interest: These interests are asserted by individual from the standpoint of political life. They are:
          (i) Interests of the state as a juristic person: It includes integrity, freedom of action and honour of
              the state’s personality, claims of the politically organized society as a corporation to property
              acquired and held for corporate purposes.
          (ii)   Interests of the state as guardian of social interest.
   3.    Social interests: These are claims or demands thought of in terms of social life and generalized as
         claims of the social group. It is from the point of view of protecting the general interest of all members
         of the society. Social interests include-
          (i) Social interest in the general security: This includes general safety, peace and order, general
              health, security of acquisition and transaction.
          (ii)   Social interest in the security of social institutions such as domestic, religious, political and
                 economic institutions.
         (iii)   Social interest in general morals like laws dealing with prostitution, gambling, bigamy, drunkenness.
         (iv) Social interest in the conservation of social resources like the natural and human resource.
              This social interest clashes to some extent with the individual interest in dealing with one’s own
              property as on pleases.
          (v)    Social interest in general progress. It has three aspects- economic, political and cultural.
         (vi) Social interest in individual life. It involves self-assertion, opportunity and conditions of life. Society
              is interested in individual life because individuals are its building blocks.
Having given various interest recognized by law, Roscoe Pound applied himself to figure out to balance
competing interests. He said that interests should be weighed on the same plane. According to him one cannot
balance an individual interest against a social interest, since that very way of stating them may reflect a decision
already made. Thus all the interests should be transferred to the same place, most preferably to the social
plane, which is the most general, for any meaningful comparison.
Criticism of Roscoe Pound’s theory of law
    1.   Pound said that interest pre-exist laws and the function of legal system should be to achieve a balance
         between competing interests but we see that a lot of interests today are a creation of laws.


                                                                                                                       9
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Sources of Law

     2.   The theory does not provide any criteria for the evaluation of interest. It is not interests as such, but
          the yardstick with reference to which they are measured that matter. It may happen that some interest
          is treated as an ideal in itself by a society, in which case it, not as an interest, but as an ideal that
          determine the relative importance between it and other interests.

     3.   Pound’s theory of balancing interests can be effectuated most effectively by judges because the
          judges get to translate the activity involved in the cases before them in terms of interests and select the
          ideal with reference to which the competing interests are to be measured. Thus his theory gives more
          importance to judiciary in comparison to the legislature.

     4.   Pound’s distinction between Public and Social interests is doubtful and even the distinction between
          Individual and Social Interest is of minor significance. It is the ideal with reference to which any
          interest is considered that matters, not so much the interest itself, still less the category in which it
          is placed.

     5.   The recognition of a new interest is a matter of policy. The mere presence of a list of interests is,
          therefore, of limited assistance in helping to decide a given dispute.

PROF. HLA HART

Prof. HLA Hart, British Legal Philosopher listed many meanings associated with the term ‘positivism’ as follows:

     l    Laws are commands.

     l    The analysis of legal concepts is

           a)   worth pursuing,

           b)   distinct from sociological and historical enquiries into law, and

           c)   distinct from critical evaluation.

     l    Decisions can be deduced logically from predetermined rules without recourse to social aims, policy or
          morality.

     l    Moral judgments cannot be established or defended by rational argument, evidence or proof.

     l    The law as it is laid down should be kept separate from the law that ought to be.

Positivism is most commonly understood as the fifth description above. Natural law theory claims that a proposition is
‘law’ not merely because it satisfies some formal requirement, but by virtue of an additional minimum moral content.
According to it, an immoral rule cannot be ‘law’ even if it satisfies all the formal requirements.

HANS KELSEN

Hans Kelsen was an Austrian philosopher and jurist who is known for his ‘Pure Theory of Law’. Kelsen believed
that the contemporary study and theories of law were impure as they were drew upon from various other fields
like religion and morality to explain legal concepts. Kelsen, like Austin was a positivist, in that he focused his
attention on what the law was and divested moral, ideal or ethical elements from law. He discarded the notion
of justice as an essential element of law because many laws, though not just, may still continue as law.

Kelsen described law as a “normative science’ as distinguished from natural sciences which are based on cause
and effect, such as law of gravitation. The laws of natural science are capable of being accurately described,
determined and discovered whereas the science of law is knowledge of what law ought to be. Like Austin,
Kelsen also considered sanction as an essential element of law but he preferred to call it ‘norm’. According to
Kelsen, ‘law is a primary norm which stipulates sanction’.


10
Sources of Law                                                                                              LESSON 1

According to Kelsen, ‘norm (sanction) is rules forbidding or prescribing a certain behaviour’. He saw legal order
as the hierarchy of norms having sanction, and jurisprudence was the study of these norms which comprised
legal order. Kelsen distinguished moral norm with legal norm and said that though moral norms are ‘ought’
prepositions, a violation of it does not have any penal fallout. The ‘ought’ in the legal norm refers to the sanction
to be applied for violation of law.

According to Kelsen, we attach legal-normative meaning to certain actions and not to others depending
on whether that event is accorded any legal-normative by any other legal norm. This second norm gains
its validity from some other norm that is placed above it. The successive authorizations come to an end at
the highest possible norm which was termed by Kelsen as ‘Grundnorm’. Thus, Kelsen’s pure theory of law
is based on pyramidical structure of hierarchy of norms which derive their validity from the basic norm.
Grundnorm or basic norm determines the content and gives validity to other norms derived from it. Under
Kelsen’s pure theory, the Grundnorm does not derive its validity from any other norm and its validity must
be presupposed. In his view the basic norm is the result of social, economic, political and other conditions
and it is supposed to be valid by itself.

The legal order as conceived by Kelsen receives its unity from the fact that the multiple norms which make
the legal system can be traced back to a final source. This final source is the basic norm or the Grundnorm he
which defined as “the postulated ultimate rule according to which the norms of this order are established and
annulled, receive or lose their validity. For example, in India a statue or law is valid because it derives its legal
authority from being duly passed by the Parliament and receiving the accent of the President, the Parliament
and the President, derive their authority from a norm i.e., the Constitution. As to the question from where does
the Constitution derive its validity there is no answer and, therefore, it is the Grundnorm, according to Kelsen’s
conception of pure theory of law.

Grundnorms are generally followed by the Superior Norms. Superior norms are laws which govern the
subordinate laws. They are inferior to Grundnorm but superior to subordinate laws. Whereas Subordinate Norm
are derived or made to assist the superior norm. These norms derives their justification from superior norm.




Criticism of Kelsen’s Pure Theory
    1.   It is difficult to trace ‘grundnorm’ in every legal system. Also, there is no rule or yardstick to measure the
         effectiveness of grundnorm. All that Kelsen maintained was that the grundnorm imparts validity as long
         as the ‘total legal order’ remains effective, which he later revised to ‘by and large’ effective. He did not
         give any measure of ‘total’ and ‘by and large’.
   2.    The Pure Theory also did not give the timeframe for which the effectiveness should hold for the
         requirement of validity to be satisfied. Validity is a matter to be determined in the context of a given
         point of time and depends on what judges are prepared to accept at that moment as imparting law-
         quality.


                                                                                                                    11
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Sources of Law

     3.   Kelsen’s theory ceases to be ‘pure’ the moment one tries to analyse the grundnorm because then one
          will have to draw upon subjects other than law like sociology, history and morality.
     4.   International law does not sit well with Kelsen’s Pure theory. He advocated a monist view of the relationship
          between international and municipal law and declared that the grundnorm of the international system
          postulated the primacy of international law. The actual experience has been to the contrary and the
          countries of the world mostly give primacy to municipal laws over international laws.

 SCHOOLS OF LAW

 Natural School of Law
Natural law says that certain rights are inherent by virtue of human nature and can be understood universally
through human reason. The law of nature, divine law, or the law that exists in all of nature is how the natural
school of law is typically understood. Though it was made by man, it is discovered via each person’s unique
personality. Religion has a significant influence on it. The fundamental tenet of this philosophy is that human
law can be judged for its applicability in light of a higher moral rule. There is a notion that certain moral laws
cannot be violated without retaining their moral or legal status. There is a fundamental link between morality
and the law under this theory.
This school of law is divided into four theories:
     1.   Ancient Theory
     2.   Medieval Theory
     3.   Renaissance Theory
     4.   Modern theory
1. ANCIENT THEORY
There were two groups of philosophers. Under this school fall most of the ancient definitions given by Roman
and other ancient jurists.
     a)   Roman philosopher
     b)   Greek philosopher
Roman Philosophers
Ulpine defined Law as “the art or science of what is equitable and good.”
Cicero said that Law is “the highest reason implanted in nature.”
Justinian’s Digest defines Law as “the standard of what is just and unjust.”
In all these definitions, propounded by Romans, “justice” is the main and guiding element of law.
     a)   Heraclitus – He was one of the first Greek philosopher who identified three main features of law of
          nature- destiny, reason and order. He stated that all these three elements are interconnected and inter-
          related.
     b)   Socrates – He was a prominent Stoic philosopher. He was of the view that just like Natural moral law,
          there is also ‘human insight’. Human sights is what helps a man to distinguish between good and bad.
     c)   Plato – He was the disciple of Socrates and his theory on natural law was characterized by two main
          aspects – wisdom and reason.


12
Sources of Law                                                                                            LESSON 1

   d)    Aristotle – He defined natural law as a ‘reason unaffected by desires’, inherent nature of man, human
         insight and all this together shape the human will and articulate the actions, justice and morality at the
         core level.

2. MEDIEVAL THEORY

Medieval Theory is based on the theological idea i.e the God. This stage provide a divine based law i.e law of
nature is then law of God. And the law of god is actually the true Dharma connecting law with that of god. Thus,
‘law’ is a part of “Dharma”. The major exponents of were-

Thomas Aquinas – He is the major exponent of this theory. He categorized the law into 4 categories:

    1)   Law of God or Lex Aeterna

   2)    Natural Law or Lex Naturalis

   3)    Divine Law

   4)    Human Law

3. RENAISSANCE THEORY

This theory is marked by rationalism. Reason is the main foundation of this theory. It has two distinct features –

    l    More secular, political and was founded on human reasons

    l    It advocates natural rights of a man and the state.

Major proponents if this era were –

    1.   Hugo Grotius – He built his theory on ‘social contract’. Accordingly to him the duty of sovereign is to
         safeguard its citizens. The sovereign is bound by natural law.

   2.    Immanuel Kant – He states that a man is guided by his own conscience. According to him, natural law
         is not only based on reason but right reason.

4. MODERN THEORY

This modern theory rejects then older theories and conceptions. This theory was a Revival of Natural law.
Revival was a reaction against the positive and historical approaches but in a modified manner. Stammler, Rawl,
Fuller, are major propounder of this theory.

Stammler stated that law of nature means the just law, with harmonious purposes in the society.

 Analytical School of Law
The major exponent of this school was English jurist John Austin. He perceived and considered law in its
present form and not what it should be. This school of jurisprudence is also known as the positivist school of law.

According to John Austin, “Law is the aggregate of rules set by man as politically superior, or sovereign, to men
as political subject.” In other words, law is the “command of the sovereign”. It obliges a certain course of conduct
or imposes a duty and is backed by a sanction. Thus, the command, duty and sanction are the three elements
of law.

Hans Kelsen gave a ‘pure theory of law’. According to him, law is a ‘normative science’. The legal norms are
‘Ought’ norms as distinct from ‘Is’ norms of physical and natural sciences. Law does not attempt to describe what


                                                                                                                 13
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Sources of Law

actually occurs but only prescribes certain rules. The science of law to Kelsen is the knowledge of hierarchy of
normative relations. All norms derive their power from the ultimate norm called ‘Grundnorm’.




Grundnorm – It is the fundamental law of land also known as superior law. Every other law has to adhere to
this law.
Superior Norm – It is those laws which govern the subordinate laws. They are inferior to Supreme law but
superior to subordinate law.
Subordinate Norm –Laws which are derived or made to assist the superior norm. These norms derives their
justification from superior norm.

 Historical School of Law
The propounders of this school believes that the origin, formation & development of law is the outcome of
historical & evolutionary forces. The law originates from long drawn process of customs, ongoing conventions,
social habits, traditions etc.
Von Savigny’s theory of law can be summarised as follows:
     –   That law is a matter of unconscious and organic growth. Therefore, law is found and not made.
     –   Law is not universal in its nature. Like language, it varies with people and age.
     –   Custom not only precedes legislation but it is superior to it. Law should always conform to the popular
         consciousness.
     –   Law has its source in the common consciousness (Volkgeist) of the people.
     –   Legislation is the last stage of law making, and, therefore, the lawyer or the jurist is more important than
         the legislator.
According to Sir Henry Maine, “The word ‘law’ has come down to us in close association with two notions, the
notion of order and the notion of force”.

 Philosophical/Ethical School
The exponents of this school believe that law and ethical values are co-related. The law, in order to command
respect in society must have an element of ethical value and ethical purpose. It considers law as a means to
achieve its end by which individual will is to harmonize with the general will.


14
Sources of Law                                                                                              LESSON 1

According to Hugo Grotius states that the rules of human conduct emerged from the right reason and therefore,
they receive public support of the community.
Hegel believed that the purpose of making law is to reconcile the conflicting egos in the society. Law is the
means to achieve human perfection and to secure individual liberty in the society.

 Sociological School of Law
This school focuses on the effect of law and society on none another. This school treats law as a social
phenomenon. It is a synthesis of philosophy, psychology, history, social science etc with law.
Duguit defines law as “essentially and exclusively a social fact.”
Ihering defines law as “the form of the guarantee of the conditions of life of society, assured by State’s power of
constraint”. There are three essentials of this definition. First, in this definition law is treated as only one means
of social control. Second, law is to serve social purpose. Third, it is coercive in character.
Roscoe Pound analysed the term “law” in the 20th century background as predominantly an instrument of
social engineering in which conflicting pulls of political, philosophy, economic interests and ethical values
constantly struggled for recognition against background of history, tradition and legal technique. Roscoe Pound
thinks of law as a social institution to satisfy social wants – the claims and demands and expectations involved
in the existence of civilised society by giving effect to as much as may be satisfied or such claims given effect
by ordering of human conduct through politically organised society.

 Realist School of Law
Realists define law in terms of judicial process.
According to Holmes, “Law is a statement of the circumstances in which public force will be brought to bear upon
through courts.” According to Cardozo, “A principle or rule of conduct so established as to justify a prediction
with reasonable certainty that it will be enforced by the courts if its authority is challenged, is a principle or rule
of law.”
From the above definitions, it follows that law is nothing but a mechanism of regulating the human conduct in
society so that the harmonious co-operation of its members increases. It thereby avoids the ruin by coordinating
the divergent conflicting interests of individuals and of society which, in its turn, enhances the potentialities and
viability of the society as a whole. The State, in order to maintain peace and order in society, formulates certain
rules of conduct to be followed by people. These rules of conduct are called ‘laws’.
To summarise, following are the main characteristics of law and a definition to become universal one, must
incorporate all these elements:
    –   Law pre-supposes a State
    –   The State makes or authorizes to make, or recognizes or sanctions rules which are called law
    –   For the rules to be effective, there are sanctions behind them
    –   These rules (called laws) are made to serve some purpose. The purpose may be a social purpose, or it
        may be simply to serve some personal ends of a despot.
Separate rules and principles are known as ‘laws’. Such laws may be mandatory, prohibitive or permissive. A
mandatory law calls for affirmative act, as in the case of law requiring the payment of taxes. A prohibitive law
requires negative conduct, as in the case of law prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapon or running a
lottery. A permissive law is one which neither requires nor forbids action, but allows certain conduct on the part
of an individual if he desires to act.

                                                                                                                    15
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Sources of Law

Laws are made effective:




 SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW
The expression “sources of law” has been used to convey different meanings. There are as many interpretations
of the expression “sources of law” as there are schools and theories about the concept of law. The general
meaning of the word “source”is origin. There is a difference of opinion among the jurists about the origin of law.
Austin contends that law originates from the sovereign. Savigny traces the origin in Volkgeist (general
consciousness of the people). The sociologists find law in numerous heterogeneous factors. For theologians,
law originates from God. Vedas and the Quran which are the primary sources of Hindu and Mohammedan
Law respectively are considered to have been revealed by God. Precisely, whatever source of origin may be
attributed to law, it has emanated from almost similar sources in most of the societies.
The modern Indian law as administered in courts is derived from various sources and these sources fall under
the following two heads:
     i.    Primary sources of Indian Laws.
     ii.   Secondary sources of Indian Laws.

 PRIMARY SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW




 1. Customs or Customary Law
As per Collins Dictionary, A custom is an activity, a way of behaving, or an event which is usual or traditional in
a particular society or in particular circumstances.
Custom is the most ancient of all the sources of law and has held the most important place in the past, though
its importance is now diminishing with the growth of legislation and precedent.

16
Sources of Law                                                                                         LESSON 1

A study of the ancient law shows that in primitive society, the lives of the people were regulated by customs
which developed spontaneously according to circumstances. It was felt that a particular way of doing things
was more convenient than others. When the same thing was done again and again in a particular way, it
assumed the form of custom.
Customs have played an important role in moulding the ancient Hindu Law. Most of the law given in Smritis and
the commentaries had its origin in customs. The Smritis have strongly recommended that the customs should
be followed and recognised. Customs worked as a re-orienting force in Indian Law.

 Examples

 Constitution of India

 Article 13 of the Constitution of India defines the term “Law”. The definition is as under:

 “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the
 territory of India the force of law.

 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955

 Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (HMA) has given ample examples of recognizing the customary laws. Few examples
 are as under:

 According to:

     –    Section 7 HMA, a Hindu marriage may be solemnized in accordance with the customary rites and
          ceremonies of either party.

     –    Section 29(2) HMA, Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right recognised by
          custom.

Classification of Customs
Customs may be divided into two classes:
    –    Customs without sanction.
    –    Customs having sanction.
Customs without sanction are those customs which are non-obligatory and are observed due to the pressure of
public opinion. These are called as “positive morality”.
Customs having sanction are those customs which are enforced by the State. It is with these customs that we
are concerned here. These may be divided into two classes: (i) Legal, and (ii) Conventional.
   (i)   Legal Customs: These customs operate as a binding rule of law. They have been recognised and
         enforced by the courts and therefore, they have become a part of the law of land. Legal customs are
         again of two kinds: (a) Local Customs (b) General Customs.
         (a)   Local Customs: Local custom is the custom which prevails in some definite locality and constitutes
               a source of law for that place only. But there are certain sects or communities which take their
               customs with them wherever they go. They are also local customs. Thus, local customs may be
               divided into two classes:
                 –   Geographical Local Customs

                                                                                                              17
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Sources of Law

                    –   Personal Local Customs
		 These customs are law only for a particular locality, section or community.
             (b)   General Customs: A general custom is that which prevails throughout the country and constitutes
                   one of the sources of law of the land. The Common Law in England is equated with the general
                   customs of the realm.
     (ii)    Conventional Customs: These are also known as “usages”. These customs are binding due to an agreement
             between the parties, and not due to any legal authority independently possessed by them. Before a Court
             treats the conventional custom as incorporated in a contract, following conditions must be satisfied:
              –    It must be shown that the convention is clearly established and it is fully known to the contracting
                   parties. There is no fixed period for which a convention must have been observed before it is
                   recognised as binding.
              –    Convention cannot alter the general law of the land.
              –    It must be reasonable.
		           Like legal customs, conventional customs may also be classified as general or local. Local conventional
             customs are limited either to a particular place or market or to a particular trade or transaction.
Requisites of a Valid Custom
A custom will be valid at law and will have a binding force only if it fulfills the following essential conditions:
      (i)    Immemorial (Antiquity): A custom to be valid must be proved to be immemorial; it must be ancient.
		 According to Blackstone, “A custom, in order that it may be legal and binding must have been used so
   long that the memory of man runs not to the contrary, so that, if any one can show the beginning of it, it
   is no good custom”. English Law places a limit to legal memory to reach back to the year of accession
   of Richard I in 1189 as enough to constitute the antiquity of a custom. In India, the English Law regarding
   legal memory is not applied. All that is required to be proved is that the alleged custom is ancient.
     (ii)    Certainty: The custom must be certain and definite, and must not be vague and ambiguous.
     (iii)   Reasonableness: A custom must be reasonable. It must be useful and convenient to the society. A
             custom is unreasonable if it is opposed to the principles of justice, equity and good conscience.
     (iv)    Compulsory Observance: A custom to be valid must have been continuously observed without any
             interruption from times immemorial and it must have been regarded by those affected by it as an
             obligatory or binding rule of conduct.
     (v)     Conformity with Law and Public Morality: A custom must not be opposed to morality or public policy
             nor must it conflict with statute law. If a custom is expressly forbidden by legislation and abrogated by
             a statute, it is inapplicable.
     (vi)    Unanimity of Opinion: The custom must be general or universal. If practice is left to individual choice,
             it cannot be termed as custom.
  (vii)      Peaceable Enjoyment: The custom must have been enjoyed peaceably without any dispute in a law
             court or otherwise.
 (viii)      Consistency: There must be consistency among the customs. Custom must not come into conflict with
             the other established customs.




18
Sources of Law                                                                                             LESSON 1

 2. Judicial Decision or Precedents
In general use, the term “precedent” means some set pattern guiding the future conduct. In the judicial field, it
means the guidance or authority of past decisions of the courts for future cases. Only such decisions which lay
down some new rule or principle are called judicial precedents.
Judicial precedents are an important source of law. They have enjoyed high authority at all times and in all
countries. This is particularly so in the case of England and other countries which have been influenced by
English jurisprudence. The principles of law expressed for the first time in court decisions become precedents to
be followed as law in deciding problems and cases identical with them in future. The rule that a court decision
becomes a precedent to be followed in similar cases is known as doctrine of stare decisis.
The reason why a precedent is recognised is that a judicial decision is presumed to be correct. The practice of
following precedents creates confidence in the minds of litigants. Law becomes certain and known and that in
itself is a great advantage. Administration of justice becomes equitable and fair.
High Courts
   (i)    The decisions of High Court are binding on all the subordinate courts and tribunals within its jurisdiction.
		 The decisions of one High Court have only a persuasive value in a court which is within the jurisdiction
   of another High Court. But if such decision is in conflict with any decision of the High Court within whose
   jurisdiction that court is situated, it has no value and the decision of that High Court is binding on the
   court.
		 In case of any conflict between the two decisions of co-equal Benches, generally the later decision is
   to be followed.
   (ii)   In a High Court, a single judge constitutes the smallest Bench. A Bench of two judges is known as
          Division Bench. Three or more judges constitute a Full Bench. A decision of such a Bench is binding on
          a Smaller Bench.
		        One Bench of the same High Court cannot take a view contrary to the decision already given by another
          co- ordinate Bench of that High Court. Though decision of a Division Bench is wrong, it is binding on a
          single judge of the same High Court.
		 Thus, a decision by a Bench of the High Court should be followed by other Benches unless they have
   reason to differ from it, in which case the proper course is to refer the question for decision by a Full
   Bench.
  (iii)   The High Courts are the Courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction. Therefore, the decision of one High Court is
          not binding on the other High Courts and have persuasive value only.
		 Pre-Constitution (1950) Privy Council decisions are binding on the High Courts unless overruled by the
   Supreme Court.
  (iv)    The Supreme Court is the highest court and its decisions are binding on all courts and other judicial
          tribunals of the country. Article 141 of the Constitution makes it clear that the law declared by the
          Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India. The words “law declared”
          includes an obiter dictum provided it is upon a point raised and argued (Bimladevi v. Chaturvedi, AIR
          1953 All. 613).
However, it does not mean that every statement in a judgement of the Supreme Court has the binding effect.
Only the statement of ratio of the judgement is having the binding force.


                                                                                                                   19
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Sources of Law

Supreme Court
The expression ‘all courts’ used in Article 141 refers only to courts other than the Supreme Court. Thus, the
Supreme Court is not bound by its own decisions. However, in practice, the Supreme Court has observed that
the earlier decisions of the Court cannot be departed from unless there are extraordinary or special reasons to
do so. If the earlier decision is found erroneous and is thus detrimental to the general welfare of the public, the
Supreme Court will not hesitate in departing from it.
English decisions have only persuasive value in India. The Supreme Court is not bound by the decisions of Privy
Council or Federal Court. Thus, the doctrine of precedent as it operates in India lays down the principle that
decisions of higher courts must be followed by the courts subordinate to them. However, higher courts are not
bound by their own decisions (as is the case in England).
Kinds of Precedents
Precedents may be classified as:




     i.    Declaratory and Original Precedents: According to Salmond, a declaratory precedent is one which is
           merely the application of an already existing rule of law. An original precedent is one which creates
           and applies a new rule of law. In the case of a declaratory precedent, the rule is applied because it is
           already a law. In the case of an original precedent, it is law for the future because it is now applied. In
           the case of advanced countries, declaratory precedents are more numerous. The number of original
           precedents is small but their importance is very great. They alone develop the law of the country. They
           serve as good evidence of law for the future. A declaratory precedent is as good a source of law as an
           original precedent. The legal authority of both is exactly the same.

            Example :
            “Vishaka Guidelines” were stipulated by the Supreme Court of India, in Vishaka and others v. State
            of Rajasthan case in 1997, regarding prevention of sexual harassment at workplace. They acted as
            precedent for many cases during 1997 to 2013.

     ii.   Persuasive Precedents: A persuasive precedent is one which the judges are not obliged to follow but
           which they will take into consideration and to which they will attach great weight as it seems to them to
           deserve. A persuasive precedent, therefore, is not a legal source of law; but is regarded as a historical


20
Sources of Law                                                                                              LESSON 1

          source of law. Thus, in India, the decisions of one High Court are only persuasive precedents in the
          other High Courts. The rulings of the English and American Courts are persuasive precedents only.
          Obiter dicta also have only persuasive value.

           Example :
           The decision of one High Court may not binding on other High Court. But the decisions can give
           a principle which may be helpful for the other High Court. So these type of decisions will have
           persuasive value. The other High Court may or may not follow the principle of the decision.

   iii.   Absolutely Authoritative Precedents: An authoritative precedent is one which judges must follow
          whether they approve of it or not. Its binding force is absolute and the judge’s discretion is altogether
          excluded as he must follow it. Such a decision has a legal claim to implicit obedience, even if the judge
          considers it wrong. Unlike a persuasive precedent which is merely historical, an authoritative precedent
          is a legal source of law.

		Absolutely authoritative precedents in India: Every court in India is absolutely bound by the decisions
  of courts superior to itself. The subordinate courts are bound to follow the decisions of the High
  Court to which they are subordinate. A single judge of a High Court is bound by the decision
  of a bench of two or more judges. All courts are absolutely bound by decisions of the Supreme
  Court.

		 In England decisions of the House of Lords are absolutely binding not only upon all inferior courts but
   even upon itself. Likewise, the decisions of the Court of Appeal are absolutely binding upon itself.

           Example :
           The decisions of Higher Court are authoritatively binding on the lower courts.

		Question: An absolutely authoritative precedent is one which the judges are not obliged to follow.
		         Options : (a) True (b) False.

    iv.   Conditionally Authoritative Precedents: A conditionally authoritative precedent is one which,
          though ordinarily binding on the court before which it is cited, is liable to be disregarded in certain
          circumstances. The court is entitled to disregard a decision if it is a wrong one, i.e., contrary to law and
          reason.


           Example :
           In India, for instance, the decision of a single Judge of the High Court is absolutely authoritative so
           far as subordinate judiciary is concerned, but it is only conditionally authoritative when cited before
           a Division Bench of the same High Court.

Doctrine of Stare Decisis
The doctrine of stare decisis means “adhere to the decision and do not unsettle things which are established”.
It originated from latin term which means “to abide by things decided” It is a useful doctrine intended to bring
about certainty and uniformity in the law. Under the stare decisis doctrine, a principle of law which has become
settled by a series of decisions generally is binding on the courts and should be followed in similar cases. In
simple words, the principle means that like cases should be decided alike. This rule is based on public policy.
Although doctrine should be strictly adhered to by the courts, it is not universally applicable. The doctrine

                                                                                                                    21
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Sources of Law

should not be regarded as a rigid and inevitable doctrine which must be applied at the cost of justice. It is a
legal doctrine that obligates courts to follow historical cases (precedents) while making ruling in similar cases.
Ratio Decidendi
The underlying principle of a judicial decision, which is only authoritative, is termed as ratio decidendi. The
proposition of law which is necessary for the decision or could be extracted from the decision constitutes the
ratio. The concrete decision is binding between the parties to it. The abstract ratio decidendi alone has the force
of law as regards the world at large. In other words, the authority of a decision as a precedent lies in its ratio
decidendi.
Prof. Goodhart says that ratio decidendi is nothing more than the decision based on the material facts of the
case.
Where an issue requires to be answered on principles, the principles which are deduced by way of abstraction
of the material facts of the case eliminating the immaterial elements is known as ratio decidendi and such
principle is not only applicable to that case but to other cases also which are of similar nature.
It is the ratio decidendi or the general principle which has the binding effect as a precedent, and not the obiter
dictum. However, the determination or separation of ratio decidendi from obiter dictum is not so easy. It is for the
judge to determine the ratio decidendi and to apply it on case to be decided.
Obiter Dicta
The literal meaning of this Latin expression is “said by the way”. The expression is used especially to denote
those judicial utterances in the course of delivering a judgement which taken by themselves, were not strictly
necessary for the decision of the particular issue raised. These statements thus go beyond the requirement of
a particular case and have the force of persuasive precedents only. The judges are not bound to follow them
although they can take advantage of them. They some times help the cause of the reform of law.
Obiter Dicta are of different kinds and of varying degree of weight. Some obiter dicta are deliberate expressions
of opinion given after consideration on a point clearly brought and argued before the court. It is quite often too
difficult for lawyers and courts to see whether an expression is the ratio of judgement or just a casual opinion
by the judge. It is open, no doubt, to other judges to give a decision contrary to such obiter dicta.

 Test Your Knowledge
 Q1. Abstract Ratio Decidendi alone has the force of law as regards the world at large. (True/False)
 Q2 Are Ratio Decidendi and Orbiter Dicta identical? (True/False)

 3. Statutes or Legislation
Legislation is that source of law which consists in the declaration or promulgation of legal rules by an authority
duly empowered by the Constitution in that behalf. It is sometimes called jus scriptum (written law) as contrasted
with the customary law or jus non-scriptum (unwritten law). Salmond prefers to call it as “enacted law”. Statute
law or statutory law is what is created by legislation, for example, Acts of Parliament or of State Legislature.
Legislation is either supreme or subordinate (delegated).
Supreme Legislation is that which proceeds from the sovereign power in the State or which derives its power
directly from the Constitution. It cannot be repealed, annulled or controlled by any other legislative authority.
Subordinate Legislation is that which proceeds from any authority other than the sovereign power. It is dependent
for its continued existence and validity on some superior authority. The Parliament of India possesses the power
of supreme legislation. Legislative powers have been given to the judiciary, as the superior courts are allowed


22
Sources of Law                                                                                          LESSON 1

to make rules for the regulation of their own procedure. The executive, whose main function is to enforce the
law, is given in some cases the power to make rules. Such subordinate legislation is known as executive or
delegated legislation. Municipal bodies enjoy by delegation from the legislature, a limited power of making
regulations or bye-laws for the area under their jurisdiction. Sometimes, the State allows autonomous bodies
like universities to make bye-laws which are recognised and enforced by courts of law.
The rule-making power of the executive is, however, hedged with limitations. The rules made by it are placed
on the table of both Houses of Parliament for a stipulated period and this is taken as having been approved by
the legislature. Such rules then become part of the enactment. Where a dispute arises as to the validity of the
rules framed by the executive, courts have the power to sit in judgement whether any part of the rules so made
is in excess of the power delegated by the parent Act.
In our legal system, Acts of Parliament and the Ordinances and other laws made by the President and Governors
in so far as they are authorised to do so under the Constitution are supreme legislation while the legislation
made by various authorities like Corporations, Municipalities, etc. under the authority of the supreme legislation
are subordinate legislation.

 4. Personal Laws
In many cases, the courts are required to apply the personal law of the parties where the point at issue is not
covered by any statutory law or custom. In the case of Hindus, for instance, their personal law is to be found in:
   a)   The Shruti which includes four Vedas.
   b)   The ‘Smritis’ which are recollections handed down by the Rishis or ancient teachings and precepts
        of God, the commentaries written by various ancient authors on these Smritis. There are three main
        Smritis; the Codes of Manu, Yajnavalkya and Narada.
   c)   Hindus are governed by their personal law as modified by statute law and custom in all matters relating
        to inheritance, succession, marriage, adoption, coparcenary, partition of joint family property, pious
        obligations of sons to pay their father’s debts, guardianship, maintenance and religious and charitable
        endowments.

 Example :
 The matters of succession of Hindus are governed by Hindu Succession Act, 1956.

The personal law of Mohammedans is to be found in:–
   a)   The holy Quran.
   b)   The actions, percept and sayings of the Prophet Mohammed which though not written during his life
        time were preserved by tradition and handed down by authorised persons. These are known as Hadis.
   c)   Ijmas, i.e., a concurrence of opinion of the companions of the Prophet and his disciples.
   d)   Kiyas or reasoning by analogy. These are analogical deductions derived from a comparison of the
        Koran, Hadis and Ijmas when none of these apply to a particular case.
   e)   Digests and Commentaries on Mohammedan law, the most important and famous of them being the
        Hedaya which was composed in the 12th century and the Fatawa Alamgiri which was compiled by
        commands of the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb Alamgiri.
Mohammedans are governed by their personal law as modified by statute law and custom in all matters
relating to inheritance, wills, succession, legacies, marriage, dowry, divorce, gifts, wakfs, guardianship and
pre-emption.

                                                                                                               23
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Sources of Law

 SECONDARY SOURCES OF INDIAN LAW




 (i) Justice, Equity and Good Conscience
The concept of “justice, equity and good conscience” was introduced by Impey’s Regulations of 1781. In personal
law disputes, the courts are required to apply the personal law of the defendant if the point at issue is not
covered by any statute or custom.
In the absence of any rule of a statutory law or custom or personal law, the Indian courts apply to the decision
of a case what is known as “justice, equity and good conscience”, which may mean the rules of English Law in
so far as they are applicable to Indian society and circumstances.
The ancient Hindu Law had its own versions of the doctrine of justice, equity and good conscience. In its modern
version, justice, equity and good conscience as a source of law, owes its origin to the beginning of the British
administration of justice in India. The Charters of the several High Courts established by the British Government
directed that when the law was silent on a matter, they should decide the cases in accordance with justice,
equity and good conscience. Justice, equity and good conscience have been generally interpreted to mean
rules of English law on an analogous matter as modified to suit the Indian conditions and circumstances. The
Supreme Court has stated that it is now well established that in the absence of any rule of Hindu Law, the courts
have authority to decide cases on the principles of justice, equity and good conscience unless in doing so the
decision would be repugnant to, or inconsistent with, any doctrine or theory of Hindu Law: (1951) 1 SCR 1135.

 (ii) Sources of English Law
Since the main body of rules and principles of Indian law is an adaptation of English law, in the following pages
the main sources of English law are discussed in some detail.
The chief sources of English law are:
     –   Common Law
     –   Law Merchant
     –   Principle of Equity
     -   Statute Law

24
Sources of Law                                                                                         LESSON 1

   (i)    Common Law: The Common Law, in this context is the name given to those principles of law evolved by
          the judges in making decisions on cases that are brought before them. These principles have been built
          up over many years so as to form a complete statement of the law in particular areas. Thus, Common
          Law denotes that body of legal rules, the primary sources of which were the general immemorial
          customs, judicial decisions and text books on Jurisprudence. Common Law is unwritten law of England
          which is common to the whole of the realm.

   (ii)   Law Merchant: The Law Merchant is the most important source of the Merchantile Law. Law Merchant
          means those customs and usages which are binding on traders in their dealings with each other. But
          before a custom can have a binding force of law, it must be shown that such a custom is ancient,
          general as well as commands universal compliance. In all other cases, a custom has to be proved by
          the party claiming it.

  (iii)   Principle of Equity: Equity is a body of rules, the primary source of which was neither custom nor
          written law, but the imperative dictates of conscience and which had been set forth and developed in
          the Courts of Chancery. The procedure of Common Law Courts was very technical and dilatory. Action
          at Common Law could be commenced by first obtaining a writ or a process. The writs were limited in
          number and unless a person was able to bring his case within one of those writs, no action could lie at
          Common Law.

		 In some cases, there was no remedy or inadequate remedy at Common Law. The King was considered
   as the fountain head of justice; when people were dissatisfied or aggrieved with the decision of the
   Common Law Court, they could always file a mercy petition with the King-in-Council. The King would
   refer these petitions to his Chancellor. The Chancellor, who was usually a Bishop, would dispose of these
   petitions not according to the rigid letter of the law but according to his own dictates of commonsense,
   natural justice and good conscience. The law so administered by the Chancellor came to be known as
   ‘Equity’ and such courts as ‘Equity Courts’. These ‘Equity Courts’ acted on number of maxims, meaning
   of few is as under: ,

		 “He who seeks equity must do equity”,

		 “He who comes to equity must come with clean hands”.

		 The Equity Courts had their separate existence from the Common Law Courts in England until the
   passing of the Judicature Act of 1873, when the separate existence of such courts was abolished and
   all High Courts were empowered to grant either or both the remedies (Common Law as well as Equity)
   according to the circumstances of each case.

		 Some of the important principles and remedies developed by Equity Courts are recognition of the right
   of beneficiary to trust property, remedy of specific performance of contracts, equity of redemption in
   case of mortgages etc.

  (iv)    Statute Law: Statute law is that portion of law which is derived from the legislation or enactment of
          Parliament or the subordinate and delegated legislative bodies. It is now a very important source of
          Law. A written or statute law overrides unwritten law, i.e., both Common Law and Equity. Some of the
          important enactments in the domain of Mercantile Law are: The English Partnership Act, 1890, The
          English Sale of Goods Act, 1893, Bankruptcy Act, 1914, Carriers Act, 1830, The English Companies Act,
          1948 etc.




                                                                                                              25
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Sources of Law

 MERCANTILE OR COMMERCIAL LAW

 Branches of Mercantile Law
There are many branches of law; viz.,




Mercantile Law is related to the commercial activities of the people of the society. It is that branch of law which
is applicable to or concerned with trade and commerce in connection with various mercantile or business
transactions. Mercantile Law is a wide term and embraces all legal principles concerning business transactions.
The most important feature of such a business transaction is the existence of a valid agreement, express or
implied, between the parties concerned.
The Mercantile Law or Law Merchant or Lex Mercatorla is the name given to that part of law which grew up from
the customs and usages of merchants or traders in England which eventually became a part of Common Law
of England.

 Sources of Mercantile Law
The following are the main sources of Mercantile Law:




26
Sources of Law                                                                                             LESSON 1

They have already been discussed under the heading – Sources of English Law.

 Mercantile Law in India
Prior to 1872, mercantile transactions were regulated by the personal law of the parties to the suit (i.e., Hindu
Law, Mohammedan Law etc.). In 1872, the first attempt was made to codify and establish uniform principles of
mercantile law when Indian Contract Act, 1872 was enacted. Since then, various Acts have been enacted to
regulate transactions regarding partnership, sale of goods, negotiable instruments, etc.

 Sources of Indian Mercantile Law
The main sources of Indian Mercantile Law are:




   (i)    English Mercantile Law: The Indian Mercantile Law is mainly an adaptation of English Mercantile Law.
          However, certain modifications wherever necessary, have been incorporated in it to provide for local
          customs and usages of trade and to suit Indian conditions. Its dependence on English Mercantile Law is
          so much that even now in the absence of provisions relating to any matter in the Indian Law, recourse
          is to be had to the English Mercantile Law.
   (ii)   Acts enacted by Indian Legislature or Statute Law: The Acts enacted by the Indian legislature from
          time to time which are important for the study of Indian Mercantile Law include,
          (a)   The Indian Contract Act, 1872
          (b)   The Sale of Goods Act, 1930
          (c)   The Indian Partnership Act, 1932
          (d)   The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
          (e)   The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
           (f) The Insurance Act, 1938.
  (iii)   Judicial Decisions: Judges interpret and explain the statutes. Whenever the law is silent on a point, the
          judge has to decide the case according to the principles of justice, equity and good conscience. It would
          be accepted in most systems of law that cases which are identical in their facts, should also be identical
          in their decisions. That principle ensures justice for the individual claimant and a measure of certainty
          for the law itself. The English legal system has developed a system of judicial precedent which requires
          the extraction of the legal principle from a particular judicial decision, given the fulfillment of certain
          conditions, ensures that judges apply the principle in subsequent cases which are indistinguishable.
          The latter provision being termed “binding precedents”. Such decisions are called as precedents and
          become an important source of law (See the topic Judicial Precedents at p.7). Prior to independence,
          the Privy Council of Great Britain was the final Court of Appeal and its decisions were binding on Indian


                                                                                                                  27
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Sources of Law

          Courts. After independence, the Supreme Court of India is the final Court of Appeal. But even then,
          the decisions of English Courts such as Privy Council and House of Lords are frequently referred to as
          precedents in deciding certain cases and in interpreting Indian Statutes.
  (iv)    Customs and Trade Usages: Most of the Indian Law has been codified. But even then, it has not
          altogether done away with customs and usages. Many Indian statutes make specific provisions to the
          effect that the rules of law laid down in a particular Act are subject to any special custom or usages of
          trade. For example, Section 1 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, lays down that, “Nothing herein contained
          shall affect the provisions of any
		 Statute, Act or Regulation not hereby expressly repealed, nor any usage or custom of trade, nor any
   incident of any contract, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act”. Similarly Section 1 of the
   Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, lays down that, “nothing herein contained... affects any local usage
   relating to any instrument in any oriental language”. It may be noted that the whole law relating to
   Hundis and the Kachhi and Pakki Adat Systems of Agency is based on custom and usage of trade as
   recognised and given legal effect to by courts of law in India.



                                                 LESSON ROUND-UP

     l Law is not static as circumstances and conditions in a society change, laws are also changed to fit the
         requirements of the society. The object of law is to provide hope of security for the future. It serves as
         a vehicle of social change and as a harbinger of social justice.
     l Jurisprudence is derived from the word ‘juris’ meaning law and ‘prudence’ meaning knowledge.
         Jurisprudence is the study of the science of law. The study of law in jurisprudence is not about any
         particular statute or a rule but of law in general, its concepts, its principles and the philosophies
         underpinning it.
     l The modern Indian law as administered in courts is derived from various sources and these sources fall
         under the following two heads:
            (a)   Principal Sources of Indian Law
                   o   Customs or Customary Law
                   o   Judicial Decisions or Precedents
                   o   Statutes or Legislation
                   o   Personal Law e.g., Hindu and Mohammedan Law, etc.
            (b)   Secondary Sources of Indian Law
                   o   Justice, Equity and Good Conscience;
                   o   English Law
                   o   Common Law
                   o   Law Merchant
                   o   Principle of Equity
                   o   Statute Law.



28
Sources of Law                                                                                        LESSON 1

     l    The majors School of Law that has emerged over time can be classified into six main heads. They
          are as follows:
            i.    Natural School of Law
           ii.    Analytical School of Law
           iii.   Historical School of Law
           iv.    Philosophical/Ethical School of Law
            v.    Sociological School of Law
           vi.    Realist School of Law.
     l    Mercantile Law is a wide term and embraces all legal principles concerning business transactions.
          The most important feature of such a business transaction is the existence of a valid agreement,
          express or implied, between the parties concerned. The main sources of Indian Mercantile Law are
           a)     English Mercantile Law
           b)     Acts enacted by Indian Legislature
           c)     Judicial Decisions
           d)     Customs and Trade Usages.


                                                   GLOSSARY

 Natural Law : Certain rights that are inherent by virtue of human nature and can be understood universally
 through human resource.
 Positivistic Law : Aggregate of rules set by man as politically superior, or sovereign, to mean as political
 subject.
 Legal customs : Customs that operates as binding rule of Law.
 Conventional Customs : They are known as usages.
 Grundnorm : It is the fundamental law, supreme law also known as the law of the land.


                                                TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)

   1. Discuss the sources of Indian Law.

   2. Distinguish between Declaratory Precedents and Original Precedents.

   3. Distinguish between Orbiter Dicta and Ratio Decidendi.

   4. Define the term Obiter Dicta.

   5. Explain Doctrine of Stare Decisis.

   6. Write down the requisite of valid customs.



                                                                                                             29
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Sources of Law


     7. Write short note on:
           (a)    Austin’s Command theory of law.
           (b)    Roscoe Pound’s theory of law.
            (c)   Salmond’s theory of law.
           (d)    Kelsen’s Pure theory of law.
            (e)   Bentham’s theory of law.
            (f)   Savigny’s Theory of law.




                                             LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

     l Student Company Secretary

     l Chartered Secretary

     l G.W. Paton : A Textbook of Jurisprudence



                          OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

     l https://www.icsi.edu/cs-journal/




30
Constitution of India
                                                                                                      Lesson
                                                                                                        LESSON 2
Constitution of India
                                                                                                         2
 KEY CONCEPTS
 n Legislature, Executive & Judiciary n Fundamental Rights n Fundamental Duties n Directive Principles n State
 n Writs




 Learning Objectives
  To understand:
          Basic Structure of the Constitution of India
          The meaning of ‘State’ the Constitution of India
          The fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution
          Various doctrines useful for Interpretation of the Constitution
          The remedies provided by way of Writs, against violation of fundamental rights
          Understand the guidance given to the states for making law through Directive Principles of State Policy
          Fundamental Duties
          How ordinances are promulgated
          The hierarchy of courts in India
          Delegated legislation which are supplementary to the legislations passed by the Legislature
          The law making process in our country
          The constitution of various Standing and non-standing committees
          The amendments to the Constitution



 Lesson Outline
          Broad Framework of the Constitution                      The Judiciary
          Preamble                                                 Writ Jurisdiction of High Courts and Supreme
          Structure                                                 Court and Types of Writs

          Fundamental Rights                                       Delegated Legislation

          Definition of State                                      Separation of Power

          Justifiability of Fundamental Rights                     Legislative functions

          Directive Principles of State Policy                     Parliamentary Committees

          Fundamental Duties                                       Lesson Round-Up

          Ordinance Making Powers                                  Glossary

          Legislative Powers of the Union and the States           Test Yourself

          Freedom of Trade, Commerce and Intercourse               List of Further Readings and References

          Constitutional Provisions relating to State
           Monopoly


                                                                                                                    31
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
     l   The Constitution of India

 The Preamble to the Constitution States
 WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST
 SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to all its citizens:
 JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
 LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to
 promote among them all
 FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation;
 IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT
 AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.

 BROAD FRAMEWORK OF THE CONSTITUTION
The Constitution of India came into force on January 26, 1950. It is a comprehensive document containing
395 Articles (divided into 22 Parts) and 12 Schedules. Apart from dealing with the structure of Government, the
Constitution makes detailed provisions for the rights of citizens and other persons in a number of entrenched
provisions and for the principles to be followed by the State in the governance of the country, labelled as
“Directive Principles of State Policy”. All public authorities – legislative, administrative and judicial derive their
powers directly or indirectly from it and the Constitution derives its authority from the people. The Constitution
of the country reflects the basic principles and laws of a nation, state, or social group that determine the powers
and duties of the government and guarantee certain rights to the people in it. It reflects the ideology and system
of the Nation. It is the prime source of other laws.

 PREAMBLE
The preamble to the Constitution sets out the aims and aspirations of the people of India. It is a part of the
Constitution. The preamble declares India to be a Sovereign, Socialist, Secular, and Democratic Republic and
secures to all its citizens Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. It is declared that the Constitution has been
given by the people to themselves, thereby affirming the republican character of the polity and the sovereignty
of the people.
The polity assured to the people of India by the Constitution is described in the preamble as a Sovereign,
Socialist, Secular, and Democratic Republic. The expression “Sovereign” signifies that the Republic is externally
and internally sovereign. Sovereignty in the strict and narrowest sense of the term implies independence all
round, within and without the borders of the country. As discussed above, legal sovereignty is vested in the
people of India and political sovereignty is distributed between the Union and the States.
The democratic character of the Indian polity is illustrated by the provisions conferring on the adult citizens
the right to vote and by the provisions for elected representatives and responsibility of the executive to the
legislature.

32
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

Constitution aims to secure to its people “justice – social, economic and political”. The Directive Principles
of State Policy, contained in Part IV of the Constitution are designed for the achievement of the socialistic
goal envisaged in the preamble. The expression “Democratic Republic” signifies that our government is of the
people, by the people and for the people.

 STRUCTURE
Constitution of India is basically federal but with certain unitary features.
The majority of the Supreme Court judges in Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461, were of
the view that the federal features form the basic structure of the Indian Constitution. However, there is some
controversy as to whether the Indian Constitution establishes a federal system or it stipulates a unitary form of
Government with some basic federal features. Thus, to decide whether our Constitution is federal, unitary or
quasi federal, it would be better to have a look at the contents of the Constitution.
The essential features of a Federal Polity or System are – dual Government, distribution of powers, supremacy
of the Constitution, independence of Judiciary, written Constitution, and a rigid procedure for the amendment
of the Constitution.
The political system introduced by our Constitution possesses all the aforesaid essentials of a federal polity as
follows:
   (a)   In India, there are Governments at different levels, like Union and States.
   (b)   Powers to make laws have been suitably distributed among them by way of various lists as per the
         Seventh Schedule.
   (c)   Both Union and States have to follow the Constitutional provisions when they make laws.
   (d)   The Judiciary is independent with regard to judicial matters and judiciary can test the validity of
         independently. The Supreme Court decides the disputes between the Union and the States, or the
         States inter se.
   (e)   The Constitution is supreme and if it is to be amended, it is possible only by following the procedure
         explained in Article 368 of the Constitution itself.
From the above, it is clear that the Indian Constitution basically has federal features. But the Indian Constitution
does not establish two co-ordinate independent Governments. Both the Governments co-ordinate, co-operate
and collaborate in each other’s efforts to achieve the ideals laid down in the preamble.

 Judicial View
The question as to whether the Indian Constitution has a federal form of Government or a unitary constitution
with some federal features came up in various cases before the Supreme Court and the High Courts. But in most
cases, the observations have been made in a particular context and have to be understood accordingly. The
question rests mostly on value judgement, i.e., on one’s own philosophy.

 Peculiar Features of Indian Federalism
Indian Constitution differs from the federal systems of the world in certain fundamental aspects, which are as
follows:
   (1)   The Mode of Formation: A federal Union, as in the American system, is formed by an agreement
         between a number of sovereign and independent States, surrendering a defined part of their sovereignty
         or autonomy to a new central organisation. But there is an alternative mode of federation, as in the
         Canadian system where the provinces of a Unitary State may be transformed into a federal union to
         make themselves autonomous.


                                                                                                                 33
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Constitution of India

		 India had a thoroughly Centralised Unitary Constitution until the Government of India Act, 1935 which
   for the first time set up a federal system in the manner as in Canada viz., by creation of autonomous
   units and combining them into a federation by one and the same Act.
     (2)   Position of the States in the Federation: In a federal system, a number of safeguards are provided
           for the protection of State’s rights as they are independent before the formation of federation. In India,
           as the States were not previously sovereign entities, the rights were exercised mainly by Union, e.g.,
           residuary powers.
     (3)   Citizenship etc.: The framers of the American Constitution made a logical division of everything
           essential to sovereignty and created a dual polity with dual citizenship, a double set of officials and
           a double system of the courts. There is, however, single citizenship in India, with no division of public
           services or of the judiciary.
     (4)   Residuary Power: Residuary power is vested in the Union.
		 In other words, the Constitution of India is neither purely federal nor purely unitary. It is a combination
   of both and is based upon the principle that “In spite of federalism the national interest ought to be
   paramount as against autocracy stepped with the establishment of supremacy of law”.

 FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
The Constitution seeks to secure to the people “liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality
of status and of opportunity; and fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual”. With this object, the fundamental
rights are envisaged in Part III of the Constitution.

 The Concept of Fundamental Rights
Political philosophers in the 17th Century began to think that the man by birth had certain rights which were
universal and inalienable, and he could not be deprived of them. The names of Rousseau, Locke, Montaesgue
and Blackstone may be noted in this context. The Declaration of American Independence 1776, stated that all
men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights: that among these,
are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Since the 17th century, it had been considered that man has certain
essential, basic, natural and inalienable rights and it is the function of the State to recognise these rights and
allow them a free play so that human liberty may be preserved, human personality developed and an effective
cultural, social and democratic life promoted. It was thought that these rights should be entrenched in such a
way that they may not be interfered with by an oppressive or transient majority in the Legislature. With this in
view, some written Constitutions (especially after the First World War) guarantee rights of the people and forbid
every organ of the Government from interfering with the same.
The fundamental difference in approach to the question of individual rights between England and the United
States is that while the English were anxious to protect individual rights from the abuses of executive power,
the framers of the American Constitution were apprehensive of tyranny, not only from the executive but also
from the legislature. While the English people, in their fight for freedom against autocracy stopped with the
establishment of Parliamentary supremacy, the Americans went further to assert that there had to be a law
superior to the legislature itself and that the restraint of such paramount written law could only save them from
the fears of absolution and autocracy which are ingrained in the human nature.
As regards India, the Simon Commission and the Joint Parliamentary Committee had rejected the idea of
enacting declaration of Fundamental Rights on the ground that abstract declarations are useless, unless
there exists the will and the means to make them effective. The Nehru Committee recommended the inclusion
of Fundamental Rights in the Constitution for the country. Although that demand of the people was not met
by the British Parliament under the Government of India Act, 1935, yet the enthusiasm of the people to have

34
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

such rights in the Constitution was not impaired. As a result of that enthusiasm they were successful in getting
a recommendation being included in the Statement of May 16, 1946 made by the Cabinet Mission- (which
became the basis of the present Constitution) to the effect that the Constitution-making body may adopt the
rights in the Constitution. Therefore, as soon as Constituent Assembly began to work in December, 1947, in
its objectives resolution Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru moved for the protection of certain rights to be provided in the
Constitution.

 Inclusion of Fundamental Rights in Part III of the Constitution
Part III of the Indian Constitution guarantees six categories of fundamental rights. These are:




Earlier the right to property under Article 31 was also guaranteed as a Fundamental Right which has been
removed by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1978. Now right to property is not a fundamental right, it is
only a legal right.

Apart from this, Articles 12 and 13 deal with definition of ‘State’ and ‘Law’ respectively. Articles 33 to 35 deal with
the general provisions relating to Fundamental Rights. No fundamental right in India is absolute and reasonable
restrictions can be imposed in the interest of the state by valid legislation and in such case the Court normally
would respect the legislative policy behind the same. (People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India, (2004)
2 SCC 476).

From the point of view of persons to whom the rights are available, the fundamental rights may be classified
as follows:

   (a)   Articles 15, 16, 19 and 30 are guaranteed only to citizens.

   (b)   Articles 14, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 27 and 28 are available to any person on the soil of India – citizen or
         foreigner.

   (c)   The rights guaranteed by Articles 15, 17, 18, 20, 24 are absolute limitations upon the legislative
         power.

For convenience as well as for their better understanding it is proper to take each of these separately. But some
related terms are necessary to be understood first.



                                                                                                                    35
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Constitution of India

 Definition of State
With a few exceptions, all the fundamental rights are available against the State. Under Article 12, unless the
context otherwise requires, “the State” includes –




                                                                     The State
                                                                     includes:

                            (a)   the Government and Parliament of India;
                            (b)   the Government Legislature of each of
                                  the States; and
                            (c)   all local or other authorities:
                                   (i)    within the territory of India; or
                                   (ii)   under the control            of     the
                                          Government of India.


 CASE LAWS
 The expression ‘local authorities’ refers to authorities like Municipalities, District Boards, Panchayats,
 Improvement Trusts, Port Trusts and Mining Settlement Boards. The Supreme Court has held that ‘other
 authorities’ will include all authorities created by the Constitution or statute on whom powers are conferred
 by law and it is not necessary that the authority should engage in performing government functions
 (Electricity Board, Rajasthan Mohanlal, AIR 1967 SC 1957). The Calcutta High Court has held that the electricity
 authorities being State within the meaning of Article 12, their action can be judicially reviewed by this Court
 under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. (In re: Angur Bala Parui, AIR 1999 Cal. 102). It has also been held
 that a university is an authority (University of Madras v. Shanta Bai, AIR 1954 Mad. 67). The Gujarat High Court
 has held that the President is “State” when making an order under Article 359 of the Constitution (Haroobhai
 v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1967, Guj. 229). The words “under the control of the Government of India” bring, into
 the definition of State, not only every authority within the territory of India, but also those functioning outside,
 provided such authorities are under the control of the Government of India. In Bidi Supply Co. v. Union of
 India, AIR 1956 SC 479, State was interpreted to include its Income-tax department.
 The Supreme Court in Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram, AIR 1975 SC 1331 and in R.D. Shetty v. International
 Airports Authority, AIR 1979 SC 1628, has pointed out that corporations acting as instrumentality or agency
 of government would become ‘State’ because obviously they are subjected to the same limitations in the
 field of constitutional or administrative law as the government itself, though in the eye of law they would be
 distinct and independent legal entities. Statutory and non-statutory bodies that get financial resources from
 government, have deep pervasive control of government and with functional characters as such as ICAR,
 CSIR, ONGC, IDBI, Electricity Boards, NAFED, Delhi Transport Corporation etc. come under the definition of
 state. Statutory and Non-statutory bodies which are not substantially generally financed by the government
 don’t come under definition of state. Examples are autonomous bodies, Cooperatives, NCERT etc. In
 Chandra Mohan Khanna v. NCERT (1991) 4 SCC 578, it was held that NCERT is not a State. In Satish Nayak v.
 Cochin Stock Exchange Ltd. (1995 Comp LJ 35), the Kerala High Court held that since a Stock Exchange was
 independent of Government control and was not discharging any public duty, it cannot be treated as ‘other
 authority’ under Article 12.



36
Constitution of India                                                                                    LESSON 2

 In Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 481, the Supreme Court has enunciated the following test for
 determining whether an entity is an instrumentality or agency of the State:
      (1)   If the entire share capital of the Corporation is held by the Government, it would go a long way
            towards indicating that the corporation is an instrumentality or agency of the Government.
     (2)    Where the financial assistance of the State is so much as to meet almost the entire expenditure of the
            corporation it would afford some indication of the corporation being impregnated with government
            character.
     (3)    Whether the corporation enjoys a monopoly status which is conferred or protected by the State.
     (4)    Existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that the corporation is a
            State agency or an instrumentality.
     (5)    If the functions of the corporation are of public importance and closely related to government
            functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying a corporation as an instrumentality or agency
            of government.
     (6)    If a department of government is transferred to a corporation, it would be a strong factor supporting
            an inference of the corporation being an instrumentality or agency of government.
 An important decision on the definition of State in Article 12 is Pradeep Kumar Biswas v. Indian Institute of
 Chemical Biology, (2002) 5 SCC 111. A seven Judge Bench of the Supreme Court by a majority of 5:2 held
 that CSIR is an instrumentality of “the State” falling within the scope of Article 12. The multiple test which is
 to be applied to ascertain the character of a body as falling within Article 12 or outside is to ascertain the
 nature of financial, functional and administrative control of the State over it and whether it is dominated by
 the State Government and the control can be said to be so deep and pervasive so as to satisfy the court “of
 brooding presence of the Government” on the activities of the body concerned.
 In Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India, (2005) 4 SCC 649, the Supreme Court applying the tests laid down
 in Pardeep Kumar Biswas case held that the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) was not State for
 purposes of Article 12 because it was not shown to be financially, functionally or administratively dominated
 by or under the control of the Government and control exercised by the Government was not pervasive but
 merely regulatory in nature.
 Judiciary although an organ of State like the executive and the legislature, is not specifically mentioned in
 Article 12. However, the position is that where the Court performs judicial functions, e.g. determination of
 scope of fundamental rights vis-a-vis legislature or executive action, it will not occasion the infringement of
 fundamental rights and therefore it will not come under ‘State’ in such situation (A.R. Antualay v. R.S. Nayak,
 (1988) 2 SCC 602). While in exercise of non-judicial functions e.g. in exercise of rule-making powers, where
 a Court makes rules which contravene the fundamental rights of citizens, the same could be challenged
 treating the Court as ‘State’.


 Example
 An central act has been passed by the parliament. The subject matter of the Act was to grant of certain pay
 related benefits to all employees of the State. Are only states of India (for example State of Maharastra,
 Haryana etc.) are required to comply with law.
 No, According to Article 12 of the Constitution of the India the word state includes not only States of India
 but also certain other authorities.


                                                                                                                37
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Constitution of India

 JUSTIFIABILITY OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
Article 13 gives teeth to the fundamental rights. It lays down the rules of interpretation in regard to laws
inconsistent with or in derogation of the Fundamental Rights.
Existing Laws: Article 13(1) relates to the laws already existing in force, i.e. laws which were in force before
the commencement of the Constitution (pre constitutional laws). A declaration by the Court of their invalidity,
however, will be necessary before they can be disregarded and declares that pre-constitution laws are void to
the extent to which they are inconsistent with the fundamental rights.
Future Laws: Article 13(2) relates to future laws, i.e., laws made after the commencement of the Constitution.
After the Constitution comes into force the State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights
conferred by Part III and if such a law is made, it shall be void to the extent to which it curtails any such right. .
In State of Punjab v. Dalbir Singh AIR 2012 SC 1040 Supreme Court held that article 13 (2) clearly prohibits the
making of any law by the state which takes away or abridges rights, conferred by part III of the Constitution. In
the event of such a law being made the same shall be void to the extent of contravention.
The word ‘law’ according to the definition given in Article 13 itself includes –
“... any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India,
the force of law.”
It is clear that like definition of State in Article 12, the definition of ‘law’ in Article 13 is not exhaustive, e.g. it
does not speak of even laws made by Parliament or State Legislatures which form the largest part of the body
of laws. Because of this nature of the definition, the issue came up before the Supreme Court as to whether
a Constitutional Amendment by which a fundamental right included in Part III is taken away or abridged is
also a law within the meaning of Article 13. The Court twice rejected the view that it includes a Constitutional
Amendment, but third time in the famous Golaknath case (A.I.R. 1967 S.C. 1643) by a majority of 6 to 5, the Court
took the view that it includes such an amendment and, therefore, even a Constitutional amendment would be
void to the extent it takes away or abridges any of the fundamental rights. By the Constitution (Twenty-Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1971 a new clause has been added to Article 13 which provides that –
“Nothing in this Article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution made under Article 368”
Article 13 came up for judicial review in a number of cases and the Courts have evolved doctrines like doctrine
of eclipse, severability, prospective overruling, acquiescence etc. for interpreting the provisions of Article 13.

 Example
 There was a Law in force before 26th January, 1950 which was against the Fundamental Rights. It was
 contended that it can still be in force as the constitution does not make it void. Is the contention correct?
 According to Article 13(1) of the Constitution of India, All laws in force in the territory of India immediately
 before the commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this
 Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.


 CASE LAW
 In the case of CBI vs. R. R. Kishore (Supreme Court decided on 11.09.2023), the Supreme Court decided on
 the point that whether declaration made in the case of Subramanian Swamy vs. Director, Central Bureau of
 Investigation and another (2014) 8 SCC 682, that Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act,
 1942 being unconstitutional, can be applied retrospectively in context with Article 20 of the Constitution.



38
Constitution of India                                                                                           LESSON 2

 The Supreme Court has decided that it is crystal clear that once a law is declared to be unconstitutional, being
 violative of Part-III of the Constitution, then it would be held to be void ab initio, still born, unenforceable and
 non est in view of Article 13(2) of the Constitution and its interpretation by authoritative pronouncements. Thus,
 the declaration made by the Constitution Bench in the case of Subramanian Swamy will have retrospective
 operation. Section 6A of the DSPE Act is held to be not in force from the date of its insertion i.e. 11.09.2003.

 Doctrine of Severability
One thing to be noted in Article 13 is that, it is not the entire law which is affected by the provisions in Part III,
but the law becomes invalid only to the extent to which it is inconsistent with the Fundamental Rights. So only
that part of the law will be declared invalid which is inconsistent, and the rest of the law will stand. However, on
this point a clarification has been made by the Courts that invalid part of the law shall be severed and declared
invalid if really it is severable, i.e., if after separating the invalid part the valid part is capable of giving effect to
the legislature’s intent, then only it will survive, otherwise the Court shall declare the entire law as invalid. This
is known as the rule of severability.
The doctrine has been applied invariably to cases where it has been found possible to separate the invalid part
from the valid part of an Act. Article 13 only says that any law which is inconsistent with the fundamental rights
is void “to the extent of inconsistency” and this has been interpreted to imply that it is not necessary to strike
down the whole Act as invalid, if only a part is invalid and that part can survive independently. In A.K. Gopalan
v. State of Madras, A.I.R. 1950 S.C. 27, the Supreme Court ruled that where an Act was partly invalid, if the valid
portion was severable from the rest, the valid portion would be maintained, provided that it was sufficient to
carry out the purpose of the Act.

 Doctrine of Eclipse
The other noteworthy thing in Article 13 is that, though an existing law inconsistent with a fundamental right
becomes in-operative from the date of the commencement of the Constitution, yet it is not dead altogether. A
law made before the commencement of the Constitution remains eclipsed or dormant to the extent it comes
under the shadow of the fundamental rights, i.e., is inconsistent with it, but the eclipsed or dormant parts
become active and effective again if the prohibition brought about by the fundamental rights is removed by the
amendment of the Constitution. This is known as the doctrine of eclipse.
The doctrine was first evolved in Bhikaji Narain Dhakras v. State of M.P., A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 781. In this case, the
validity of C.P. and Berar Motor Vehicles Amendment Act, 1947, empowering the Government to regulate, control
and to take up the entire motor transport business was challenged. The Act was perfectly a valid piece of
legislation at the time of its enactment. But on the commencement of the Constitution, the existing law became
inconsistent under Article 13(1), as it contravened the freedom to carry on trade and business under Article 19(1)
(g). To remove the infirmity the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 was passed which permitted creation
by law of State monopoly in respect of motor transport business. The Court held that the Article by reason of its
language could not be read as having obliterated the entire operation of the inconsistent law or having wiped
it altogether from the statute book. In case of a pre-Constitution law or statute, it was held, that the doctrine of
eclipse would apply. The relevant part of the judgement is:
“The true position is that the impugned law became as it were, eclipsed, for the time being, by the fundamental
right. The effect of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 was to remove the shadow and to make the
impugned Act free from all blemish or infirmity.”
However, there was a dispute regarding the applicability of the doctrine of eclipse, whether it should be
applicable to both pre-Constitution and post-Constitution laws or only to pre-constitution laws. Some decisions
were in favour of both laws and some were in favour of pre-constitution laws only. There is no unambiguous
judicial pronouncement to that effect.

                                                                                                                        39
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Constitution of India

 Waiver
The doctrine of waiver of rights is based on the premise that a person is his best judge and that he has the liberty
to waive the enjoyment of such rights as are conferred on him by the State. However, the person must have
the knowledge of his rights and that the waiver should be voluntary. The doctrine was discussed in Basheshar
Nath v. C.I.T., AIR 1959 SC 149, where the majority expressed its view against the waiver of fundamental rights. It
was held that it was not open to citizens to waive any of the fundamental rights. Any person aggrieved by the
consequence of the exercise of any discriminatory power, could be heard to complain against it.
The Article has been invoked in many cases. Some of the important cases and observations are as under:
Single Person Law
A law may be constitutional, even though it relates to a single individual, if that single individual is treated as
a class by himself on some peculiar circumstances. The case is Charanjit Lal Chowdhary v. Union of India, AIR
1951 SC 41. In this case, the petitioner was an ordinary shareholder of the Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co.
Ltd. The company through its directors had been managing and running a textile mill of the same name.
Later, on account of mis-management, a situation had arisen that brought about the closing down of the mill,
thus affecting the production of an essential commodity, apart from causing serious unemployment amongst
certain section of the community. The Central Government issued an Ordinance which was later replaced by
an Act, known as Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1950. With the passing of this
Act, the management and the administration of the assets of the company were placed under the control of
the directors appointed by the Government. As regards the shareholders, the Act declared that they could
neither appoint a new director nor could take proceedings against the company for winding up. The petitioner
filed a writ petition on the ground that the said Act infringed the rule of equal protection of laws as embodied in
Article 14, because a single company and its shareholders were subjected to disability as compared with other
companies and their shareholders. The Supreme Court dismissed the petition and held the legislation as valid. It
laid down that the law may be constitutional even though it applies to a single individual if on account of some
special circumstances or reasons applicable to him only, that single individual may be treated as a class by
himself. However, in subsequent cases the Court explained that the rule of presumption laid down in Charanjit
Lal’s case is not absolute, but would depend on facts of each case.
For a valid classification there has to be a rational nexus between the classification made by the law and the
object sought to be achieved. For example a provision for district-wise distribution of seats in State Medical
colleges on the basis of population of a district to the population of the State was held to be void [Minor P.
Rajendran v. State of Madras & Ors. Air 1968 Sc 1012)].

 Right of equality
Articles 14 to 18 of the Constitution deal with equality and its various facets. The general principle finds expression
in Article 14. Particular applications of this right are dealt with in Articles 15 and 16. Still more specialised
applications of equality are found in Articles 17 and 18.

 Article 14: Equality before the law and equal protection of the laws
Article 14 of the Constitution says that “the State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the
equal protection of the laws within the territory of India”.
As is evident, Article 14 guarantees to every person the right to equality before the law or the equal protection of
the laws. The expression ‘equality before the law’ which is borrowed from English Common Law is a declaration
of equality of all persons within the territory of India, implying thereby the absence of any special privilege
in favour of any individual. Every person, whatever be his rank or position is subject to the jurisdiction of the
ordinary courts. The second expression “the equal protection of the laws” which is based on the last clause
of the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment to the American Constitution directs that equal protection

40
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

shall be secured to all persons within the territorial jurisdiction of the Union in the enjoyment of their rights and
privileges without favouritism or discrimination. Article 14 applies to all persons and is not limited to citizens.
A corporation, which is a juristic person, is also entitled to the benefit of this Article (Chiranjit Lal Chowdhurary
v. Union of India, AIR 1951 SC 41). The right to equality is also recognised as one of the basic features of the
Constitution (Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, AIR 2000 SC 498).
As a matter of fact all persons are not alike or equal in all respects. Application of the same laws uniformly
to all of them will, therefore, be inconsistent with the principle of equality. Of course, mathematical equality is
not intended. Equals are to be governed by the same laws. But as regards unequals, the same laws are not
complemented. In fact, that would itself lead to inequality.
Equality is a comparative concept. A person is treated unequally only if that person is treated worse than
others, and those others (the comparison group) must be those who are ‘similarly situated’ to the complainant.
[Glanrock Estate (P.) Ltd. v. State of T.N. (2010) 10 SCC 96]. In Raj Bala v. State of Haryana AIR 2016 SC 33
Supreme Court held that declaring a piece of legislation as arbitrary and thereby unconstitutional implies value
judgement. It has no application under the Indian constitution.
Legislative classification
A right conferred on persons that they shall not be denied equal protection of the laws does not mean the
protection of the same laws for all. It is here that the doctrine of classification steps in and gives content and
significance to the guarantee of the equal protection of the laws. To separate persons similarly situated from
those who are not, legislative classification or distinction is made carefully between persons who are and who
are not similarly situated. The Supreme Court in a number of cases has upheld the view that Article 14 does not
rule out classification for purposes of legislation. Article 14 does not forbid classification or differentiation which
rests upon reasonable grounds of distinction.
The Supreme Court in State of Bihar v. Bihar State ‘Plus-2’ lectures Associations, (2008) 7 SCC 231 held that
now it is well settled and cannot be disputed that Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees equality before the
law and confers equal protection of laws. It prohibits the state from denying persons or class of persons equal
treatment; provided they are equals and are similarly situated. It however, does not forbid classification. In other
words, what Article 14 prohibits is discrimination and not classification if otherwise such classification is legal,
valid and reasonable.
Test of valid classification
Since a distinction is to be made for the purpose of enacting a legislation, it must pass the classical test
enunciated by the Supreme Court in State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar, AIR 1952 SC 75. Permissible
classification must satisfy two conditions, namely;
    (i)   it must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped
          together from others left out of the group; and
   (ii)   the differentia must have a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the statute in
          question.
After considering leading cases on equal protection clause enshrined in Article 14 of the constitution, the five-
Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Confederation of Ex-Servicemen Assns. v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC
399 stated: “In our judgement, therefore, it is clear that every classification to be legal, valid and permissible,
must fulfill the twin test; namely:
    (i)   the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which must distinguish persons or things
          that are grouped together from others leaving out or left out; and
   (ii)   Such a differentia must have rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute or
          legislation in question”.

                                                                                                                    41
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Constitution of India

The classification may be founded on different basis, such as, geographical, or according to objects or occupation
or the like. What is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the basis of classification and the object of
the Act under consideration. A legal and valid classification may be based on educational qualifications [State
of Bihar v. Bihar State ‘Plus-2’ lecturers Associations and Others, (2008) 7 SCC 238].
A law based on a permissible classification fulfills the guarantee of the equal protection of the laws and is
valid. On the other hand if it is based on an impermissible classification it violates that guarantee and is void.
Reiterating the test of reasonable classification, the Supreme Court in Dharam Dutt v. Union of India, (2004) 1 SCC
712 held that laying down of intelligible differentia does not, however mean that the legislative classification
should be scientifically perfect or logically complete.
Scope of Article 14
The true meaning and scope of Article 14 has been explained in several decisions of the Supreme Court. The
rules with respect to permissible classification as evolved in the various decisions have been summarised by
the Supreme Court in Ram Kishan Dalmiya v. Justice Tendulkar, AIR 1958 SC 538 as follows:
      (i)    Article 14 forbids class legislation, but does not forbid classification.

              Example
              A law has been passed for grant of financial assistance to girl child below the Age of 14 years for
              education. It was contented that there shall be equality before the law. Can this law be enacted?
              Yes, it can be passed if the Legislation is based on reasonable classification and intelligible
              differentia.

      (ii)   Permissible classification must satisfy two conditions, namely, (a) it must be founded on an intelligible
             differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group,
             and (b) the differentia must have a relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
     (iii)   The classification may be founded on different basis, namely geographical, or according to objects or
             occupations or the like.
     (iv)    In permissible classification, mathematical nicety and perfect equality are not required. Similarly, non-
             identity of treatment is enough.
     (v)     Even a single individual may be treated a class by himself on account of some special circumstances
             or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to others; a law may be constitutional even though it
             relates to a single individual who is in a class by himself.
     (vi)    Article 14 condemns discrimination not only by substantive law but by a law of procedure.
  (vii)      There is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon
             him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles.
A remarkable example of the application of the principle of equality under the Constitution is the decision of the
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in R.K. Garg v. Union of India, AIR 1976 SC 1559. The legislation under
attack was the Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1981. It permitted investment of black
money in the purchase of these Bonds without any questions being asked as to how this money came into the
possession.
In public interest litigation it was contended that Article 14 had been violated, because honest tax payers
were adversely discriminated against by the Act, which legalized evasion. But the Supreme Court rejected the
challenge, taking note of the magnitude of the problem of black money which had brought into being a parallel
economy.

42
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

Finally it should be mentioned that Article 14 invalidates discrimination not only in substantive law but also in
procedure. Further, it applies to executive acts also.
In the past, Article 14 has acquired new dimensions. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597, the
Supreme Court held that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and ensures a fairness and equality of
treatment. The principle of reasonableness, which logically as well as philosophically, is an essential element
of equality or non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding omnipresence (See also Ramana Dayaram
Shetty v. International Airport Authority, AIR 1979 SC 1628; Kasturi Lal v. State of J&K, AIR 1980 SC 1992). Finally in
Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC 487, the Supreme Court held “ …. what Article 14 strikes at is arbitrariness
because an action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve negation of equality….. Wherever therefore there
is arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the executive or of an “authority” under
Article 12, Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such action.” In this case the system of
selection by oral interview, in addition to written test was upheld as valid, but allocation of above 15 per cent
of the total marks for interview was regarded as arbitrary and unreasonable and liable to be struck down as
constitutionally invalid.
Possession of higher qualification can be treated as a valid base or classification of two categories of employees,
even if no such requirement is prescribed at the time of recruitment. If such a distinction is drawn no complaint
can be made that it would violate Article 14 of the Constitution (U.P. State Sugar Corpn. Ltd. v. Sant Raj Singh,
(2006) 9 SCC 82).

 Article 15: Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion etc.
Article 15(1) prohibits the State from discriminating against any citizen on grounds only of:




Article 15(2) lays down that no citizen shall be subjected to any disability, restriction or condition with regard to –
   (a)   access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or
   (b)   the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort, maintained wholly or partially
         out of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general public.
Article 15(3) and 15(4) create certain exceptions to the right guaranteed by Article 15(1) and 15(2). Under Article
15(3) the State can make special provision for women and children. It is under this provision that courts have
upheld the validity of legislation or executive orders discriminating in favour of women (Union of India v.
Prabhakaran, (1997) 2 SCC 633).
Article 15(4) permits the State to make special provision for the advancement of –
   (a)   Socially and educationally backward classes of citizens;
   (b)   Scheduled castes; and
   (c)   Scheduled tribes.
Article 15(5) inserted in the Constitution of India under the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005,
permits the State to make special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions

                                                                                                                    43
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

relate to their admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or
unaided by the State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.
Further, Article 15(6) inserted in the Constitution of India under the Constitution (One Hundred and Third
Amendment) Act, 2019. Article 15(6) provides that nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article
19 or clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from making, –
     (a)   any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than
           the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and
     b)    any special provision for the advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than
           the classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) in so far as such special provisions relate to their admission
           to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the
           State, other than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30, which in the
           case of reservation would be in addition to the existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten
           per cent. of the total seats in each category.
Explanation. – For the purposes of Article 15 and Article 16, “economically weaker sections” shall be such as
may be notified by the State from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of economic
disadvantage.

 Example
 The parliament made a law for advancement of economically weaker sections of citizens. Can the parliament
 made such law?
 Yes, the Constitution of India is amended by the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019
 empowering the parliament to make such laws.

 Article 16: Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
Article 16(1) guarantees to all citizens’ equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment or appointment
of office under the State.
Article 16(2) prohibits discrimination against a citizen on the grounds of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place
of birth or residence.
However, there are certain exceptions provided in Article 16(3), 16(4) and 16(5). These are as under:
     (1)   Parliament can make a law that in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an
           office under the Government of a State on a Union Territory, under any local or other authority within
           the State or Union Territory, residence within that State or Union Territory prior to such employment or
           appointment shall be an essential qualification. [Article 16(3)]
     (2)   A provision can be made for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class
           of citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the services under the
           State. [Article 16(4)]
     (3)   The State from may make a law for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential seniority,
           to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and
           the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in the services
           under the State. [Article 16(4A)]
     (4)   The State may consider any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in
           that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or clause (4A) as

44
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

         a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding year or years and such class of
         vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled
         up for determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
         [Article 16(4B)]
   (5)   A law shall not be invalid if it provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affair of any
         religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person
         professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination. [Article 16(5)]
   (6)   The State may make a law for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically
         weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in clause (4), in addition to the existing
         reservation and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the posts in each category. [Article 16(6)]
The Supreme Court in Secy. of State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (2006) 4 SCC 1 held that adherence to the rule
of equality in public employment is a basic feature of the Constitution and since the rule of law is the core of
the Constitution, a Court would certainly be disabled from passing an order upholding a violation of Article 14.
Equality of opportunity is the hallmark and the Constitution has provided also for affirmative action to ensure
that unequals are not treated as equals. Thus any public employment has to be in terms of the Constitutional
Scheme.

 Rights Relating to Freedom
Articles 19-22 guarantee certain fundamental freedoms.
Article 19(1), of the Constitution, guarantees to the citizens of India six freedoms, namely:




These freedoms are those great and basic rights which are recognized as the natural rights inherent in the
status of a citizen. At the same time, none of these freedoms is absolute but subject to reasonable restrictions
specified under clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19. The Constitution under Articles 19(2) to 19(6) permits the imposition
of restrictions on these freedoms subject to the following conditions:
   (a)   The restriction can be imposed by law and not by a purely executive order issued under a statute;
   (b)   The restriction must be reasonable;
   (c)   The restriction must be imposed for achieving one or more of the objects specified in the respective
         clauses of Article 19.


                                                                                                                    45
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India


 Example
 A certain class of persons were denied to form co-operative societies. They contended that it is their
 fundamental right to form co-operative societies. Is the contention correct?
 Yes, it is the fundamental right of citizen to form co-operatives societies.

Reasonableness
It is very important to note that the restrictions should be reasonable. If this word ‘reasonable’ is not there, the
Government can impose any restrictions and they cannot be challenged. This word alone gives the right to an
aggrieved person to challenge any restriction of the freedoms granted under this Article.
Reasonableness of the restriction is an ingredient common to all the clauses of Article 19. Reasonableness is
an objective test to be applied by the judiciary. Legislative judgment may be taken into account by the Court,
but is not conclusive. It is subject to the supervision of Courts. The following factors are usually considered to
assess the reasonableness of a law:

      (i)    The objective of the restriction;

     (ii)    The nature, extent and urgency of the evil sought to be dealt with by the law in question;

     (iii)   How far the restriction is proportion to the evil in question;

     (iv)    Duration of the restriction;

     (v)     The conditions prevailing at the time when the law was framed.

The onus of proving to the satisfaction of the Court that the restriction is reasonable is upon the State.

Procedural and Substantiveness

In determining the reasonableness of a law, the Court will not only see the surrounding circumstances, but
all contemporaneous legislation passed as part of a single scheme. It is the reasonableness of the restriction
and not of the law that has to be found out, and if the legislature imposes a restriction by one law but creates
countervailing advantages by another law passed as part of the same legislative plan, the court can take
judicial notice of such Acts forming part of the same legislative plan (Lord Krishna Sagar Mills v. Union of India,
AIR 1959 SC 316).

The phrase ‘reasonable restrictions’ connotes that the limitation imposed upon a person in the enjoyment of a
right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature. In determining the reasonableness of a statute, the Court
would see both the nature of the restriction and procedure prescribed by the statute for enforcing the restriction
on the individual freedom. The reasonableness of a restriction has to be determined in an objective manner and
from the point of view of the interests of the general public and not from the point of view of the persons upon
whom the restrictions are imposed or upon abstract considerations. The Court is called upon to ascertain the
reasonableness of the restrictions and not of the law which permits the restriction. The word ‘restriction’ also
includes cases of prohibition and the State can establish that a law, though purporting to deprive a person of
his fundamental right, under certain circumstances amounts to a reasonable restriction only. Though the test
of reasonableness laid down in clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 might in great part coincide with that for judging
‘due process’ under the American Constitution, it must not be assumed that these are identical. It has been held
that the restrictions are imposed in carrying out the Directive Principles of State Policy is a point in favour of the
reasonableness of the restrictions.



46
Constitution of India                                                                                    LESSON 2

Scope and Limitations on the Freedoms

   (a)   Right to freedom of speech and expression

		 It need not be mentioned as to how important the freedom of speech and expression is in a democracy.
   A democratic Government attaches a great importance to this freedom because without freedom of
   speech and expression the appeal to reason which is the basis of democracy cannot be made. The
   right to speech and expression includes right to make a good or bad speech and even the right of not
   to speak. One may express oneself even by signs. The Courts have held that this right includes the
   freedom of press and right to publish one’s opinion, right to circulation and propagation of one’s ideas,
   freedom of peaceful demonstration, dramatic performance and cinematography. It may also include
   any other mode of expression of one’s ideas. The Supreme Court in Cricket Association of Bengal v. the
   Secretary, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (Govt. of India), AIR 1995 SC 1236, has held that this
   freedom includes the right to communicate through any media - print, electronic and audio visual.

		       The freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) means the right to express one’s convictions
         and opinions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, pictures or any other mode. This freedom includes
         the freedom of press as it partakes of the same basic nature and characteristic (Maneka Gandhi v. Union
         of India, AIR 1978 S.C. 597). However no special privilege is attached to the press as such, distinct
         from ordinary citizens. In Romesh Thapar v. State of Punjab, AIR 1950 S.C. 124, it was observed that
         “freedom of speech and of the press lay at the foundation of all democratic organisations, for without
         free political discussion no public education, so essential for the proper functioning of the process
         of popular Government is possible”. Imposition of pre-censorship on publication under clause (2), is
         violative of freedom of speech and expression.

		 The right to freedom of speech is infringed not only by a direct ban on the circulation of a publication
   but also by an action of the Government which would adversely affect the circulation of the paper. The
   only restrictions which may be imposed on the press are those which clause (2) of Article 19 permits and
   no other [Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, AIR 1962 SC 305].

		 Regarding Commercial advertisements it was held in Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, AIR 1960
   SC 554 that they do not fall within the protection of freedom of speech and expression because such
   advertisements have an element of trade and commerce. A commercial advertisement does not aim at
   the furtherance of the freedom of speech. Later the perception about advertisement changed and it has
   been held that commercial speech is a part of freedom of speech and expression guaranteed under
   Article 19(1)(a) and such speech can also be subjected to reasonable restrictions only under Article 19(2)
   and not otherwise (Tata Press Ltd. v. MTNL, AIR 1995 SC 2438).

		 The right to know, ‘receive and impart information’ has been recognized within the right to freedom of
   speech and expression (S.P. Gupta v. President of India, AIR 1982 SC 14). A citizen has a fundamental
   right to use the best means of imparting and receiving information and as such to have an access to
   telecasting for the purpose. [Secretary, Ministry of I&B, Govt. of India v. Cricket Association of Bengal,
   (1995) 2 SCC 161].

		 The right to reply, i.e., the right to get published one’s reply in the same news media in which something
   is published against or in relation to a person has also been recognised under Article 19(1)(a), particularly
   when the news media is owned by the State within the meaning of Article 12. It has also been held that
   a Government circular having no legal sanction violates Article 19(1)(a), if it compels each and every
   pupil to join in the singing of the National Anthem despite his genuine, conscientious religious objection
   [Bijoe Emmanuel v. State of Kerala, (1986) 3 SCC 615]. Impliedly the Court has recognised in Article 19(1)
   (a) the right to remain silent. The Supreme Court in Union of India v. Naveen Jindal, (2004) 2 SCC 476,
   has held that right to fly the National Flag freely with respect and dignity is a fundamental right of a

                                                                                                                47
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Constitution of India

        citizen within the meaning of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution being an expression and manifestation
        of his allegiance and feelings and sentiments of pride for the nation.

		 Dramatic performance is also a form of speech and expression. In K.A. Abbas v. Union of India, AIR 1971
   S.C. 481, the Court held that censorship of films including (pre-censorship) is justified under Article 19(1)
   (a) and (2) of the Constitution but the restrictions must be reasonable. The right of a citizen to exhibit
   films on the Doordarshan subject to the terms and conditions to be imposed by the latter has also been
   recognized. (Odyssey Communications (P) Ltd. v. Lokvidayan Sangathan, AIR 1988 SC 1642).

		 Clause (2) of Article 19 specifies the limits upto which the freedom of speech and expression may be
   restricted. It enables the Legislature to impose by law reasonable restrictions on the freedom of speech
   and expression under the following heads :




		 Reasonable restrictions under these heads can be imposed only by a duly enacted law and not by the
   executive action [Express News Papers Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India, (1986) 1 SCC 133]. In Sanjay Narayan,
   Editor-in-chief Hindustan v. Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad JT 2011 (10) SC 74 the Court initially
   expressed the view that the unbridled power of the media can become dangerous if check and balance
   is not inherent in it. The role of the media is to provide to the readers and the public in general with
   information and views tested and found as true and correct. This power must be carefully regulated and
   must reconcile with a person’s fundamental right to privacy. However, this right is restricted by article
   19 (2) in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, public order, decency
   and morality and also Contempt of Courts Act and defamation.

           CASE LAW
           The Supreme Court, initially expressed the view that a Corporation is not a citizen within the
           meaning of Article 19 and, therefore, cannot invoke this Article. Subsequently the Supreme Court
           held that a company is a distinct and separate entity from its shareholders and refused to tear the
           corporate veil for determining the constitutionality of the legislation by judging its impact on the
           fundamental rights of the shareholders of the company (TELCO v. State of Bihar, AIR 1965 S.C. 40).
           But a significant modification is made by the Supreme Court in R.C. Cooper v. Union of India, AIR
           1970 S.C. 564 (also called the Bank Nationalisation case). The Supreme Court ruled that the test in
           determining whether the shareholder’s right is impaired is not formal but is essentially qualitative.
           If the State action impaired the rights of the shareholders as well as of the company, the Court will
           not deny itself jurisdiction to grant relief. The shareholders’ rights are equally affected, if the rights
           of the company are affected (Bennett Coleman & Co., AIR (1973) S.C. 106).


48
Constitution of India                                                                                LESSON 2

   (b)   Freedom of assembly
		 The next right is the right of citizens to assemble peacefully and without arms [Art. 19(1)(b)]. Calling an
   assembly and putting one’s views before it is also intermixed with the right to speech and expression
   discussed above, and in a democracy it is of no less importance than speech. However, apart from
   the fact that the assembly must be peaceful and without arms, the State is also authorised to impose
   reasonable restrictions on this right in the interests of:
           (i) the sovereignty and integrity of India, or
          (ii)    public order.
		 Freedom of assembly is an essential element in a democratic Government. In the words of Chief Justice
   Waite of the Supreme Court of America, “the very idea of Government, republican in form, implies a
   right on the part of citizens to meet peaceably for consultation in respect of public affairs”. The purpose
   of public meetings being the education of the public and the formation of opinion on religious, social,
   economic and political matters, the right of assembly has a close affinity to that of free speech under
   Article 19(1)(a).
   (c)   Freedom of association
		 The freedom of association includes freedom to hold meeting and to takeout processions without arms.
   Right to form associations for unions is also guaranteed so that people are free to have the members
   entertaining similar views [Art. 19(1)(c)]. This right is also, however, subject to reasonable restrictions
   which the State may impose in the interests of:
           (i) the sovereignty and integrity of India, or
          (ii)    public order, or
          (iii)   morality.
		 A question not yet free from doubt is whether the fundamental right to form association also conveys
   the freedom to deny to form an association. In Tikaramji v. Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1956 SC 676, the
   Supreme Court observed that assuming the right to form an association “implies a right not to form an
   association, it does notfollow that the negative right must also be regarded as a fundamental right”.
   However, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh has held, that this right necessarily implies a right not to be
   a member of an association. Hence, the rules which made it compulsory for all teachers of elementary
   schools to become members of an association were held to be void as being violative of Article 19(1)
   (c) (Sitharamachary v. Sr. Dy. Inspector of Schools, AIR 1958 A.P. 78). This view gets support from O.K.
   Ghosh v. Joseph, AIR 1963 SC 812. It has been held that a right to form associations or unions does
   not include within its ken as a fundamental right a right to form associations or unions for achieving a
   particular object or running a particular institution.
   (d)   Freedom of movement
		 Right to move freely throughout the territory of India is another right guaranteed under Article 19(1)
   (d). This right, however, does not extend to travel abroad, and like other rights stated above, it is also
   subject to the reasonable restrictions which the State may impose:
           (i) in the interests of the general public, or
          (ii)    for the protection of the interests of any scheduled tribe.
		 A law authorising externment or interment to be valid must fall within the limits of permissible legislation
   in clause (5), namely restrictions must be reasonable and in the interests of the general public or for the
   protection of the interests of the Scheduled Tribes.

                                                                                                            49
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Constitution of India

     (e)   Freedom of residence
		 Article 19(1)(e) guarantees to a citizens the right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India.
   This right overlaps the right guaranteed by clause (d). This freedom is said to be intended to remove
   internal barriers within the territory of India to enable every citizen to travel freely and settle down in any
   part of a State or Union territory. This freedom is also subject to reasonable restrictions in the interests
   of general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe under Article 19(5). That
   apart, citizens can be subjected to reasonable restrictions [Ebrahim v. State of Bom., (1954) SCR 933,
   950]. Besides this, certain areas may be banned for certain kinds of persons such as prostitutes (State
   of U.P. v. Kaushaliya, AIR 1964 SC 416).
     (f)   Right to acquire, hold and dispose of property – deleted by 44th Amendment in 1978.]
     (g)   Freedom to trade and occupations
		 Article 19(1)(g) provides that all citizens shall have the right to practise any profession, or to carry on any
   occupation, trade or business.
		 An analysis of the case law reveals that the emphasis of the Courts has been on social control and
   social policy. However, no hard and fast rules have been laid down by the Court for interpreting
   this Article. The words ‘trade’, ‘business’, ‘profession’ used in this Article have received a variety of
   interpretations. The word ‘trade’ has been held to include the occupation of men in buying and selling,
   barter or commerce, work, especially skilled, thus of the widest scope (The Management of Safdarjung
   Hospital v. K.S. Sethi, AIR 1970 S.C. 1407).
		 The word ‘business’ is more comprehensive than the word ‘trade’. Each case must be decided according
   to its own circumstances, applying the common sense principle as to what business is. A profession
   on the other hand, has been held ordinarily as an occupation requiring intellectual skill, often coupled
   with manual skill. Like other freedoms discussed above, this freedom is also subject to reasonable
   restrictions. Article 19(6) provides as under:
		 Nothing in sub-clause (g) shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
   the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions
   in the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and in particular, nothing in the said sub-
   clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from
   making any law relating to –
            (i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on
                any occupation, trade or business, or
           (ii)    the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade,
                   industry or service whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.
		 Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution guarantees that all citizens have the right to practice any profession or
   to carry on any occupation or trade or business. The freedom is not uncontrolled, for, clause (6) of the
   Article authorises legislation which:
            (i) imposes reasonable restrictions on this freedom in the interests of the general public;
           (ii)    prescribes professional or technical qualifications necessary for carrying on any profession, trade
                   or business; and
           (iii)   enables the State to carry on any trade or business to the exclusion of private citizens, wholly or
                   partially.
		 In order to determine the reasonableness of the restriction, regard must be had to the nature of the

50
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

          business and conditions prevailing in that trade. It is obvious that these factors differ from trade to
          trade, and no hard and fast rules concerning all trades can be laid down. The word ‘restriction’ used in
          clause (6) is wide enough to include cases of total prohibition also. Accordingly, even if the effect of a
          law is the elimination of the dealers from the trade, the law may be valid, provided it satisfies the test
          of reasonableness or otherwise.
		 The vital principle which has to be kept in mind is that the restrictive law should strike a proper balance
   between the freedom guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) and the social control permitted by clause (6) of
   Article 19. The restriction must not be of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the interests of
   the public.
Monopoly
The Supreme Court’s decision in Chintamana Rao v. State of M.P., AIR 1951 S.C. 118; is a leading case on the point
where the constitutionality of Madhya Pradesh Act was challenged. The State law prohibited the manufacture
of bidis in the villages during the agricultural season. No person residing in the village could employ any other
person nor engage himself, in the manufacture of bidis during the agricultural season. The object of the provision
was to ensure adequate supply of labour for agricultural purposes. The bidi manufacturer could not even import
labour from outside, and so, had to suspend manufacture of bidis during the agricultural season. Even villagers
incapable of engaging in agriculture, like old people, women and children, etc., who supplemented their income
by engaging themselves manufacturing bidis were prohibited without any reason. The prohibition was held to
be unreasonable.
However, after the Constitutional (Amendment) Act, 1951, the State can create a monopoly in favour of itself and
can compete with private traders. It has been held in Assn. of Registration Plates v. Union of India, (2004) SCC
476 that the State is free to create monopoly in favour of itself. However the entire benefit arising therefrom
must ensure to the benefit of the State and should not be used as a cloak for conferring private benefit upon a
limited class of persons.

 Protection in respect of conviction for offences
Articles 20, 21 and 22 provide a system of protection, relevant to the criminal law. Article 20 guarantees to all
persons – whether citizens or non-citizens-three rights namely –
    (i)   Protection against ex-post facto laws
		 According to Article 20(1), no person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in
   force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a penalty
   greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the commission
   of the offence.
		 Ex-post facto laws are laws which punished what had been lawful when done. If a particular act was not
   an offence according to the law of the land at the time when the person did that act, then he cannot be
   convicted under a law which with retrospective declares that act as an offence. For example, what was
   not an offence in 1972 cannot be declared as an offence under a law made in 1974 giving operation to
   such law from a back date, say from 1972.
		 Even the penalty for the commission of an offence cannot be increased with retrospective effect. For
   example, suppose for committing dacoity the penalty in 1970 was 10 years imprisonment and a person
   commits dacoity in that year. By a law passed after his committing the dacoity the penalty, for his act
   cannot be increased from 10 to 11 years or to life imprisonment.
		In Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of Vindhya Pradesh, AIR 1953 S.C. 394, it was clarified that Article 20(1)
  prohibited the conviction under an ex post facto law, and that too the substantive law. This protection is

                                                                                                                 51
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Constitution of India

            not available with respect to procedural law. Thus, no one has a vested right in procedure. A law which
            nullifies the rigour of criminal law is not affected by the rule against ex post facto law [Rattan Lal v. State
            of Punjab, (1964) 7 S.C.R. 676].
     (ii)   Protection against double jeopardy
		 According to Article 20(2), no person can be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than
   once. It is, however, to be noted that the conjunction “and” is used between the words prosecuted and
   punished, and therefore, if a person has been let off after prosecution without being punished, he can
   be prosecuted again.
  (iii)     Protection against self-incrimination
		 According to Article 20(3), no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against
   himself. In other words, an accused cannot be compelled to state anything which goes against him.
   But it is to be noted that a person is entitled to this protection, only when all the three conditions are
   fulfilled:
              1. that he must be accused of an offence;
             2.   that there must be a compulsion to be a witness; and
             3.   such compulsion should result in his giving evidence against himself.
So, if the person was not an accused when he made a statement or the statement was not made as a witness or
it was made by him without compulsion and does not result as a statement against himself, then the protection
available under this provision does not extend to such person or to such statement.
The ‘right against self-incrimination’ protects persons who have been formally accused as well as those who are
examined as suspects in criminal cases. It also extends to cover witnesses who apprehend that their answers
could expose them to criminal charges in the ongoing investigation or even in cases other than the one being
investigated. [Selvi v. State of Karnataka, AIR 2010 SC 1974].

 Protection of life and personal liberty
Article 21 confers on every person the fundamental right to life and personal liberty. It says that,
“No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.”
The right to life includes those things which make life meaningful. For example, the right of a couple to adopt a
son is a constitutional right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution (Philips Alfred Malvin v. Y.J Gonsalvis
and others, AIR 1999 Ker. 187). The right to life enshrined in Article 21 guarantees right to live with human dignity.
Right to live in freedom from noise pollution is a fundamental right protected by Article 21 and noise pollution
beyond permissible limits is an inroad into that right. [Noise Pollution (v), in re, (2005) 5 SCC 733].
The majority in the case of A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27, gave a narrow meaning to the
expression ‘personal liberty’ within the subject matter of Articles 20 to 22 by confining it to the liberty of the
person (that is, of the body of a person). The majority of the judges also took a narrow view of the expression
‘procedure established by law’ in this case. In the State of Maharashtra v. Prabhakar Pandurang Sanzigri, AIR
1966, SC 424, Subba Rao J. considered the inter-relation between Articles 19 and 21 as was discussed by the
majority Judges in the A.K. Gopalan’s case and came to the conclusion that “that view was not the last word on
the subject”.
The expression ‘liberty’ in the 5th and 14th Amendments of the U.S. Constitution has been given a very wide
meaning. The restricted interpretation of the expression ‘personal liberty’ preferred by the majority judgement
in A.K. Gopalan’s case namely, that the expression ‘personal liberty’ means only liberty relating to or concerning

52
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

the person or body of the individual, has not been accepted by the Supreme Court in subsequent cases.
That the expression ‘personal liberty’ is not limited to bodily restraint or to confinement to prison, only is well
illustrated in Kharak Singh v. State of U.P, AIR 1963 SC 1295. In that case the question raised was of the validity
of the police regulations authorising the police to conduct what are called as domiciliary visits against bad
characters and to have surveillance over them. The court held that such visits were an invasion, on the part
of the police, of the sanctity of a man’s home and an intrusion into his personal security and his right to sleep,
and therefore violative of the personal liberty of the individual, unless authorised by a valid law. As regards the
regulations authorising surveillance over the movements of an individual the court was of the view that they
were not bad, as no right to privacy has been guaranteed in the Constitution.
However, in Gobind v. State of M.P., AIR 1975 S.C. 1378, Mathew, J. asserted that the right to privacy deserves
to be examined with care and to be denied only when an important countervailing interest is shown to be
superior, and observed that this right will have to go through a process of case-by-case development. Mathew,
J. explained that even assuming that the right to personal liberty, the right to move freely throughout the territory
of India and the freedom of speech create an independent right to privacy as emanating from them, the right is
not absolute and it must be read subject to restrictions on the basis of compelling public interest.
Refusal of an application to enter a medical college cannot be said to affect person’s personal liberty under
Article 21 [State of A.P. v. L. Narendranathan, (1971) 1 S.C.C. 607].
In Satwant Singh Sawhney v. A.P.O., New Delhi, AIR 1967 S.C. 1836, it was held that right to travel is included
within the expression ‘personal liberty’ and, therefore, no person can be deprived of his right to travel, except
according to the procedure established by law. Since a passport is essential for the enjoyment of that right, the
denial of a passport amounts to deprivation of personal liberty. In the absence of any procedure prescribed
by the law of land sustaining the refusal of a passport to a person, it’s refusal amounts to an unauthorised
deprivation of personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21. This decision was accepted by the Parliament and the
infirmity was set right by the enactment of the Passports Act, 1967.
It was stated in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 S.C. 597, that ‘personal liberty’ within the meaning
of Article 21 includes within its ambit the right to go abroad, and no person can be deprived of this right except
according to procedure prescribed by law. In this case, it was clearly laid down that the fundamental rights
conferred by Part III of the Constitution are not distinct and mutually exclusive. Thus, a law depriving a person
of personal liberty and prescribing a procedure for that purpose within the meaning of Article 21 has still to
stand the test of one or more of fundamental rights conferred by Article 19 which may be applicable to a given
situation.
Procedure established by law
The expression ‘procedure established by law’ means procedure laid down by statute or procedure prescribed
by the law of the State. Accordingly, first, there must be a law justifying interference with the person’s life or
personal liberty, and secondly, the law should be a valid law, and thirdly, the procedure laid down by the law
should have been strictly followed.
The law laid down in A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras, AIR 1950 SC 27, that the expression ‘procedure established
by law’ means only the procedure enacted by a law made by the State was held to be incorrect in the Bank
Nationalisation Case (1970) 1 S.C.C. 248. Subsequently, in Maneka Gandhi’s case (AIR 1978 SC 49), it was laid
down, that the law must now be taken to be well settled that Article 21 does not exclude Article 19 and a law
prescribing a procedure for depriving a person of ‘personal liberty’ will have to meet the requirements of Article
21 and also of Article 19, as well as of Article 14.
The procedure must be fair, just and reasonable. It must not be arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. An interesting,
follow-up of the Maneka Gandhi’s case came in a series of cases.


                                                                                                                  53
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Constitution of India

In Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1980 S.C. 898, it was reiterated that in Article 21 the founding fathers
recognised the right of the State to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty in accordance with fair, just
and reasonable procedure established by valid law.
Presently, this term personal liberty extends to variety of matters like right to bail, right not to be handcuffed except
under very few cases, right to speedy trial, right to free legal aid etc. In Justice KS Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India
AIR 2017 SC 4161 Supreme Court held that right to life and personal liberty includes right to privacy as an integral
part guaranteed under part III of the Constitution. On August 24, 2017, the Supreme Court of India held that the right
to privacy is protected by the Constitution of India. Right to privacy applies across the gamut of “fundamental” rights
including equality, dignity (Article 14), speech, expression (Article 19), life, and liberty (Article 21).


 CASE LAW
 Swapnil Tripathi and Ors. vs. Supreme Court of India and Ors. (26.09.2018 - SC) : AIR 2018 SC 4806
 In this case, Petitioners have sought a declaration that Supreme Court case proceedings of “constitutional
 importance having an impact on the public at large or a large number of people” should be live streamed
 in a manner that is easily accessible for public viewing. The three judge bench held that live-streaming of
 court proceedings are important so as to enable administration of justice especially owing to the effect it has
 on public at large. It is important to re-emphasise the significance of live-streaming as an extension of the
 principle of open justice and open courts. it was stated in this cas as follows:
 “Live-streaming of proceedings is crucial to the dissemination of knowledge about judicial proceedings and
 granting full access to justice to the litigant. Access to justice can never be complete without the litigant
 being able to see, hear and understand the course of proceedings first hand. Apart from this, live-streaming
 is an important facet of a responsive judiciary which accepts and acknowledges that it is accountable to the
 concerns of those who seek justice.”
 PHR Invent Educational Society v. UCO Bank and Others, [2024] 4 S.C.R. 541 : 2024 INSC 297 decided
 by Supreme Court on 12.04.2024
 High Court will not entertain a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution if an effective alternative
 remedy is available to the aggrieved person. However, it is subject to certain exceptions
 This case can be referred to for understanding and give more clarity of the law relating to entertaining writ
 petition by the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
 In the instant case the Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down that it could thus clearly be seen that the Court
 has carved out certain exceptions when a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution could be entertained
 in spite of availability of an alternative remedy. Some of them are thus:
           (i) where the statutory authority has not acted in accordance with the provisions of the enactment
           in question;
           (ii) it has acted in defiance of the fundamental principles of judicial procedure;
           (iii) it has resorted to invoke the provisions which are repealed; and
           (iv) when an order has been passed in total violation of the principles of natural justice.
 Further it was clarified that the High Court will not entertain a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
 if an effective alternative remedy is available to the aggrieved person or the statute under which the action
 complained of has been taken itself contains a mechanism for redressal of grievance.


54
Constitution of India                                                                                            LESSON 2

 Article 21A: Right to Education
This was introduced by the Constitution (Eighty sixth Amendment) Act, 2002. According to this, the State shall
provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine. In Environmental and Consumers Protect foundation v. Delhi Administration 2012
(4) SCALE 243 the Court held that in order to ensure compliance of article 21A of the Constitution, it is imperative
that schools must have qualified teachers and basic infrastructure. In State of Tamil Nadu v. K. Shyam Sunder
AIR 2011 SC 3470 the Court held that right of a child should not be restricted only to free and compulsory
education, but should be extended to have quality education without any discrimination on the grounds of their
economic, social and cultural background. In Fahima Shareen RK v. State of Kerala and others the High Court of
Kerala on September 19, 2019 upheld that ‘Right to Internet Access’ as a fundamental right. The Court declared
that the right to have access to Internet becomes the part of right to education as well as right to privacy under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Protection against arrest and detention
Although Article 21 does not impose a limitation on the legislature in so far as the deprivation of life or personal
liberty is concerned, yet a legislative Act providing for such deprivation is subject to the procedural safeguards
provided in Article 22 and if it does not provide for any of these safeguards it shall be declared unconstitutional.
However, Article 22 does not apply uniformly to all persons and makes a distinction between:
   (a)     alien enemies,
   (b)     person arrested or detained under preventive detention law, and
   (c)     other persons.
So far as alien enemies are concerned the article provides no protection to them. So far as persons in category
are concerned, it provides the following rights (These rights are not given to persons detained under preventive
detention law).
    (i)    A person who is arrested cannot be detained in custody unless he has been informed, as soon as he
           may be, of the grounds for such arrest.
    (ii)   Such person shall have the right to consult and to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice.
   (iii)   A person who is arrested and detained must be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period
           of twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time of journey. And such a person shall not be
           detained in custody beyond twenty-four hours without the authority of magistrate.

 Preventive Detention
Preventive detention means detention of a person without trial. The object of preventive detention is not to
punish a person for having done something but to prevent him from doing it. No offence is proved nor any
charge formulated and yet a person is detained because he is likely to commit an act prohibited by law.
Parliament has the power to make a law for preventive detention for reasons connected with defence, foreign
affairs or the security of India. Parliament and State Legislatures are both entitled to pass a law of preventive
detention for reasons connected with the security of State, the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance
of supplies and services essential to the community.
Safeguards against Preventive Detention
Article 22 (amended by the 44th Constitution Amendment Act, 1978)1 contains following safeguards against
preventive detention:
   (a)     such a person cannot be detained for a longer period than three months unless:
1. The changes proposed by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment), Act, 1978 have not been notified as yet.

                                                                                                                      55
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India

            (i) An Advisory Board constituted of persons who are or have been or are qualified to be High Court
                judges has reported, before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is, in its
                opinion sufficient cause for such detention.
            (ii)   Parliament may by law prescribe the maximum period for which any person may in any class or
                   classes of cases be detained under any law providing for preventive detention and the procedure
                   to be followed by an Advisory Board.
     (b)   The authority ordering the detention of a person under the preventive detention law shall:
            (i) communicate to him, as soon as may be, the grounds on which the order for his detention has
                been made, and
            (ii)   afford him the earliest opportunity of making the representation against the order.
It may, however, be noted that while the grounds for making the order are to be supplied, the authority making
such order is not bound to disclose those facts which it considers to be against the public interest.

 Right against Exploitation
This group of fundamental rights consists of Articles 23 and 24. They provide for rights against exploitation of all
citizens and non-citizens. Taking them one by one they guarantee certain rights by imposing certain prohibitions
not only against the State but also against private persons.
     (a)   Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour
		 Article 23 imposes a complete ban on traffic in human beings, begar and other similar forms of forced
   labour. The contravention of these provisions is declared punishable by law. Thus the traditional system
   of beggary particularly in villages, becomes unconstitutional and a person who is asked to do any
   labour without payment or even a labourer with payment against his desire can complain against the
   violation of his fundamental right under Article 23.
		 ‘Traffic’ in human beings means to deal in men and women like goods, such as to sell or let or otherwise
   dispose them of. ‘Begar’ means involuntary work without payment.
		 The State can impose compulsory service for public purposes such as conscription for defence or social
   service etc. While imposing such compulsory service the State cannot make any discrimination on
   grounds only of religion, race, caste or class or any of them. (Clause 2 of Article 23).
     (b)   Prohibition of employment of children
		 Article 24 prohibits the employment of children below the age of fourteen in any factory or mine. The
   Employment of Children Act, 1938; The Factories Act, 1948; The Mines Act, 1952; The Apprentices’ Act,
   1961; and the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 are some of the important enactments
   in the statute book to protect the children from exploitation by unscrupulous employers.
		 The Supreme Court has issued detailed guidelines as to child labour in M.C. Mehta v. State of T.N., AIR
   1993 S.C. 699.

 Right to Constitutional Remedies
Article 32 guarantees the enforcement of Fundamental Rights. It is remedial and not substantive in nature.
The rest of the Articles 33 to 35 relate to supplementary matters and do not create or guarantee any right.
Therefore, we shall discuss Art. 32 first and then rest of the Articles, i.e., 33-35 briefly.



56
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

 Remedies for enforcement of Fundamental Rights
It is a cardinal principle of jurisprudence that where there is a right there is a remedy (ubi jus ibi remedium) and
if rights are given without there being a remedy for their enforcement, they are of no use. While remedies are
available in the Constitution and under the ordinary laws, Article 32 makes it a fundamental right that a person
whose fundamental right is violated has the right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for
the enforcement of this fundamental right. It is really a far reaching provision in the sense that a person need
not first exhaust the other remedies and then go to the Supreme Court. He can directly raise the matter before
highest Court of the land and the Supreme Court is empowered to issue directions or orders or writs in the
nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate
for the enforcement of the right, the violation of which has been alleged. This power of the Supreme Court to
issue directions, etc., may also be assigned to other Courts by Parliament without affecting the powers of the
Supreme Court.

 Example
 There is a right to freedom of speech under Constitution of India. What is the remedy provided for its violation?
 On the basis of principle of ubi jus ibi remedeum when there is right, there shall also be remedy. Article 32
 makes it a fundamental right that a person whose fundamental right is violated has the right to move the
 Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of this fundamental right.

The right to move the Supreme Court is itself a guaranteed right and the significance of this has been assessed
by Gajendragadkar, J. in the following words:
The fundamental right to move this Court can therefore be appropriately described as the cornerstone of the
democratic edifice raised by the Constitution. That is why it is natural that this Court should, in the words of
Patanjali Sastri, J., regard itself ‘as the protector and guarantor of fundamental rights’, and should declare that
“it cannot, consistently with the responsibility laid upon it, refuse to entertain applications seeking protection
against infringements of such rights. In discharging the duties assigned to it, this Court has to play the role of
‘sentinel on the qui vive’ (State of Madras v. V.G. Row, AIR 1952 SC 196) and it must always regard it as its solemn
duty to protect the said fundamental rights ‘zealously and vigilantly’. (Daryao v. State of U.P., AIR 1961 SC 1457).
Where a fundamental right is also available against private persons such as the right under Articles 17, 23 and
24, the Supreme Court can always be approached for appropriate remedy against the violation of such rights
by private individuals. (Peoples’ Union for Democratic Rights v. Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 1473). A petitioner’s
challenge under Article 32 extends not only to the validity of a law but also to an executive order issued under
the authority of the law. Court’s jurisdiction under Article 32 is ‘wide enough to reach out to injustice in any form’.
Article 32 empowers the Supreme Court to issue orders which enforce fundamental rights. [Romila Thapar v.
Union of India, (2018) 10 SCC 753].
In Nithya Anand Raghavan v. State of NCT of Delhi AIR 2017 SC 3137 the Supreme Court held that the remedy of
writ of habeas corpus cannot be used for mere enforcement of the directions given by the foreign court against
a person within its jurisdiction and convert that jurisdiction into that of an executing court. In Assam Sanmilata
Mahasangha v. Union of India AIR 2015 SC 783 the Court held that article 32 which has been described as
the ‘heart and soul’ of the Constitution guarantees the right to move to the Supreme Court for enforcement
of all or any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution. This article is therefore, itself a
fundamental right. In Centre for PIL v. Union of India AIR 2011 SC 1267 the Court held that before a citizen can
claim a writ of quo warranto he must satisfy the court inter-alia that the office in question is a public office and
it is held by a person without legal authority and that leads to the inquiry as to whether the appointment of the
said person has been in accordance with law or not. A writ of quo warranto is issued to prevent a continued
exercise of unlawful authority.

                                                                                                                    57
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

The right guaranteed by Article 32 shall not be suspended except as provided in the Constitution. Constitution
does not contemplate such suspension except by way of President’s order under Article 359 when a proclamation
of Emergency is in force.
In Article 31C the words appearing at the end of the main paragraph, namely and no law containing a declaration
that it is for giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give
effect to such policy were declared to be void in Kesavananda’s case.

 Supplementary provisions
Articles 33-35 – contain certain supplementary provisions.
Article 33 authorises Parliament to restrict or abrogate the application of fundamental rights in relation to
members of armed forces, para-military forces, police forces and analogous forces.
Article 34 is primarily concerned with granting indemnity by law in respect of acts done during operation of
martial law. The Constitution does not have a provision authorizing proclamation of martial law. Article 34 says
that Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the Union or of State or any other person,
for an act done during martial law.
Article 35 provides that wherever Parliament has by an express provision been empowered to make a law
restricting a fundamental right Parliament alone can do so, (and not the state legislature).

 Amendability of the Fundamental Rights
     (a)   Since 1951, questions have been raised about the scope of amending process contained in Article 368
           of the Constitution. The basic question raised was whether the Fundamental Rights are amendable.
           The question whether the word ‘Law’ in Clause (2) of Article 13 includes amendments or not or whether
           amendment in Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution is permissible under the
           procedure laid down in Article 368 had come before the Supreme Court in Shankari Prasad v. Union
           of India, A.I.R. 1951 S.C. 458, in 1951 where the First Amendment was challenged. The Court held that
           the power to amend the Constitution including the Fundamental Rights, was contained in Article 368
           and that the word ‘Law’ in Article 13(2) did not include an amendment to the Constitution which was
           made in exercise of constituent and not legislative power. This decision was approved by the majority
           judgement in Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 845.
		 Thus, until the case of I.C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1967, S.C. 1643, the Supreme Court had
   been holding that no part of our Constitution was unamenable and that Parliament might, by passing a
   Constitution Amendment Act, in compliance with the requirements of Article 368, amend any provision
   of the Constitution, including the Fundamental Rights and Article 368 itself.
     (b)   But, in Golak Nath’s case, a majority overruled the previous decisions and held that the Fundamental
           Rights are outside the amendatory process if the amendment takes away or abridges any of the
           rights. The majority, in Golak Nath’s case, rested its conclusion on the view that the power to amend
           the Constitution was also a legislative power conferred by Article 245 by the Constitution, so that a
           Constitution Amendment Act was also a ‘law’ within the purview of Article 13(2).
     (c)   To nullify the effect of Golak Nath’s case, Parliament passed the Constitution (Twenty-Fourth Amendment)
           Act in 1971 introducing certain changes in Article 13 and Article 368, so as to assert the power of
           Parliament (denied to it in Golak Nath’s case) to amend the Fundamental Rights. The Constitutional
           validity of the 24th Amendment was challenged in the case of
                                  . The Supreme Court upheld the validity of 24th Constitutional Amendment holding
           that Parliament can amend any Part of the Constitution including the Fundamental Rights. But the Court

58
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

         made it clear that Parliament cannot alter the basic structure or framework of the Constitution. In Indira
         Gandhi v. Raj Narain, AIR 1975 S.C. 2299, the appellant challenged the decision of the Allahabad High
         Court who declared her election as invalid on ground of corrupt practices. In the mean time Parliament
         enacted the 39th Amendment withdrawing the control of the S.C. over election disputes involving
         among others, the Prime Minister. The S.C. upheld the challenge and held that democracy was an
         essential feature forming part of the basic structure of the Constitution. The exclusion of Judicial review
         in Election disputes in this manner damaged the basic structure. The doctrine of ‘basic structure’ placed
         a limitation on the powers of the Parliament to introduce substantial alterations or to make a new
         Constitution.
		 To neutralise the effect of this limitation, the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) Act, 1976 added
   to Article 368 two new clauses. By new clause (4), it has been provided that no amendment of the
   Constitution made before or after the Forty-Second Amendment Act shall be questioned in any Court
   on any ground. New clause (5) declares that there shall be no limitation whatever on the Constitutional
   power of parliament to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution
   made under Article 368.
		 The scope and extent of the application of the doctrine of basic structure again came up for discussion
   before the Supreme Court in Minerva Mill Ltd. v. Union of India, (1980) 3 SCC, 625. The Supreme Court
   unanimously held clauses (4) and (5) of Article 368 and Section 55 of the 42nd Amendment Act as
   unconstitutional transgressing the limits of the amending power and damaging or destroying the basic
   structure of the Constitution.
		In Waman Rao v. Union of India, (1981) 2 SCC 362 the Supreme Court held that the amendments to the
  Constitution made on or after 24.4.1973 by which Ninth Schedule was amended from time to time by
  inclusion of various Acts, regulations therein were open to challenge on the ground that they, or any
  one or more of them are beyond the constitutional power of Parliament since they damage the basic
  or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure. [See also Bhim Singh Ji v. Union of India
  (1981)1 SCC 166.]
		In L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (1997) 3 SCC 261 the Supreme Court held that power of judicial
  review is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution constituting the basic part , the jurisdiction
  so conferred on the High Courts and the Supreme Court is a part of in-violable basic structure of the
  Constitution.
		In I.R. Coelho v. State of T.N., (2007) 2 SCC 1, Article 31-B as introduced by the Constitution (First
  amendment) Act 1951 was held to be valid by the Supreme Court. The fundamental question before
  the nine Judge Constitution Bench was whether on or after 24.4.1973 (i.e., when the basic structure of
  the Constitution was propounded) it is permissible for the Parliament under Article 31-B to immunize
  legislations from fundamental rights by inserting them into the Ninth Schedule and if so what is the
  effect on the power of judicial review of the court. The challenge was made to the validity of the Urban
  Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 which was inserted in the Ninth Schedule.
		 The Supreme Court held that all amendments to the Constitution made on or after 24.4.1973 by which
   Ninth Schedule is amended by inclusion of various laws therein shall have to be tested on the touch
   stone of the basic or essential features of the Constitution as reflected in Article 21 read with Article 14,
   Article 19 and the principles under lying them. So also any law included in Schedule IX do not become
   part of the Constitution. They derive their validity on account of being included in Schedule IX and this
   exercise is to be tested every time it is undertaken. If the validity of any Ninth Schedule law has already
   been upheld by this Court, it would not be open to challenge such law on the principles declared in this
   judgement. However, if a law held to be violative of any rights of Part III is subsequently incorporated
   in the Ninth Schedule after 24.4.1973 such a violation shall be open to challenge on the ground that it
   destroys or damages the basic structure doctrine.

                                                                                                                 59
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Constitution of India

		In Glanrock Estate (P) Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu (2010) 10 SCC 96, the Supreme Court upheld constitutional
  validity of Constitution (Thirty-fourth) Amendment Act, 1974. By Constitution (Thirty-fourth) Amendment
  Act, 1974 Gudalur Janman Estates (Abolition & Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1969 was inserted in the
  Ninth Schedule as item 80.
		 It was alleged that the 1969 Act violated the principle of equality because by the T N Land Reforms
   (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 only ceiling surplus forest lands vested in the State but by the
   1969 Act all forests vested in the State. The constitutional amendment was further challenged on the
   ground that it validated the 1969 Act by inserting it in the Ninth Schedule in spite of Section 3 of the 1969
   Act having been declared as unconstitutional in Balmadies case, (1972) 2 SCC 133, thereby violating
   the principles of judicial review, rule of law and separation of powers. (Section 3 had been declared
   unconstitutional in Balmadies case because it could not be shown how vesting of forest lands was an
   agrarian reform.)
		 Upholding the constitutional validity of the amendment, the Supreme Court held:
		 None of the facets of Article 14 have been abrogated by the Constitution (Thirty fourth Amendment)
   Act, 1974, which included the 1969 Act in the Ninth Schedule. When the 1969 Act was put in the Ninth
   Schedule in 1974, the Act received immunity from Article 31(2) with retrospective effect.
		 It is only that breach of the principle of equality which is of the character of destroying the basic
   framework of the Constitution which will not be protected by Article 31-B. If every breach of Article 14,
   however egregious, is held to be unprotected by Article 31-B, there would be no purpose in protection
   by Article 31-B.
		      In the present case, not even an ordinary principle of equality under Article 14, leave aside the egalitarian
        equality as an overarching principle, is violated. Even assuming for the sake of argument that Article
        14 stood violated, even then the 1969 Act in any event stood validated by its insertion in the Ninth
        Schedule vide the Constitution (Thirty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1974.There is no merit in the submission
        that the Constitution (Thirty fourth Amendment) Act, 1974 by which the 1969 Act was inserted in the
        Ninth Schedule as item 80 seeks to confer naked power on Parliament and destroys basic features of
        the Constitution, namely, judicial review and separation of powers as well as rule of law.
		 The doctrine of basic structure provides a touchstone on which validity of the constitutional amendment
   Act could be judged. Core constitutional values/ overarching principles like secularism; egalitarian
   equality etc. fall outside the amendatory power under Article 368 of the Constitution and Parliament
   cannot amend the constitution to abrogate these principles so as to rewrite the constitution. [In Glanrock
   Estate (P) Ltd. State of T N (2010) 10 SCC 96.]. In GVK industries v. The Income Tax Officer (2011) 4 SCC
   36 the Court held that under our Constitution, while some features are capable of being amended by
   Parliament, pursuant to the amending power granted by Article 368, the essential features - the basic
   structure - of the Constitution is beyond such powers of Parliament. The power to make changes to the
   basic structure of the Constitution vests only in the people sitting, as a nation, through its representatives
   in a Constituent Assembly.

 DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
The Sub-committee on Fundamental Rights constituted by the Constituent Assembly had suggested two types
of Fundamental Rights – one which can be enforced in the Courts of law and the other which because of their
different nature cannot be enforced in the law Courts. Later on however, the former were put under the head
‘Fundamental Rights’ as Part III which we have already discussed and the latter were put separately in Part IV
of the Constitution under the heading ‘Directive Principles of State Policy’ which are discussed in the following
pages.
The Articles included in Part IV of the Constitution (Articles 36 to 51) contain certain Directives which are the
guidelines for the future Government to lead the country. Article 37 provides that the ‘provisions contained

60
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

in this part (i) shall not be enforceable by any Court, but the principles therein laid down are neverthless (ii)
fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in
making laws. The Directives, however, differ from the Fundamental Rights contained in Part-III of the Constitution
or the ordinary laws of the land in the following respects:
    (i)    The Directives are not enforceable in the courts and do not create any justiciable rights in favour of
           individuals.
   (ii)    The Directives require to be implemented by legislation and so long as there is no law carrying out the
           policy laid down in a Directive neither the state nor an individual can violate any existing law.
   (iii)   The Directives per-se do not confer upon or take away any legislative power from the appropriate
           legislature.
   (iv)    The courts cannot declare any law as void on the ground that it contravenes any of the Directive
           Principles.
   (v)     The courts are not competent to compel the Government to carry out any Directives or to make any law
           for that purpose.
   (vi)    Though it is the duty of the state to implement the Directives, it can do so only subject to the limitations
           imposed by the different provisions of the Constitution upon the exercise of the legislative and executive
           power by the state.

 Conflict between a Fundamental Right and a Directive Principle
The declarations made in Part IV of the Constitution under the head ‘Directive Principles of State Policy’ are in
many cases of a wider import than the declarations made in Part III as ‘Fundamental Rights’. Hence, the question
of priority in case of conflict between the two classes of the provisions may easily arise. What will be the legal
position if a law enacted to enforce a Directive Principle violates a Fundamental Right? Initialy, the Courts,
adopted a strict view in this respect and ruled that a Directive Principle could not override a Fundamental
Right, and in case of conflict between the two, a Fundamental Right would prevail over the Directive Principle.
When the matter came before the Supreme Court in State of Madras v. Champakram Dorairajan, AIR 1951 S.C.
226, where the validity of a Government order alleged to be made to give effect to a Directive Principle was
challenged as being violative of a Fundamental Right, the Supreme Court made the observation that :
“The Directive Principles of State Policy have to conform to and run as subsidiary to the chapter of Fundamental
Rights.”
The Court ruled that while the Fundamental Rights were enforceable, the Directive Principles were not, and so
the laws made to implement Directive Principles could not take away Fundamental Rights.
The Supreme Court also pointed out that looking at Directive Principles, we find as was envisaged by the
Constitution makers, that they lay down the ideals to be observed by every Government to bring about an
economic democracy in this country. Such a democracy actually is our need and unless we achieve it as soon
as possible, there is a danger to our political and constitutional democracy of being overthrown by undemocratic
and unconstitutional means.

 Important Directive Principles
To be specific, the important Directive Principles are enumerated below:
   (a)     State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people:
            (1)   The State must strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as
                  effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political should inform
                  all the institutions of the national life (Article 38).

                                                                                                                    61
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Constitution of India

             (2)    The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in income and endeavour to
                    eliminate inequalities in status, facilities, and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also
                    among groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations. (introduced
                    by Constitution 44th Amendment Act).
     (b)     Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State. The State, particularly, must direct its policy
             towards securing:
              (1)   that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood;
             (2)    that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as
                    best to subserve the common good;
             (3) that the operation of the economic systems does not result in the concentration of wealth and
                 means of production to the common detriment;
             (4)    equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
             (5) that the health and strength of workers and children is not abused and citizens are not forced by
                 the economic necessity to enter a vocation unsuited to their age or strength;
             (6)    that childhood, and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material
                    abandonment (Article 39).
 (bb)        The State shall secure that the operation of legal system promotes justice on a basis of equal
             opportunity, and shall, in particular provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any
             other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason of
             economic or other disabilities (Article 39A).
     (c)     The State must take steps to organise the Village Panchayats and enable them to function as units of
             self- government (Article 40).
     (d)     Within the limits of economic capacity and development the State must make effective provision for
             securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in case of unemployment, old age, etc.
             (Article 41).
     (e)     Provision must be made for just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief (Article 42).
     (f)     The State must endeavour to secure living wage and good standard of life to all types of workers and
             must endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual of co-operative basis in rural areas
             (Article 43).
     (ff)    The State take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers
             in the management of undertakings, establishments or other organisations engaged in any industry
             (Article 43A).
     (g)     The State must endeavour to provide a uniform civil code for all Indian citizens (Article 44).
     (h)     Provision for free and compulsory education for all children upto the age of fourteen years (Article 45).
      (i)    The State must promote the educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
             Tribes and other weaker sections (Article 46).
      ( j)   The State must regard it one of its primary duties to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of
             living and to improve public health and in particular it must endeavour to bring about prohibition of the
             consumption, except for medicinal purposes, in intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to
             health (Article 47).
     (k)     The State must organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and improve
             the breeds and prohibit the slaughter of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle (Article
             48).

62
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

  (kk)    The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and
          wild life of the country (Article 48A).
    (l)   Protection of monuments and places and objects of national importance is obligatory upon the State
          (Article 49).
  (m)     The State must separate executive from judiciary in the public services of the State (Article 50).
   (n)    In international matters the State must endeavour to promote peace and security, maintain just and
          honourable relations in respect of international law between nations, treaty obligations and encourage
          settlement of international disputes by arbitration (Article 51).

 FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
Article 51A imposing the fundamental duties on every citizen of India was inserted by the Constitution Forty-
second Amendment) Act, 1976.
The objective in introducing these duties is not laid down in the Bill except that since the duties of the citizens
are not specified in the Constitution, so it was thought necessary to introduce them.
These Fundamental Duties are:




Since the duties are imposed upon the citizens and not upon the States, legislation is necessary for their


                                                                                                                63
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

implementation. Fundamental duties can’t be enforced by writs (Surya Narain v. Union of India, AIR 1982
Raj 1). The Supreme Court in AIIMS Students’ Union v. AIIMS (2002) SCC 428 has reiterated that though the
fundamental duties are not enforceable by the courts, they provide a valuable guide and aid to the interpretation
of Constitutional and legal issues.
Further, in Om Prakash v. State of U.P. (2004) 3 SCC 402, the Supreme Court held that fundamental duties
enjoined on citizens under Article 51-A should also guide the legislative and executive actions of elected or
non- elected institutions and organizations of citizens including municipal bodies.

 ORDINANCE MAKING POWERS

 1. Of the President
In Article 53 the Constitution lays down that the “executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President”.
The President of India shall, thus, be the head of the ‘executive power’ of the Union. The executive power may
be defined as the power of “carrying on the business of Government” or “the administration of the affairs of the
state” excepting functions which are vested in any other authority by the Constitution. The various powers that
are included within the comprehensive expression ‘executive power’ in a modern state have been classified
under various heads as follows:




      (i)    Administrative power, i.e., the execution of the laws and the administration of the departments of
             Government.
     (ii)    Military power, i.e., the command of the armed forces and the conduct of war.
     (iii)   Legislative power, i.e., the summoning; prorogation, etc. of the legislature.
     (iv)    Judicial power, i.e., granting of pardons, reprieves etc. to persons convicted of crime.
These powers vest in the President under each of these heads, subject to the limitations made under the
Constitution.
Ordinance-making power
The most important legislative power conferred on the President is to promulgate Ordinances. Article 123 of the
Constitution provides that the President shall have the power to legislate by Ordinances at any time when it
is not possible to have a parliamentary enactment on the subject, immediately. This is a special feature of the
Constitution of India.
The ambit of this Ordinance-making power of the President is co-extensive with the legislative powers of
Parliament, that is to say it may relate to any subject in respect of which parliament has the right to legislate
and is subject to the same constitutional limitations as legislation by Parliament.
According to Article 13(3)(a) “Law” includes an “Ordinance”. But an Ordinance shall be of temporary duration. It
may be of any nature, i.e., it may be retrospective or may amend or repeal any law or Act of Parliament itself.
This independent power of the executive to legislate by Ordinance has the following peculiarities:
      (i)    the Ordinance-making power will be available to the President only when both the Houses of Parliament

64
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

           have been prorogued or is otherwise not in session, so that it is not possible to have a law enacted by
           Parliament. However, Ordinance can be made even if only one House is in Session because law cannot
           be made by that House in session alone. Both the Houses must be in session when Parliament makes
           the law. The President’s Ordinance making power under the Constitution is not a co-ordinate or parallel
           power of legislation along with Legislature.
   (ii)    this power is to be exercised by the President on the advice of his Council of Ministers.
   (iii)   the President must be satisfied about the need for the Ordinance and he cannot be compelled
   (iv)    the Ordinance must be laid before Parliament when it re-assembles, and shall automatically cease to
           have effect at the expiration of 6 weeks from the date of re-assembly or before resolutions have been
           passed disapproving the Ordinance.
   (v)     the period of six weeks will be counted from the latter date if the Houses reassemble on different dates.
  Example
  The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 and the Taxation and other laws (Relaxation
  of certain Provisions) Ordinance, 2020 are few of the ordinances passed by President of India in the year
  2020.

 2. Of the Governor
The executive power of the State is vested in the Governor and all executive action of the State has to be taken
in the name of the Governor. Normally there shall be a Governor for each State but the same person can be
appointed as Governor for two or more States. The Governor of a State is not elected but is appointed by the
President and holds his office at the pleasure of the President. The head of the executive power to a State is the
Governor just as the President for the Union.
Powers: The Governor possesses executive, legislation and judicial powers as the President’s except that he
has no diplomate or military powers like the President.
Ordinance making power
This power is exercised under the head of ‘legislative powers’. The Governor’s power to make Ordinances as
given under Article 213 is similar to the Ordinance making power of the President and have the force of an Act
of the State Legislature. He can make Ordinance only when the State Legislature or either of the two Houses
(where it is bicameral) is not in session. He must be satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary
to take immediate action. While exercising this power Governor must act with the aid and advise of the Council
of Ministers. But in following cases the Governor cannot promulgate any Ordinance without instructions from
the President:
   (a)     if a Bill containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have required the previous section
           of the President.
   (b)     he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing the same provisions for the consideration
           of the President.
   (c)     an Act of the State legislature containing the same provisions would under this Constitution have been
           invalid under having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had received the assent of
           the President.
The Ordinance must be laid before the state legislature (when it re-assembles) and shall automatically cease
to have effect at the expiration of six weeks from the date of the re-assembly unless disapproved earlier by that
legislature.


                                                                                                                 65
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Constitution of India


 Example
 There is an urgent need for passing a legislation for the country. The parliament is not in session. What can
 be done in this case?
 If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that
 circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such
 Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.

 LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE UNION AND THE STATES

 1. Two Sets of Government
The Indian Constitution is essentially federal.
Dicey, in the “Law of Constitution’ has said “Federation means the distribution of the force of the State among a
number of co-ordinate bodies, each originating in and controlled by the Constitution”. The field of Government
is divided between the Federal and State Governments which are not subordinate to one another but are
co-ordinate and independent within the sphere allotted to them. The existence of co-ordinate authorities
independent of each other is the gist of the federal principle.
A federal constitution establishes a dual polity as it comprises two levels of Government. At one level, there
exists a Central Government having jurisdiction over the whole country and reaching down to the person and
property of every individual therein. At the other level, there exists the State Government each of which exercises
jurisdiction in one of the States into which the country is divided under the Constitution. A citizen of the federal
country thus becomes subject to the decrees of two Government – the central and the regional.
The Union of India is now composed of 29 States and both the Union and the States derive their authority
from the Constitution which divides all powers-legislative, executive and financial, between them. The result
is that the States are not delegates of the Union and though there are agencies and devices for Union control
over the States in many matters, the States are autonomous within their own spheres as allotted to them by
the Constitution. Both the Union and States are equally subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution,
say, for example, the exercise of legislative powers being limited by Fundamental Rights. However, there are
some parts of Indian territory which are not covered by these States and such territories are called Union
Territories.
The two levels of Government divide and share the totality of governmental functions and powers between
themselves. A federal constitution thus envisages a division of governmental functions and powers between the
centre and the regions by the sanction of the Constitution.
Chapter I of Part XI (Articles 245 to 255) of the Indian Constitution read with Seventh Schedule thereto covers
the legislative relationship between the Union and the States. Analysis of these provisions reveals that the
entire legislative sphere has been divided on the basis of:
     (a)   territory with respect to which the laws are to be made, and
     (b)   subject matter on which laws are to be made.

 2. Territorial Distribution
The Union Legislature, i.e., Parliament has the power to make laws for the whole of the territory of India or any
part thereof, and the State Legislatures have the power to make laws for the whole or any part of the territory
of the respective States. Thus, while the laws of the Union can be enforced throughout the territory of India, the
laws of a State cannot be operative beyond the territorial limits of that State. For example, a law passed by


66
Constitution of India                                                                                         LESSON 2

the legislature of the Punjab State cannot be made applicable to the State of Uttar Pradesh or any other state.
However, this simple generalisation of territorial division of legislative jurisdiction is subject to the following
clarification.
  (A)    Parliament
		 From the territorial point of view, Parliament, being supreme legislative body, may make laws for the
   whole of India; or any part thereof; and it can also make laws which may have their application even
   beyond the territory of India. A law made by Parliament is not invalid merely because it has an extra-
   territorial operation.
		 As explained by Kania C.J. in A.H. Wadia v. Income-tax Commissioner, A.I.R. 1949 F.C. 18, 25 “In the
   case of sovereign Legislature, questions of extra-territoriality of any enactment can never be raised
   in the municipal courts as a ground for challenging its validity. The legislation may offend the rules
   of International law, may not be recognised by foreign courts, or there may be practical difficulties in
   enforcing them but these are questions of policy with which the domestic tribunals are not concerned”.
		       A Union Territory is administered directly by the Central Executive. Article 239(1) provides save as otherwise
         provided, by Parliament by law, every Union Territory shall be administered by the President acting, to
         such extent as he thinks fit, through an Administrator to be appointed by him with such designation as
         he may specify. Article 239A empowers Parliament to create local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or
         both for certain Union Territories with such constitutional powers and functions, in each case, as may be
         specified in the law. Article 246(4) provides that Parliament can make a law for a Union
		 Territory with respect to any matter, even if it is one which is enumerated in the State List. With regard
   to Union Territories, there is no distribution of legislative powers. Parliament has thus plenary powers
   to legislate for the Union Territories with regard to any subject. These powers are, however, subject to
   some special provisions of the Constitution.
   (B)   State Legislature
		 A State Legislature may make laws only for the state concerned. It can also make laws which may
   extend beyond the territory of that State. But such law can be valid only on the basis of “territorial
   nexus”. That is, if there is sufficient nexus or connection between the State and the subject matter of the
   law which falls beyond the territory of the State, the law will be valid. The sufficiency of the nexus is to
   be seen on the basis of the test laid down by our Supreme Court in State of Bombay v. R.M.D.C., A.I.R.
   1957 S.C. 699, according to which two conditions, must be fulfilled:
           (i) the connection must be real and not illusory; and
          (ii)   the liability sought to be imposed by that law must be pertinent to that connection.
		       If both the conditions are fulfilled by a law simultaneously then only it is valid otherwise not. To illustrate,
         in the case cited above a newspaper in the name of “Sporting Star” was published and printed at
         Bangalore in Mysore (now Karnataka) State. It contained crossword puzzles and engaged in prize
         competitions. It had wide circulation in the State of Bombay (now Maharashtra) and most of its activities
         such as the standing invitations, the filling up of the forms and the payment of money took place
         within that State. The State of Bombay imposed a tax on the newspaper. The publishers challenged
         the validity of the law on the ground that it was invalid in so far it covered a subject matter falling
         beyond the territory of that State because the paper was published in another State. The Supreme
         Court, applying the doctrine of territorial nexus, held that the nexus was sufficient between the law
         and its subject-matter to justify the imposition of the tax. So in this way, the state laws may also have
         a limited extra-territorial operation and it is not necessary that such law should be only one relating to
         tax-matters.

                                                                                                                      67
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Constitution of India

 3. Distribution of Subject Matter of Legislation
In distributing the subjects on which legislation can be made, different constitutions have adopted different
pattern. For example, in the U.S.A. there is only one short list on the subject. Either by their express terms or
by necessary implication some of them are exclusively assigned to the Central Government and the others
concurrent on which Centre and the States both can make laws. The subjects not enumerated in this list, i.e.,
residuary subjects, have been left for the States. Similar pattern has been followed in Australia but there is one
short list in which a few subjects have been exclusively assigned to the Centre and there is a longer list in which
those subjects are enumerated on which Centre and States both can make laws. By necessary implication a
few of these concurrent subject have also become exclusively Central subjects. The unenumerated subjects
fall exclusively within the State jurisdiction. A different pattern has been adopted in Canada where there are
three lists of subjects, one consists of subjects exclusively belonging to the Centre, and the other consists of
those exclusively belonging to the States and the third where both can make law. Thus residuary subjects fall
within the central jurisdiction. The Government of India Act, 1935 followed the Canadian pattern subject to the
modification that here the lists of subjects were much more detailed as compared to those in the Canadian
Constitution and secondly, the residuary subjects had been left to the discretion of the Governor-General which
he could assign either to Centre or to the States.
The Constitution of India, substantially follows the pattern of the Government of India Act, 1935 subject to
the modification that the residuary subjects have been left for the Union as in Canada. To understand the
whole scheme, the Constitution draws three long lists of all the conceivable legislative subjects. These lists
are contained in the VIIth Schedule to the Constitution. List I is named as the Union List. List II as the State List
and III as the Concurrent List. Each list contains a number of entries in which the subjects of legislation have
been separately and distinctly mentioned. The number of entries in the respective lists is 97, 66 and 47. The
subjects included in each of the lists have been drawn on certain basic considerations and not arbitrarily or in
any haphazard manner.
Thus, those subjects which are of national interest or importance, or which need national control and
uniformity of policy throughout the country have been included in the Union List; the subjects which
are of local or regional interest and on which local control is more expedient, have been assigned to
the State List and those subjects which ordinarily are of local interest yet need uniformity on national
level or at least with respect to some parts of the country, i.e., with respect, to more than one State have
been allotted to the Concurrent List. To illustrate, defence of India, naval, military and air forces; atomic
energy, foreign affairs, war and peace, railways, posts and telegraphs, currency, coinage and legal
tender; foreign loans; Reserve Bank of India; trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and
export across customs frontiers; inter-State trade and commerce, banking; industrial disputes concerning
Union employees; coordination and determination of Standards in institutions for higher education are
some of the subjects in the Union List. Public Order; police; prisons; local Government; public health
and sanitation; trade and commerce within the State; markets and fairs; betting and gambling etc., are
some of the subjects included in the State List. And coming to the Concurrent List, Criminal law; marriage
and divorce; transfer of property; contracts; economic and social planning; commercial and industrial
insurance; monopolies; social security and social insurance; legal, medical and other professions; price
control, electricity; acquisition and requisition of property are some of the illustrative matters included
in the Concurrent List.
Apart from this enumeration of subjects, there are a few notable points with respect to these lists, e.g.:
     (i)   The entries relating to tax have been separated from other subjects and thus if a subject is included
           in any particular List it does not mean the power to impose tax with respect to that also follows. Apart

68
Constitution of India                                                                                            LESSON 2

           from that, while other subjects are in the first part of the List in one group, the subjects relating to tax
           are given towards the end of the List.
   (ii)    Subject-matter of tax is enumerated only in the Union List and the State List. There is no tax subject
           included in the Concurrent List.
   (iii)   In each List there is an entry of “fees” with respect to any matter included in that List excluding court fee.
           This entry is the last in all the Lists except List I where it is last but one.
   (iv)    There is an entry each in Lists I and II relating to “offences against laws with respect to any of the
           matters” included in the respective List while criminal law is a general subject in the Concurrent List.
So far we have discussed the general aspect of the subject matters of legislation or of the items on which
Legislation could be passed. The next question that arises is, who will legislate on which subject? Whether, it
is both Centre and the States that can make laws on all subjects included in the three Lists or there is some
division of power between the two to make laws on these subjects? The answer is that the Constitution makes
clear arrangements as to how the powers shall be exercised by the Parliament or the State Legislatures on
these subjects. That arrangement is mainly contained in Article 246, but in addition to that, provisions have also
been made in Articles 247 to 254 of the Constitution.

 4. Legislative Powers of the Union and the States with respect to Legislative Subjects
The arrangement for the operation of legislative powers of the Centre and the States with respect to different
subjects of legislation is as follows:
   (a)     With respect to the subject enumerated in the Union, i.e., List I, the Union Parliament has the exclusive
           power to make laws. The State Legislature has no power to make laws on any of these subjects and it
           is immaterial whether Parliament has exercised its power by making a law or not. Moreover, this power
           of parliament to make laws on subjects included in the Union List is notwithstanding the power of the
           States to make laws either on the subjects included in the State List or the Concurrent List. If by any
           stretch of imagination or because of some mistake – which is not expected – the same subject which is
           included in the Union List is also covered in the State List, in such a situation that subject shall be read
           only in List I and not in List II or List III. By this principle the superiority of the Union List over the other
           two has been recognised.
   (b)     With respect to the subjects enumerated in the State List, i.e., List II, the legislature of a State has
           exclusive power to make laws. Therefore Parliament cannot make any law on any of these subjects,
           whether the State makes or does not make any law.
   (c)     With respect to the subjects enumerated in the Concurrent List, i.e., List III, Parliament and the State
           Legislatures both have powers to make laws. Thus, both of them can make a law even with respect
           to the same subject and both the laws shall be valid in so far as they are not repugnant to each other.
           However, in case of repugnancy, i.e., when there is a conflict between such laws then the law made by
           Parliament shall prevail over the law made by the State Legislature and the latter will be valid only to
           the extent to which it is not repugnant to the former. It is almost a universal rule in all the Constitutions
           where distribution of legislative powers is provided that in the concurrent field the Central law prevails
           if it conflicts with a State law. However, our Constitution recognises an exception to this general or
           universal rule. The exception is that if there is already a law of Parliament on any subject enumerated
           in the Concurrent List and a state also wants to make a law on the same subject then a State can do so
           provided that law has been reserved for the consideration of the President of India and has received his
           assent. Such law shall prevail in that State over the law of Parliament if there is any conflict between
           the two. However, Parliament can get rid of such law at any time by passing a new law and can modify
           by amending or repealing the law of the State.
   (d)     With respect to all those matters which are not included in any of the three lists, Parliament has the


                                                                                                                         69
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Constitution of India

           exclusive power to make laws. It is called the residuary legislative power of Parliament. The Supreme Court
           has held that the power to impose wealth-tax on the total wealth of a person including his agricultural
           land belongs to Parliament in its residuary jurisdiction (Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 1061).
 5. Power of Parliament to make Laws on State List
We have just discussed that the State legislatures have the exclusive powers to make laws with respect to
the subjects included in the State List and Parliament has no power to encroach upon them. However, our
Constitution makes a few exceptions to this general rule by authorising Parliament to make law even on the
subjects enumerated in the State List. Following are the exceptions which the Constitution so recognises:
     (a)   In the National Interest (Article 249)
		 Parliament can make a law with respect to a matter enumerated in the State List if the Council of
   States declares by a resolution supported by two-thirds of its members present and voting, that it is
   necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should make a law on that matter. By
   such declaration Parliament gets the authority to legislate on that matter for the whole or part of the
   country so long as the resolution of the Council of States remains in force. But such resolution shall
   remain in force for a period not exceeding one year. However, a fresh resolution can be passed at the
   end of one year to give extended lease to the law of Parliament and that way the law of Parliament can
   be continued to remain in force for any number of years.
		 The laws passed by Parliament under the provision cease to have effect automatically after six months
   of the expiry of the resolution period. Beyond that date, such Parliamentary law becomes inoperative
   except as regards the thing done or omitted to be done before the expiry of that law.
     (b)   During a proclamation of emergency (Article 250)
		 While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, Article 250 of the Constitution of India removes
   restrictions on the legislative authority of the Union Legislature in relation to the subjects enumerated in
   the State List. Thus, during emergency, Parliament shall have power to make laws for the whole or any
   part of the territory of India with respect to all matters in the State List. These laws will cease to have
   effect on the expiration of six months after the proclamation ceases to operate. After that date, such
   Union laws shall become inoperative, except in respect of things done or omitted to be done before
   the expiry of the said period. Under Article 352, if the President is satisfied that a grave emergency
   exists where-by the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened whether by war,
   or external aggression or armed rebellion, he may by proclamation make a declaration to that effect
   in respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be specified in the
   proclamation. It is not necessary that there is an actual war or armed rebellion. It is enough that the
   President is satisfied that there is an imminent danger of such war or armed rebellion as the case may
   be. The proclamation of emergency shall not be issued except when the decision of the Union Cabinet
   that such proclamation may be issued, has been communicated to the President in writing. Every such
   proclamation shall be laid before each House of Parliament and unless it is approved by both the
   Houses by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting within a period of
   30 days thereof, such proclamation shall cease to operate. If any such proclamation is issued at a time
   when the House of People (Lok Sabha) has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the House of People
   takes place during the period of one month referred to above but before passing the resolution, and if
   a resolution approving the proclamation has been passed by the Council of State (Rajya Sabha), the
   proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiry of thirty days from the date on which the House of
   the People (Lok Sabha) first sits after it’s reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period
   of thirty days a resolution approving the proclamation has also been passed by the House of the
   People.
		 A proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six

70
Constitution of India                                                                                 LESSON 2

         months from the date of passing of the second resolution approving the proclamation. But this period
         of six months may be extended by a further period of six months, if, within the first six months, both
         the Houses of Parliament pass a resolution approving the continuance in force of such proclamation.
         Prior to the Constitution 44th Amendment Act, the position was that the proclamation when approved
         by both the Houses of Parliament would remain in the force for an indefinite period unless and until
         the President chose to revoke the proclamation in exercise of the power conferred by the then Article
         352(2)(a).
		 Article 353 provides that while a proclamation of emergency is in operation, the Parliament shall have
   the power to make laws conferring powers and imposing duties or authorising the conferring of powers
   and the imposition of duties upon the Union or officers and authorities of the Union as respects that
   matter, notwithstanding, that it is one which is not enumerated in the Union List.
   (c)   Breakdown of Constitutional Machinery in a State (Article 356 and 357)
		 In case the Governor of a State reports to the President, or he is otherwise satisfied that the Government
   of a State cannot be carried on according to the provisions of the Constitution, then he (President)
   can make a proclamation to that effect. By that proclamation, he can assume to himself all or any
   of the functions of the Government of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable
   by the Governor or any body or authority in the State, and declare that the powers of Legislature
   of that State shall vest in Parliament. Parliament can make laws with respect to all State matters as
   regards the particular State in which there is a breakdown of constitutional machinery and is under
   the President’s rule. Further it is not necessary that the legislature of the concerned State should be
   suspended or dissolved before it is brought under the President’s rule, but practically it so happens. It
   is important to note that the President cannot, however, assume to himself any of the powers vested in
   or exercisable by a High Court or to suspend, either in whole or in part, the operation of any provision
   of the Constitution relating to the High Courts.
		 Under the Constitution of India, the power is really that of the Union Council of Ministers with the Prime
   Minister as its head. The satisfaction of the President contemplated by this Article is subjective in nature.
   The power conferred by Article 356 upon the President is a conditional power. It is notan absolute power.
   The existence of material-which may comprise of, or include, the report(s) of the Governor – is a pre-
   condition. The satisfaction must be formed on relevant materials. Though the power of dissolving the
   Legislative Assembly can be said to be implicit in Clause (1) of Article 356, it must be held, having regard
   to the overall Constitutional scheme that the President shall exercise it only after the proclamation is
   approved by both the Houses of Parliament under Clause (3) and not before. Until such approval, the
   President can only suspend the Legislative Assembly by suspending the provisions of the Constitution
   relating to the Legislative Assembly under Sub-clause (c) of Clause (1). The proclamation under Clause
   (1) can be issued only where the situation contemplated by the clause arises. Clause (3) of Article 356,
   is conceived as a control on the power of the President and also as a safeguard against its abuse (S.R.
   Bommai v. Union of India, AIR 1994 SC 1918).
		 Clause 2 of Article 356 provides that any such proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent
   proclamation. It may, however, be noted that the presidential proclamation is valid only for six months
   at a time and that also if approved by both the Houses of Parliament within a period of two months
   from the date of proclamation. A fresh proclamation can be issued to extend the life of the existing
   one for a further period of six months but in no case such proclamation can remain in force beyond a
   consecutive period of three years. The Constitution (Forty-Second) Amendment Act, 1976 inserted a
   new clause (2) in Article 357. It provides that any law made in exercise of the Power of the Legislature
   of the State by Parliament or the President or other Authority referred to in Sub-clause (a) of Clause (1)
   which Parliament or the President or such other Authority would not, but for the issue of a proclamation

                                                                                                             71
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

           under Article 356 have been competent to make shall, after the proclamation has ceased to operate,
           continue in force until altered, or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other authority.
           This means that the laws made during the subsistence of the proclamation shall continue to be in
           force unless and until they are altered or repealed by the State Legislature. So an express negative
           act is required in order to put an end to the operation of the laws made in respect of that State by the
           Union.
		 The action of the President under Article 356 is a constitutional function and the same is subject
   to judicial review. The Supreme Court or High Court can strike down the proclamation if it is found
   to be mala fide or based on wholly irrelevant or extraneous grounds. If the Court strikes down the
   proclamation, it has the power to restore the dismissed government to office and revive and reactivate
   the Legislative Assembly wherever it may have been dissolved or kept under suspension. (see S.R.
   Bommai’s case).
     (d)   On the request of two or more States (Article 252)
		 Article 252 of the Constitution enumerates the power of Parliament to legislate for state. The exercise
   of such power is conditional upon an agreement between two or more States requesting Parliament to
   legislate for them on a specified subject. This Article provides that, if two or more States are desirous
   that on any particular item included in the State List there should be a common legislation applicable to
   all such State then they can make a request to Parliament to make such law on that particular subject.
   Such request shall be made by passing a resolution in the legislatures of the State concerned. If request
   is made in that form then parliament can make law on that subject as regards those States. The law so
   made may be adopted by other States also, by passing resolutions in their legislatures. Once, however,
   such law has been made, the power of those State legislatures which originally requested or which
   later on adopted such law is curtailed as regards that matter; and only Parliament can amend, modify
   or repeal such a law on similar request being made by any State or States. If any of the consenting
   States makes a law on that subject then its law will be invalid to the extent to which it is inconsistent
   with a law of Parliament.
		 To take an example, Parliament passed the Prize Competitions Act, 1955 under the provisions of the
   Constitution.
     (e)   Legislation for enforcing international agreements (Article 253)
		 Parliament has exclusive power with respect to foreign affairs and entering into treaties and
   agreements with foreign countries and implementing of treaties and agreements and conventions with
   foreign countries. But a treaty or agreement concluded with another country may require national
   implementation and for that purpose a law may be needed. To meet such difficulties, the Constitution
   authorises Parliament to make law on any subject included in any list to implement:
            (i) any treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries, or
            (ii)   any decision made at any international conference, association or other body.
		         These five exceptions to the general scheme of distribution of legislative powers on the basis of exclusive
           Union and State Lists go to show that in our Constitution there is nothing which makes the States totally
           immune from legislative interference by the Centre in any matter. There remains no subject in the
           exclusive State jurisdiction which cannot be approached by the Centre in certain situations. But by this,
           one must not conclude that the distribution of legislative power in our Constitution is just illusory and all
           the powers vest in the Centre. On the other hand, the distribution of legislative powers is real and that is
           the general rule but to face the practical difficulties the Constitution has made a few exceptions which
           are to operate within the circumscribed sphere and conditions.


72
Constitution of India                                                                                          LESSON 2

 6. Interpretation of the Legislative Lists
For giving effect to the various items in the different lists the Courts have applied mainly the following principles :
   (a)   Plenary Powers: The first and foremost rule is that if legislative power is granted with respect to a subject
         and there are no limitations imposed on the power, then it is to be given the widest scope that its words
         are capable of, without, rendering another item nugatory. In the words of Gajenderagadkar, C.J.
		 “It is an elementary cardinal rule of interpretation that the words used in the Constitution which confer
   legislative power must receive the most liberal construction and if they are words of wide amplitude,
   they must be interpreted so as to give effect to that amplitude. A general word used in an entry ... must
   be construed to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be held to
   be included in it (Jagannath Baksh Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1962 SC 1563).
		 Thus, a legislature to which a power is granted over a particular subject may make law on any aspect
   or on all aspects of it; it can make a retrospective law or a prospective law and it can also make law
   on all matters ancillary to that matter. For example, if power to collect taxes is granted to a legislature,
   the power not to collect taxes or the power to remit taxes shall be presumed to be included within the
   power to collect taxes.
   (b)   Harmonious Construction: Different entries in the different lists are to be interpreted in such a way
         that a conflict between them is avoided and each of them is given effect. It must be accepted that the
         Constitution does not want to create conflict and make any entry nugatory. Therefore, when there
         appears a conflict between two entries in the two different lists the two entries should be so interpreted,
         that each of them is given effect and, for that purpose the scope and meaning of one may be restricted
         so as to give meaning to the other also.
   (c)   Pith and Substance Rule: The rule of pith and substance means that where a law in reality and
         substance falls within an item on which the legislature which enacted that law is competent to
         legislate, then such law shall not become invalid merely because it incidentally touches a matter
         outside the competence of legislature. In a federal Constitution, as was observed by Gwyer C.J. “it
         must inevitably happen from time to time that legislation though purporting to deal with a subject
         in one list touches also upon a subject in another list, and the different provisions of the enactment
         may be so closely intertwined that blind adherence to a strictly verbal interpretation would result
         in a large number of statutes being declared invalid because the legislature enacting them may
         appear to have legislated in a forbidden sphere” (Prafulla Kumar v. Bank of Khulna, AIR 1947 PC
         60). Therefore, where such overlapping occurs, the question must be asked, what is, “pith and
         substance” of the enactment in question and in which list its true nature and character is to be
         found. For this purpose the enactment as a whole with its object and effect must be considered. By
         way of illustration, acting on entry 6 of List II which reads “Public Health and Sanitation”. Rajasthan
         Legislature passed a law restricting the use of sound amplifiers. The law was challenged on the
         ground that it dealt with a matter which fell in entry 31 of List I which reads: “Post and telegraphs,
         telephones, wireless broadcasting and other like forms of communication”, and, therefore, the State
         Legislature was not competent to pass it. The Supreme Court rejected this argument on the ground
         that the object of the law was to prohibit unnecessary noise affecting the health of public and not to
         make a law on broadcasting, etc. Therefore, the pith and substance of the law was “public health”
         and not “broadcasting” (G. Chawla v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1959 SC 544).
   (d)   Colourable Legislation: It is, in a way, a rule of interpretation almost opposite to the one discussed
         above. The Constitution does not allow any transgression of power by any legislature, either directly or
         indirectly. However, a legislature may pass a law in such a way that it gives it a colour of constitutionality
         while, in reality, that law aims at achieving something which the legislature could not do. Such


                                                                                                                          73
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

        legislation is called colourable piece of legislation and is invalid. To take an example in Kameshwar
        Singh v. State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1952 S.C. 252, the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 provided that the unpaid
        rents by the tenants shall vest in the state and one half of them shall be paid back by the State to the
        landlord or zamindar as compensation for acquisition of unpaid rents. According to the provision in the
        State List under which the above law was passed, no property should be acquired without payment
        of compensation. The question was whether the taking of the whole unpaid rents and then returning
        half of them back to them who were entitled to claim, (i.e., the landlords) is a law which provides for
        compensation. The Supreme Court found that this was a colourable exercise of power of acquisition by
        the State legislature, because “the taking of the whole and returning a half means nothing more or less
        than taking of without any return and this is naked confiscation, no matter in whatever specious form it
        may be clothed or disguised”.
		 The motive of the legislature is, however, irrelevant for the application of this doctrine. Therefore, if a
   legislature is authorised to do a particular thing directly or indirectly, then it is totally irrelevant as to
   with what motives – good or bad – it did that.
		 These are just few guiding principles which the Courts have evolved, to resolve the disputes which may
   arise about the competence of law passed by Parliament or by any State Legislature.

 FREEDOM OF TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE
This heading has been given to Part XIII of the Constitution. This part originally consisted of seven articles –
Articles 301 to 307 – of which one (Art. 306) has been repealed. Out of these articles it is the first, i.e., 301 which,
in real sense, creates an overall comprehensive limitation on all legislative powers of the Union and the State
which affect the matters covered by that Article. This Article guarantees the freedom of trade, commerce and
intercourse and runs in the following words:
“Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India
shall be free”.
The opening words of this Article clearly show, and it has been so held by the Supreme Court, that except the
provisions contained under this Part, i.e., Articles 302 to 307 under no other provision of the Constitution the
free flow of trade and commerce can be interfered with. The object of the freedom declared by this Article is to
ensure that the economic unity of India may not be broken by internal barriers.
The concept of trade, commerce and intercourse today is so wide that from ordinary sale and purchase it
includes broadcasting on radios, communication on telephone and even to non-commercial movement from
one place to another place. If such is the scope of trade and commerce then any law relating to any matter
may affect the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse, e.g., it may be said that the law which imposes the
condition of licence for having a radio violates the freedom of trade and commerce, or a law which regulates
the hours during which the electricity in a particular locality shall be available may be called as affecting the
freedom of trade and commerce because during those hours one cannot use the radio or television or one
cannot run this factory. If that view is taken then every law shall become contrary to Articles 301 and unless
saved by Articles 302 to 307 shall be unconstitutional. To avoid such situations the Supreme Court in the very
first case on the matter (Atiabari Tea Co. v. State of Assam, A.I.R. 1951 S.C. 232) declared that only those laws
which “directly and immediately” restrict or impede the freedom of trade and commerce are covered by Article
301 and such laws which directly and incidentally affect the freedom guaranteed in that article are not within
the reach of Article 301. The word ‘intercourse’ in this article is of wide import. It will cover all such intercourse
as might not be included in the words ‘trade and commerce’.
Thus, it would cover movement and dealings even of a non-commercial nature (Chobe v. Palnitkar, A.I.R. 1954
Hyd. 207). The word, free in Article 301 cannot mean an absolute freedom. Such measures as traffic regulations
licensing of vehicles etc. are not open to challenge.

74
Constitution of India                                                                                         LESSON 2

It was further held in the next case (Automobile Transport Ltd. v. State of Raj., A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1906) that regulations
that facilitate the freedom of trade and commerce and compensatory taxes are also saved from the reach of
Article 301. About compensatory taxes the Supreme Court has doubted the correctness of its own views in a
later case Khyerbari Tea Co. v. State of Assam, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 925.
With respect to regulatory laws also, we may say that if they are the laws which facilitate the freedom of trade
and commerce then they are not at all laws which impede the free flow of trade and commerce directly or
indirectly. The freedom of trade and commerce guaranteed under Article 301 applies throughout the territory of
India; it is not only to inter-state but also to intra-state trade, commerce and intercourse. But in no way it covers
the foreign trade or the trade beyond the territory of India. Therefore, the foreign trade is free from the restriction
of Article 301.
Trade and commerce which are protected by Article 301 are only those activities which are regarded as lawful
trading activities and are not against policy. The Supreme Court held that gambling is not “trade”. Similarly,
prize competitions being of gambling in nature, cannot be regarded as trade or commerce and as such are not
protected under Article 301 (State of Bombay v. RMDC, AIR 1957 SC 699).
The freedom guaranteed by Article 301 is not made absolute and is to be read subject to the following exceptions
as provided in Articles 302-305.
   (a)   Parliament to Impose Restriction in the Public Interest
		 According to Article 302 Parliament may, by law, impose such restrictions on the freedom of trade,
   commerce and intercourse as may be required in the public interest.
   (b)   Parliament to make Preference or Discrimination
		       Parliament cannot by making any law give preference to one State over the other or make discrimination
         between the States except when it is declared by that law that it is necessary to do so for the purpose
         of dealing with a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India [Article 303
         (1) and (2)].
   (c)   Power of the State Legislature
		 The Legislature of a State may by law:
           (i) impose on goods imported from other States or the Union territories any tax to which similar
               goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate
               between goods so imported and goods so manufactured or produced; and
          (ii)   impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse within the
                 State as may be required in the public interest.
		 However, no bill or amendment for making a law falling in this provision can be introduced or moved in
   the Legislature of a State without the previous sanction of the President. [Article 304]
		In Kalyani Stores v. State of Orissa, (AIR 1966 SC 1686) Supreme Court held that Article 304 enables
  State legislature to impose taxes on goods from other States, if goods produced within the state are
  subjected to such taxes. A subsequent assent of President is also sufficient, as held in State of Karnataka
  v. M/s Hansa Corpn., (1981) AIR SC 463.
   (d)   Saving of Existing Laws
		 The law which was already in force at the commencement of the Constitution shall not be affected by
   the provisions of Article 301 except in so far as the President may, by order, otherwise direct (Art 305).


                                                                                                                      75
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Constitution of India

     (e)     Saving of Laws providing for State Monopoly
		 The laws which create State monopoly in any trade, etc. are saved from attack under Article 301, i.e.,
   they are valid irrespective of the fact that they directly impede or restrict the freedom of trade and
   commerce. So, if the State creates a monopoly in road, transporters cannot complain that their freedom
   of trade and commerce has been affected or if the State created monopoly in banking then other
   bankers cannot complain that their freedom of trade and commerce has been restricted.
		 The last provision (Article 307) in Part XIII authorises Parliament to appoint by law such authority as it
   considers appropriate for carrying out purposes of Articles 301 to 304 and to confer on the authority so
   appointed such powers and duties as it thinks necessary.

 CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE MONOPOLY
Creation of monopoly rights in favour of a person or body of persons to carry on any business prima facie
affects the freedom of trade. But in certain circumstances it can be justified.
After the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1951, the State creates a monopoly in favour of itself, without being
called upon to justify its action in the Court as being reasonable.
Sub-clause (ii) of clause (6) of Article 19 makes it clear that the freedom of profession, trade or business will not
be understood to mean to prevent the state from undertaking either directly or through a corporation owned or
controlled by it, any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, citizens
or otherwise.
If a law is passed creating a State monopoly the Court should enquire as to what are the provisions of the said
law which are basically and essentially necessary for creating the state monopoly. Sub-clause (ii) of clause (6)
protects only the essential and basic provisions. If there are other provisions which are subsidiary or incidental
to the operation of the monopoly they do not fall under Article 19(6)(ii). It was held by Shah, J. in R.C. Cooper v.
Union of India, (1970) 1 SCC 248, that the impugned law which prohibited the named banks from carrying the
banking business was a necessary incident of the business assumed by the Union and hence was not liable to
be challenged under Article 19(6)(ii) in so far as it affected the right of a citizen to carry on business.

 THE JUDICIARY
The Courts in the Indian legal system, broadly speaking, consist of:
      (i)    The Supreme Court,
     (ii)    The High Courts, and
     (iii)   The subordinate courts.

 The Supreme Court
The Supreme Court, which is the highest Court in the country (both for matters of ordinary law and for interpreting
the Constitution) is an institution created by the Constitution. Immediately before independence, the Privy
Council was the highest appellate authority for British India, for matters arising under ordinary law. But appeals
from High Courts in constitutional matters lay to the Federal Court (created under the Government of India Act,
1935) and thence to the Privy Council. The Supreme Court of India, in this sense, has inherited the jurisdiction of
both the Privy Council and the Federal Court. However, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under the present
Constitution is much more extensive than that of its two predecessors mentioned above.
The Supreme Court, entertains appeals (in civil and criminal and other cases) from High Courts and certain


76
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

Tribunals. It has also writ jurisdiction for enforcing Fundamental Rights. It can advise the President on a reference
made by the President on questions of fact and law. It has a variety of other special jurisdictions.

 High Courts
The High Courts that function under the Constitution were not created for the first time by the Constitution. Some
High Courts existed before the Constitution, although some new High Courts have been created after 1950.
The High Courts in (British) India were established first under the Indian High Courts Act, 1861 (an Act of the U.K.
Parliament). The remaining High Courts were established or continued under the Constitution or under special
Acts. High Courts for each State (or Group of States) have appellate, civil and criminal jurisdiction over lower
Courts. High Courts have writ jurisdiction to enforce fundamental rights and for certain other purposes.
Some High Courts (notably) Bombay, Calcutta and Delhi, have ordinary original civil jurisdiction (i.e., jurisdiction
to try regular civil suits) for their respective cities. High Courts can also hear references made by the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal under the Income Tax Act and other tribunals.
It should be added, that the “writ” jurisdiction vested at present in all High Courts by the Constitution was
(before the Constitution came into force) vested only in the High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras (i.e.,
the three Presidency towns).

 Subordinate Courts
Finally, there are various subordinate civil and criminal courts (original and appellate), functioning under ordinary
law. Although their nomenclature and powers have undergone change from time to time, the basic pattern
remains the same. These have been created, not under the Constitution, but under laws of the competent
legislature. Civil Courts are created mostly under the Civil Courts Act of each State. Criminal courts are created
mainly under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita.

 Civil Courts
In each district, there is a District Court presided over by the District Judge, with a number of Additional District
Judges attached to the court. Below that Court are Courts of Judges (sometimes called subordinate Judges)
and in, some States, Munsiffs. These Courts are created under State Laws.

 Criminal Courts
Criminal courts in India primarily consist of the Magistrate and the Courts of Session. Magistrates themselves
have been divided by Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 into ‘Judicial’ and ‘Executive’ Magistrates. The
latter do not try criminal prosecutions, and their jurisdiction is confined to certain miscellaneous cases, which
are of importance for public tranquillity and the like. Their proceedings do not end in conviction or acquittal, but
in certain other types of restrictive orders. In some States, by local amendments, Executive Magistrates have
been vested with powers to try certain offences.
As regards Judicial Magistrates, they are of two classes: Second Class and First Class. Judicial Magistrates are
subject to the control of the Court of Session, which also is itself a Court of original jurisdiction. The powers of
Magistrates of the two classes vary, according to their grade. The Court of Session can try all offences, and has
power to award any sentence, prescribed by law for the offence, but a sentence of death requires confirmation
by the High Court.

 Special Tribunals
Besides these Courts, which form part of the general judicial set up, there are host of specialised tribunals
dealing with direct taxes, labour, excise and customs, claims for accidents caused by motor vehicles, copyright
and monopolies and restrictive trade practices.


                                                                                                                  77
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Constitution of India

For the trial of cases of corruption, there are Special Judges, appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1952.

 WRIT JURISDICTION OF HIGH COURTS AND SUPREME COURT
In the words of Dicey, prerogative writs are ‘the bulwark of English Liberty’. The expression ‘prerogative writ’
is one of English common law which refers to the extraordinary writs granted by the sovereign, as fountain of
justice on the ground of inadequacy of ordinary legal remedies. In course of time these writs were issued by the
High Court as extraordinary remedies in cases where there was either no remedy available under the ordinary
law or the remedy available was inadequate. Under the Constitution by virtue of Article 226, every High Court
has the power to issue directions or orders or writs including writs in the nature of Habeas corpus, Mandamus,
Prohibition, Quo warranto and Certiorari or any of them for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights stipulated
in Part III of the Constitution or for any other purpose. This power is exercisable by each High Court throughout
the territory in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction. Where an effective remedy is available, the High Court
should not readily entertain a petition under Article 226 of the constitution of India e.g., under the Companies
Act, a share holder has very effective remedies for prevention of oppression and mismanagement. Consequently
High Court should not entertain a petition under the said Article (Ramdas Motors Transport Company Limited
T.A. Reddy, AIR 1997 SC 2189).
The Supreme Court could be moved by appropriate proceedings for the issue of directions or orders or writs, as
referred to under Article 226 for the enforcement of the rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution. Article
32 itself being a fundamental right, the Constitutional remedy of writ is available to anyone whose fundamental
rights are infringed by state action. Thus we see the power of the High Courts to issue these writs is wider than
that of the Supreme Court, whereas:
     (a)   an application to a High Court under Article 226 will lie not only where some other limitation imposed
           by the Constitution, outside Part III, has been violated, but, an application under Article 32 shall not lie
           in any case unless the right infringed is ‘Fundamental Right’ enumerated in Part III of the Constitution;
     (b)   while the Supreme Court can issue a writ against any person or Government within the territory of India,
           a High Court can, under Article 226, issue a writ against any person, Government or other authority
           only if such person or authority is physically resident or located within the territorial jurisdiction of the
           particular High Court extends or if the cause of action arises within such jurisdiction.
As stated earlier, the Supreme Court has been assigned by the Constitution a special role as “the protector
and guarantor of fundamental rights” by Article 32 (1). Although the Constitution has provided for concurrent
writ jurisdiction of the High Courts it is not necessary, that an aggrieved petitioner should first apply to the High
Court and then to the Supreme Court (Romesh Thappar v. State of Madras AIR 1950 SC 124)
The jurisdiction of the High Court also extends to the enforcement of rights other than Fundamental Rights
provided there is a public duty. The Supreme Court’s jurisdiction to issue writs extends to all Fundamental
Rights (Common Cause v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1999 SC 2979).

 CASE LAWS
 Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2024 INSC 134 decided by Supreme
 Court on 11th July, 2022
 In this case, taking note of the continuous supply of cases seeking bail after filing of the final report on a
 wrong interpretation of Section 170 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (“the Code”), an endeavour was made
 by Supreme Court to categorize the types of offenses to be used as guidelines for the future.



78
Constitution of India                                                                                        LESSON 2

 The Supreme Court inter alia said that “The principle that bail is the Rule and jail is the exception has been
 well recognised through the repetitive pronouncements of this Court. This again is on the touchstone of
 Article 21 of the Constitution of India.”
 Further, in this case, the Supreme Court issued certain directions, however they may be subject to State
 Amendments. These directions are meant for the investigating agencies and also for the courts. The
 directions are as under:
      a)    The Government of India may consider the introduction of a separate enactment in the nature of a
            Bail Act so as to streamline the grant of bails.
      b)    The investigating agencies and their officers are duty-bound to comply with the mandate of
            Section 41 and 41A of the Code and the directions issued by this Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra). Any
            dereliction on their part has to be brought to the notice of the higher authorities by the court followed
            by appropriate action.
      c)    The courts will have to satisfy themselves on the compliance of Section 41 and 41A of the Code. Any
            non-compliance would entitle the Accused for grant of bail.
      d)    All the State Governments and the Union Territories are directed to facilitate standing orders for
            the procedure to be followed Under Section 41 and 41A of the Code while taking note of the order
            of the High Court of Delhi dated 07.02.2018 in Writ Petition (C) No. 7608 of 2018 and the standing
            order issued by the Delhi Police i.e. Standing Order No. 109 of 2020, to comply with the mandate of
            Section 41A of the Code.
      e)    There need not be any insistence of a bail application while considering the application Under
            Section 88, 170, 204 and 209 of the Code.
      f)    There needs to be a strict compliance of the mandate laid down in the judgment of this Court in case
            of Siddharth.
      g)    The State and Central Governments will have to comply with the directions issued by this Court from
            time to time with respect to constitution of special courts. The High Court in consultation with the State
            Governments will have to undertake an exercise on the need for the special courts. The vacancies in
            the position of Presiding Officers of the special courts will have to be filled up expeditiously.
      h)    The High Courts are directed to undertake the exercise of finding out the undertrial prisoners who
            are not able to comply with the bail conditions. After doing so, appropriate action will have to be
            taken in light of Section 440 of the Code, facilitating the release.
       i)   While insisting upon sureties the mandate of Section 440 of the Code has to be kept in mind.
       j)   An exercise will have to be done in a similar manner to comply with the mandate of Section 436A
            of the Code both at the district judiciary level and the High Court as earlier directed by this Court in
            Bhim Singh case, followed by appropriate orders.
      k)    Bail applications ought to be disposed of within a period of two weeks except if the provisions
            mandate otherwise, with the exception being an intervening application. Applications for anticipatory
            bail are expected to be disposed of within a period of six weeks with the exception of any intervening
            application.
      l)    All State Governments, Union Territories and High Courts are directed to file affidavits/status reports
            within a period of four months.


                                                                                                                    79
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Constitution of India

 Types of Writs
A brief description of the various types of writs is given below:




     1.   Habeas Corpus
		 The writ of Habeas corpus - an effective bulwark of personal liberty – is a remedy available to a
   person who is confined without legal justification. The words ‘Habeas Corpus’ literally mean “to have
   the body”. When a prima facie case for the issue of writ has been made then the Court issues a rule nisi
   upon the relevant authority to show-cause why the writ should not be issued. This is in national order to
   let the Court know on what grounds he has been confined and to set him free if there is no justification
   for his detention. This writ has to be obeyed by the detaining authority by producing the person before
   the Court. Under Articles 32 and 226 any person can move for this writ to the Supreme Court and High
   Court respectively. The applicant may be the prisoner or any person acting on his behalf to safeguard
   his liberty for the issuance of the writ of Habeas Corpus as no man can be punished or deprived of his
   personal liberty except for violation of law and in the ordinary legal manner. An appeal to the Supreme
   Court of India may lie against an order granting or rejecting the application (Articles 132, 134 or 136). The
   disobedience to this writ is met with by punishment for contempt of Court under the Contempt of Courts Act.
           Example
           X has been detained wrongfully in custody by Y. As X was detained wrongfully by Y, the writ of
           habeas corpus can be filed in court by X’s family on his behalf since his whereabouts are not known
           to them. Can X’s family file a Writ Petition?
           As he was detained wrongfully by Y (police officer), the writ of habeas corpus can be filed in court
           by X’s family on his behalf since his whereabouts are not known to them
     2.   Mandamus
		 The word ‘Mandamus’ literally means ‘we command’. The writ of mandamus is, a command issued to
   direct any person, corporation, inferior court, or Government requiring him or it do a particular thing
   specified therein which pertains to his or its office and is further in the nature of a public duty. This writ
   is used when the inferior tribunal has declined to exercise jurisdiction while resort to certiorari and
   prohibition arises when the tribunal has wrongly exercised jurisdiction or exceeded its jurisdiction and
   are available only against judicial and quasi-judicial bodies. Mandamus can be issued against any
   public authority. It commands activity. The writ is used for securing judicial enforcement of public duties.
   In a fit case, Court can direct executives to carry out Directive Principles of the Constitution through this
   writ [State of Maharashtra v. MP Vashi, 1995 (4) SCALE]. The applicant must have a legal right to the
   performance of a legal duty by the person against whom the writ is prayed for. It is not issued if the
   authority has a discretion.
		 The Constitution of India by Articles 226 and 32 enables mandamus to be issued by the High Courts
   and the Supreme Court to all authorities.

80
Constitution of India                                                                                   LESSON 2

		Mandamus does not lie against the President or the Governor
                                                                          Example
  of a State for the exercise of their duties and power (Article
  361). It does not lie also against a private individual or body         Direction to correct the PAN Card by
  except where the state is in collusion with such private                the High Court or Supreme Court to
  party in the matter of contravention of any provision of the            an authority.
  Constitution of a statute. It is a discretionary remedy and the
  High Court may refuse if alternative remedy exists except in
  case of infringement of fundamental rights.
    3.   Prohibition                                                      Example
		 A writ of prohibition is issued to an Inferior Court preventing        Staying the proceedings without
   the latter from usurping jurisdiction which is not legally vested      the jurisdiction by the High Court or
   in it. When a tribunal acts without or in excess of jurisdiction,      Supreme Court.
   or in violation of rules or law, a writ of prohibition can be
   asked for. It is generally issued before the trial of the case.
		While mandamus commands activity, prohibition commands inactivity, it is available only against
  judicial or quasi judicial authorities and is not available against a public officer who is not vested with
  judicial functions. If abuse of power is apparent this writ may be of right and not a matter of discretion.
    4.   Certiorari
                                                                          Example
		 It is available to any person, wherever any body of persons
   having legal authority to determine questions affecting the            Quashing the order passed without
   rights of subjects and having the duty to act judicially in excess     the jurisdiction by the High Court or
   of their legal authority. [The King v. Electricity Commissioners,      Supreme Court.
   (1924) I.K.B. 171, P. 204-5].
		The writ removes the proceedings from such body to the High Court, to quash a decision that goes beyond
  its jurisdiction. Under the Constitution of India, all High Courts can issue the writ of certiorari throughout
  their territorial jurisdiction when the subordinate judicial authority acts (i) without or in excess of
  jurisdiction or in (ii) contravention of the rules of natural justice or (iii) commits an error apparent on the
  face of the record. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to issue such writs arises under Article 32.
  Although the object of both the writs of prohibition and of certiorari is the same, prohibition is available
  at an earlier stage whereas certiorari is available at a later stage but in similar grounds, i.e., Certiorari
  is issued after authority has exercised its powers.
    5.   Quo Warranto
		 The writ of quo warranto enables enquiry into the legality of the claim which a person asserts, to an
   office or franchise and to oust him from such position if he is a usurper. The holder of the office has to
   show to the court under what authority he holds the office. It is issued when:
           (i) the office is of public and of a substantive nature,
          (ii)    created by statute or by the Constitution itself, and
          (iii)   the respondent has asserted his claim to the office. It can be issued even though he has not
                  assumed the charge of the office.
		 The fundamental basis of the proceeding of Quo warranto is that the public has an interest to see that
   an unlawful claimant does not usurp a public office. It is a discretionary remedy which the court may
   grant or refuse.




                                                                                                                  81
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Constitution of India


              Example
              Writ available against illegal appointments in public office.

 DELEGATED LEGISLATION
The increasing complexity of modern administration and the need for flexibility capable of rapid readjustment to
meet changing circumstances which cannot always be foreseen, in implementing our socio-economic policies
pursuant to the establishment of a welfare state as contemplated by our Constitution, have made it necessary
for the legislatures to delegate its powers. Further, the Parliamentary procedure and discussions in getting
through a legislative measure in the Legislatures is usually time consuming.
The three relevant justifications for delegated legislation are:
      (i)    the limits of the time of the legislature;
     (ii)    the limits of the amplitude of the legislature, not merely its lack of competence but also its sheer
             inability to act in many situations, where direction is wanted; and
     (iii)   the need of some weapon for coping with situations created by emergency.
The delegation of the legislative power is what Hughus, Chief Justice called, flexibility and practicability (Currin
Wallace 83 L. ed. 441).

 Classification of delegated legislation
The American writes classify delegated legislation as contingent and subordinate. Further, legislation is either
supreme or subordinate. The Supreme Law or Legislation is that which proceeds from supreme or sovereign
power in the state and is therefore incapable of being repealed, annulled or controlled by any other legislative
authority. Subordinate legislation is that which proceeds from any authority other than the sovereign power,
and is, therefore, dependent for its continued existence and validity on some sovereign or supreme authority.

 Classification of Subordinate Legislation




       1.    Executive Legislation
		 The tendency of modern legislation has been in the direction of placing in the body of an Act only
   few general rules or statements and relegating details to statutory rules. This system empowers the
   executive to make rules and orders which do not require express confirmation by the legislature. Thus,
   the rules framed by the Government under the various Municipal Acts fall under the category.
      2.     Judicial Legislation
		 Under various statues, the High Courts are authorised to frame rules for regulating the procedure to be
   followed in courts. Such rules have been framed by the High Courts under the Guardians of Wards Act,
   Insolvency Act, Succession Act and Companies Act, etc.


82
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

    3.   Municipal Legislation
		 Municipal authorities are entrusted with limited and sub-ordinate powers of establishing special laws
   applicable to the whole or any part of the area under their administration known as bye-laws.
    4.   Autonomous Legislation
		 Under this head fall the regulations which autonomus bodies such as Universities make in respect of
   matters which concern themselves.
    5.   Colonial Legislation
		 The laws made by colonies under the control of some other nation, which are subject to supreme
   legislation of the country under whose control they are.
Principles applicable
A body, to which powers of subordinate legislation are delegated must directly act within the powers which
are conferred on it and it cannot act beyond its powers except to the extent justified by the doctrine of implied
powers. The doctrine of implied powers means where the legislature has conferred any power, it must be
deemed to have also granted any other power without which that power cannot be effectively exercised.
Subordinate legislation can not take effect unless published. Therefore, there must be promulgation and
publication in such cases. Although there is no rule as to any particular kind of publication.
Conditional legislation is defined as a statute that provides controls but specifies that they are to come into
effect only when a given administrative authority finds the existence of conditions defined in the statue. In other
words in sub-ordinate legislation the delegate completes the legislation by supplying details within the limits
prescribed by the statue and in the case of conditional legislation, the power of legislation is exercised by the
legislature conditionally, leaving to the discretion of an external authority, the time and manner of carrying its
legislation into effect (Hamdard Dawa Khana v. Union of India, AIR, 1960 SC 554).
While delegating the powers to an outside authority the legislature must act within the ambit of the powers
defined by the Constitution and subject to the limitations prescribed thereby. If an Act is contrary to the
provisions of the Constitution, it is void. Our Constitution embodies a doctrine of judicial review of legislation as
to its conformity with the Constitution.
In England, however, the position is different. Parliament in England may delegate to any extent and even all
its power of law-making to an outside authority. In U.S.A., the Constitution embodies the doctrine of separation
of powers, which prohibits the executive being given law making powers. On the question whether there is any
limit beyond which delegation may not go in India, it was held in In re-Delhi Laws Act, 1912 AIR 1951 SC 332,
that there is a limit that essential powers of legislation or essential legislative functions cannot be delegated.
However, there is no specific provision in the Constitution prohibiting the delegation. On the question whether
such doctrine is recognised in our Constitution, a number of principles in various judicial decisions have been
laid down which are as follows:
   (a)   The primary duty of law-making has to be discharged by the Legislature itself. The Legislature cannot
         delegate its primary or essential legislative function to an outside authority in any case.
   (b)   The essential legislative function consists in laying down the ‘the policy of the law’ and ‘making it a
         binding rule of conduct’. The legislature, in other words must itself lay down the legislative policy and
         principles and must afford sufficient guidance to the rule-making authority for carrying out the declared
         policy.




                                                                                                                  83
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India

     (c)   If the legislature has performed its essential function of laying down the policy of the law and providing
           guidance for carrying out the policy, there is no constitutional bar against delegation of subsidiary or
           ancillary powers in that behalf to an outside authority.
     (d)   It follows from the above that an Act delegating law-making powers to a person or body shall be
           invalid, if it lays down no principles and provides no standard for the guidance of the rule-making body.
     (e)   In applying this test the court could take into account the statement in the preamble to the act and if
           said statements afford a satisfactory basis for holding that the legislative policy or principle has been
           enunciated with sufficient accuracy and clarity, the preamble itself would satisfy the requirements of
           the relevant tests.
     (f)   In every case, it would be necessary to consider the relevant provisions of the Act in relation to the
           delegation made and the question as to whether the delegation made is intra vires or not will have to
           be decided by the application of the relevant tests.
     (g)   Delegated legislation may take different forms, viz., conditional legislation, supplementary legislation
           subordinate legislation etc., but each form is subject to the one and same rule that delegation made
           without indicating intelligible limits of authority is constitutionally incompetent.

 RECENT AMENDMENTS

 102nd Amendment
      The Constitution (One Hundred Second Amendment) Act, 2018 received assent of the President on 11th
      August, 2018. This amendment inter-alia provided for National Commission for Backward Classes and
      provisions for socially and educationally backward classes


 103rd Amendment
      The Constitution (One Hundred Third Amendment) Act, 2018 received assent of the President on 12th
      January, 2019. This amendment added for advancement of any economically weaker sections of citizens
      inter-alia including admission to educational institutions including private educational institutions, whether
      aided or unaided by the State and reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any economically
      weaker sections of citizens.


 104th Amendment
      The Constitution (One Hundred Fourth Amendment) Act, 2019 received assent of the President on 21st
      January, 2020. This amendment extended the period for reservation of seat for Schedule Castes and
      Schedule Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States to eighty Years
      from the commencement of this Constitution.

 SEPARATION OF POWERS
It is generally accepted that there are three main categories of governmental functions – (i) the Legislative,
(ii) the Executive, and (iii) the Judicial. At the same time, there are three main organs of the Government in
State, i.e., legislature, executive and judiciary. According to the theory of separation of powers, these three
powers and functions of the Government must, in a free democracy, always be kept separate and exercised
by separate organs of the Government. Thus, the legislature cannot exercise executive or judicial power; the
executive cannot exercise legislative or judicial power of the Government.


84
Constitution of India                                                                                       LESSON 2

Article 50 of the Constitution of India deals with Separation of judiciary from executive. It provides that the State
shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.
Montesquieu said that if the Executive and the Legislature are the same person or body of persons, there would
be a danger of the Legislature enacting oppressive laws which the executive will administer to attain its own
ends, for laws to be enforced by the same body that enacts them result in arbitrary rule and makes the judge a
legislator rather than an interpreter of law. If one person or body of persons could exercise both the executive
and judicial powers in the same matter, there would be arbitrary powers, which would amount to complete
tyranny, if the legislative power would be added to the power of that person. The value of the doctrine lies in
the fact that it seeks to preserve human liberty by avoiding the concentration of powers in one person or body
of persons. The different organs of government should thus be prevented from encroaching on the province of
the other organ.
In India, the executive is part of the legislature. The President is the head of the executive and acts on the advice
of the Council of Ministers.
The Constitution of India does not recognize the doctrine of separation of power in its absolute rigidity, but the
functions of the three organs of the government have been sufficiently differentiated. (Ram Jawaya v. State of
Punjab, AIR 1955 SC 549). None of the three of organs of the Government can take over the functions assigned
to the other organs. (Keshanand Bharti v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461, Asif Hameed v. State of J&K 1989 AIR,
SC 1899) In State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd., (AIR 1997 SC 1511) the Supreme Court has held that the judiciary
must recognize the fundamental nature and importance of the legislature process and must accord due regard
and deference to it. The Legislative and Executive are also expected to show due regard and deference to the
judiciary. The Constitution of India recognizes and gives effect to the concept of equality between the three
organs of the Government. The concept of checks and balance is inherent in the scheme.

 LEGISLATIVE FUNCTIONS
 1
  Law making process (How a Bill becomes an Act)
A Bill is the draft of a legislative proposal which has to pass through various stages before it becomes an Act
of Parliament.
First Reading
The legislative process starts with the introduction of a Bill in either House of Parliament – Lok Sabha or Rajya
Sabha. A Bill can be introduced either by a Minister or by a Private Member. In the former case, it is known as a
Government Bill and in the latter case it is called a Private Member’s Bill.
It is necessary for a Member-in-charge of the Bill to ask for leave to introduce the Bill. If leave is granted
by the House, the Bill is introduced. This stage is known as the First Reading of the Bill. If the motion for
leave to introduce a Bill is opposed, the Speaker may, allow a brief explanatory statement to be made by the
Member who opposes the motion and the Member-in-charge who moved the motion. Where a motion for leave
to introduce a Bill is opposed on the ground that the Bill initiates legislation outside the legislative competence
of the House, the Speaker may permit a full discussion thereon. Thereafter, the question is put to the vote of the
House. However, the motion for leave to introduce a Finance Bill or an Appropriation Bill is forthwith put to the
vote of the House.
Publication in Gazette
After a Bill has been introduced, it is published in the Official Gazette. Even before introduction, a Bill might, with
the permission of the Speaker, be published in the Gazette.

1. https://loksabhadocs.nic.in/our%20parliament/How%20a%20bill%20become%20an%20act.pdf

                                                                                                                    85
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India

Reference of Bill to Standing Committee
After a Bill has been introduced, the presiding Officer of the house concerned can refer the Bill to the Standing
Committee concerned for examination and make report thereon.
If a Bill is referred to the Standing Committee, the Committee shall consider the general principles and clauses
of the Bill referred to them and make report thereon. After the Bill has thus been considered, the Committee
submits its report to the House. The report of the Committee, being of persuasive value, shall be treated as
considered advice given by the Committee.
Second Reading
The Second Reading consists of consideration of the Bill which is in two stages:
First Stage: The first stage consists of general discussion on the Bill as a whole when the principle underlying
the Bill is discussed.
Second Stage: The second stage of the Second Reading consists of clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill.
Third Reading
Thereafter, the Member-in-charge can move that the Bill be passed. This stage is known as the Third Reading of
the Bill. At this stage, the debate is confined to arguments either in support or rejection of the Bill. In passing an
ordinary Bill, a simple majority of Members present and voting is necessary. But in the case of a Bill to amend
the Constitution, a majority of the total membership of the House and a majority of not less than two-thirds of
the Members present and voting is required in each House of Parliament.
Bill in the other House
After the Bill is passed by one House, it is sent to the other House for concurrence with a message to that effect,
and there also it goes through the stages described above, except the introduction stage.
Consideration of the Bill at a Joint Sitting
If a Bill passed by one House is rejected by the other House, or, the Houses have finally disagreed as to the
amendments to be made in the Bill, or more than six months elapse from the date of the receipt of the Bill by
the other House without the Bill being passed by it, the President may call a joint sitting of the two Houses to
resolve the deadlock. If, at the joint sitting of the Houses, the Bill is passed by a majority of the total number
of Members of both the Houses present and voting, with the amendments, if any, accepted by them, the Bill is
deemed to have been passed by both the Hoses.
There cannot be a joint sitting of both Houses on a Constitution Amendment Bill.
Assent of the President
When a Bill is passed by both Houses, the Secretariat of the House which is last in possession of the Bill obtains
the assent of the President. In the case of a Money Bill or a Bill passed at a joint sitting of the Houses, the Lok
Sabha Secretariat obtains assent of the President. The Bill becomes an Act only after the President has given
assent to it.

 CASE LAWS
 Skill Lotto Solutions v. Union of India, 2020 SCC OnLine SC 990
 In present case, the constitutional validity of levying of taxes on lottery, betting and gambling was challenged
 in the Court. The Supreme Court held that the taxation of lottery tickets and prize money as constitutionally
 lawful. The SC ruled that gaming and lotteries fall under the Goods and Services Tax’s purview and are
 therefore legitimate under the law. It was stated as follows:


86
Constitution of India                                                                                     LESSON 2

 “The value of taxable supply is a matter of statutory Regulation and when the value is to be transaction value
 which is to be determined as per Section 15 of Central Goods And Services Tax Act, 2017, it is not permissible to
 compute the value of taxable supply by excluding prize which has been contemplated in the statutory scheme.
 When prize paid by the distributor/agent is not contemplated to be excluded from the value of taxable supply, we
 are not persuaded to accept the submission of the Petitioner that prize money should be excluded for computing
 the taxable value of supply the prize money should be excluded. We, thus, conclude that while determining the
 taxable value of supply the prize money is not to be excluded for the purpose of levy of GST.”
 Municipal Corporation of Gr. Mumbai vs. Ankita Sinha (25.10.2021 - SC) 2021 SCC OnLine SC 897
 In this case, the principal issue as to whether the National Green Tribunal (in short “the Tribunal”) can exercise
 suomotu jurisdiction or initiate suomotu action. Tribunal may initiate suo moto action. However, same is
 subject to opportunities of being heard. Court stated that
 “the judgment rendered by this Court predicates that even if the Tribunal intends to initiate suomotu action,
 must give opportunity to the parties likely to be affected before passing any adverse order against them.
 Viewed thus, the ex parte preemptory order(s) passed by the Tribunal without giving opportunity to the
 person(s) likely to be affected by such order(s), be treated as effaced from the record.”




                                                    LESSON ROUND-UP

    l The Constitution of India came into force on January 26, 1950. The preamble to the Constitution sets
        out the aims and aspirations of the people of India. Constitution of India is basically federal but with
        certain unitary features. The essential features of a Federal System are – dual Government, distribution
        of powers, supremacy of the Constitution, independence of Judiciary, written Constitution, and a rigid
        procedure for the amendment of the Constitution.

    l The fundamental rights are envisaged in Part III of the Constitution. These are:

             (i)    Right to Equality;

            (ii)    Right to Freedom;

            (iii)   Right against Exploitation;

            (iv)    Right to Freedom of Religion;

            (v)     Cultural and Educational Rights;

            (vi)    Right to Constitutional Remedies.

    l The Directive Principles as envisaged by the Constitution makers lay down the ideals to be observed
        by every Government to bring about an economic democracy in this country.

    l Article 51 A imposing the fundamental duties on every citizen of India was inserted by the Constitution
        (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976.

    l The most important legislative power conferred on the President is to promulgate Ordinances. The
        ambit of this Ordinance-making power of the President is co-extensive with the legislative powers of
        the Parliament. The Governor’s power to make Ordinances is similar to the Ordinance making power of
        the President and has the force of an Act of the State Legislature.


                                                                                                                 87
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Constitution of India


     l The Union of India is composed of 29 States and both the Union and the States derive their authority
        from the Constitution which divides all powers-legislative, executive and financial, between them. Both
        the Union and States are equally subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution. However, there
        are some parts of Indian Territory which are not covered by these States and such territories are called
        Union Territories.

     l The courts in the Indian legal system, broadly speaking, consist of (i) the Supreme Court, (ii) the High
        Courts, and (iii) the subordinate courts. The Supreme Court, which is the highest Court in the country is
        an institution created by the Constitution. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is vast including the writ
        jurisdiction for enforcing Fundamental Rights.

     l The increasing complexity of modern administration and the need for flexibility capable of rapid
        readjustment to meet changing circumstances, have made it necessary for the legislature to delegate
        its powers.

     l Article 50 of the Constitution of India deals with Separation of judiciary from executive. It provides
        that the State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the
        State.

     l A Bill is a draft statute which becomes law after it is passed by both the Houses of Parliament and
        assented to by the President. All legislative proposals are brought before Parliament in the form of
        Bills.



                                                    GLOSSARY

 Doctrine of Severability: If after separating the invalid part the valid part is capable of giving effect
 to the legislature’s intent, then only it will survive, otherwise the Court shall declare the entire law as
 invalid.
 Doctrine of Eclipse: A law made before the commencement of the Constitution remains eclipsed or dormant
 to the extent it comes under the shadow of the fundamental rights but the eclipsed or dormant parts become
 effective again if the prohibition brought about by the fundamental rights is removed by the amendment of
 the Constitution.
 Equality before the law: Law treats everyone equal. Legislative classification: Legislative classification or
 distinction is made carefully between persons who are and who are not similarly situated.
 Delegated Legislation: The legislative power delegated to non legislatures.
 Constitutional Remedies: The remedies that guarantee the enforcement of Fundamental Rights.
 Harmonious Construction: Different entries in the different lists are to be interpreted in such a way that a
 conflict between them is avoided and each of them is given effect. It must be accepted that the Constitution
 does not want to create conflict and make any entry nugatory.
 Pith and Substance Rule: The rule of pith and substance means that where a law in reality and substance
 falls within an item on which the legislature which enacted that law is competent to legislate, then such
 law shall not become invalid merely because it incidentally touches a matter outside the competence of
 legislature.



88
Constitution of India                                                                                   LESSON 2

                                                 TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)

    1. The Constitution of India is “federal in character but with unitary features”. Comment.

   2. What is bill? Discuss type of bills and their specific features.

   3. Write short notes on:

             (i)    Separation of Powers

            (ii)    Writ of Habeas Corpus

            (iii)   Writ of Mandamus

            (iv)    Writ of Certiorari

   4. Does a law made by a State to create monopoly rights in favour of a person to carry on any business
      affect the freedom of trade?

   5. “The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws
      within the territory of India”. Comment.

   6. Explain the powers of promulgation of ordinances under the Constitution of India.

    7. The judicial structure of India is well equipped to deal with every kind of cases. Comment.

   8. Explain the various principles behind Interpretation of the Legislative Lists


                                            LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

    l Constitution of India

    l V.N. Shukla’s the Constitution of India; Eastern Book Company, Lucknow
 		                                                                                              Durga Das Basu
    l Dr. J. N Pandey’s Constitution Law of India
 		                                                                                         Dr. D.K. Singh (Ed.)


                             OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

    l https://sansad.in/ls




                                                                                                              89
EP-JI&GL   Constitution of India




90
                                                                                                            Lesson
Interpretation of Statutes
                                                                                                               3
KEY CONCEPTS
n Legislature n Statute n Literal Construction n Reasonable Construction n Harmonious Construction n Internal
and External Aids to Interpretation


Learning Objectives
To understand:                                                     How different laws are required to be interpreted in a
     The meaning and need of interpretation of statutes            different manner
                                                                   Various doctrines that may be used while interpreting
     Principle required to applied while interpreting a
                                                                    statutes
      statute
                                                                   The rules that are applicable while interpreting
     The meaning and need of interpretation of statutes
                                                                    statutes
     Principle required to be applied while interpreting a
                                                                   How different laws are required to be interpreted in a
      statute
                                                                    different manner
     Internal and external aid to Interpretation of Statutes      Various doctrines that may be used while interpreting
     Legal terminologies used in the field of legal studies        statutes
     How to read a Bare Act and Citation of Cases                 The applicability of General Clauses Act

   The rules that are applicable while interpreting statutes      Reading methodology of Companies Act, 2013




Lesson Outline
     Introduction                                                 Conflict between General Provision and Special
     Need for Interpretation of a Statute                          Provision
     Meanings of Interpretation of Statutes                       Socially Beneficial Construction
     Casus Omissus rule                                           Interpretation of Procedural Law
     Interpretation of Definition Clause                          Interpretation of Fiscal and Taxing Statutes
     Principles of Interpretation including Heydon’s Rule         Delegated Legislations
      of Interpretation, Golden Rule of Interpretation             Conflict between Statute, Rules and Regulations
     Presumptions                                                 Doctrine of Substantial Compliance
     Aids to Interpretation                                       Doctrine of Impossibility of Performance
     Legal Terminologies & Legal Maxims                           Strict Construction of Penal Statutes
     Reading a Bare Act & Citation of Cases                       Brief of General Clause Act, 1897
     Prospective and Retrospective Operation                      Reading methodology of the Companies Act, 2013
     Use of “may” and “shall”                                      and its Legal Aura
     Use of “and” and “or”                                        Lesson Round-Up
     Interpretation of Proviso                                    Glossary
     Deeming Provisions                                           Test Yourself
     Repugnancy with other Statutes                               List of Further Readings


                                                                                                                        91
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Interpretation of Statutes


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 “Interpretation or construction is the process by which the Courts seek to ascertain the meaning of the
 legislature through the medium of the authoritative forms in which it is expressed.” – Salmond

 INTRODUCTION
A statute has been defined as “the will of the legislature” (Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes, 11th ed. p. 1).
Normally, it denotes the Act enacted by the legislature.
A statute is thus a written “will” of the legislature expressed according to the form necessary to constitute it as
a law of the State, and rendered authentic by certain prescribed forms and solemnities. (Crawford, p. 1)
According to Bouvier’s Law Dictionary, a statute is “a law established by the act of the legislative power, i.e.,
an Act of the legislature. The written will of the legislature. The term ‘statute’ is generally applied to laws and
regulations of every sort, law which ordains, permits or prohibits anything which is designated as a statute,
without considering from what source it arises”.
The Constitution of India does not use the term ‘statute’ but it employs the term “law” to describe an exercise
of legislative power.
Statutes are commonly divided into following classes




92
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                LESSON 3

    (1)   Codifying, when they codify the unwritten law on a subject;
   (2)    Declaratory, when they do not profess to make any alteration in the existing law, but merely declare or
          explain what it is;
   (3)    Remedial, when they alter the common law, or the judge made (non-statutory) law;

   (4)    Amending, when they alter the statute law;

   (5)    Consolidating, when they consolidate several previous statutes relating to the same subject matter,
          with or without alternations of substance;

   (6)    Enabling, when they remove a restriction or disability;

   (7)    Disabling or restraining, when they restrain the alienation of property;

   (8)    Penal, when they impose a penalty or forfeiture.

 NEED FOR INTERPRETATION OF A STATUTE
The following observation of Denning L.J. in Seaford Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher, (1949) 2 K.B. 481 (498), on the
need for statutory interpretation is instructive: “It is not within human powers to forsee the manifold sets of facts
which may arise; and that; even if it were, it is not possible to provide for them in terms free from all ambiguity.
The English language is not an instrument of mathematical precision. Our literature would be much the poorer if
it were. This is where the draftsmen of Acts of Parliament have often been unfairly criticised. A judge, believing
himself to be fettered by the supposed rule that he must look to the language and nothing else, laments that the
draftsmen have not provided for this or that, or have been guilty of some or other ambiguity. It would certainly
save the judge’s trouble if Acts of Parliament were drafted with divine prescience and perfect clarity. In the
absence of it, when a defect appears, a judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman. He must
set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament, and he must do this, not only from the
language of the statute, but also from a consideration of the social conditions which gave rise to it, and of the
mischief which it was passed to remedy, and then he must supplement the written word so as to give ‘force and
life’ to the intention of the legislature. To put into other words : A judge should ask himself the question : If the
makers of the Act had themselves come across this luck in the texture of it, how would they have straight ended
it out? He must then do as they would have done. A judge must not alter the material of which it is woven, but
he can and should iron out the creases.

The object of interpretation has been explained in Halsbury’s Laws of England 3rd Ed., vol. 2, p. 381 in the
following words: “The object of all interpretation of a ‘Written Document’ is to discover the intention of the
author, the written declaration of whose mind the document is always considered to be. Consequently, the
construction must be as near to the minds and apparent intention of the parties as possible, and as the law
will permit. The function of the court is to ascertain what the parties meant by the words which they have
used; to declare the meaning of what is written in the instrument, and not of what was intended to have
been written; to give effect to the intention as expressed, the expressed meaning being, for the purpose
of interpretation, equivalent of the intention. It is not possible to guess at the intention of the parties and
substitute the presumed for the expressed intention. The ordinary rules of construction must be applied,
although by doing so the real intention of the parties may, in some instances be defeated. Such a course
tends to establish a greater degree of certainty in the administration of the law”. The object of interpretation,
thus, in all cases is to see what is the intention expressed by the words used. The words of the statute are
to be interpreted so as to ascertain the mind of the legislature from the natural and grammatical meaning
of the words which it has used.


                                                                                                                  93
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Interpretation of Statutes

According to Salmond, interpretation or construction is the process by which the Court’s seek to ascertain the
meaning of the legislature through the medium of the authoritative forms in which it is expressed.

    MEANINGS OF INTERPRETATION OF STATUTES
The phrase “Interpretation of Statutes” implies the judicial process of determining,, in accordance with certain
rules and presumptions, the true meaning of the Acts of the Parliament. In this context, the phrase would mean
a process or manner that conveys one’s understanding of the ideas of the creator, or understand as having a
particular meaning or significance, explanation, explication or a clarification for a particular statute or law. It is
often said that the purpose of interpretation is to ascertain the intention of the Legislature.
The object of interpretation is to see what is intended by the words used by the lawmaker. But, sometimes it is
very difficult to understand the meaning without making further inquiry. Therefore, it becomes necessary to find
out the correct meaning by applying various rules of interpretation. However, there is no hierarchy of one rule
over the other. The interpreter has to analyse which rule has to apply after giving due consideration to the facts
of the situation and intent of the statute.
It must be kept in the mind that there is a clear distinction between Interpretation and Legislation. The court only
interprets the law and does not legislate it. If the provision of law is misused and subjected to the abuse of the
process of law, it is for the Legislature to amend modify or repeal it by having recourse to appropriate procedure
if deemed necessary. Therefore, statutory interpretation is an exercise which requires the court to identify the
meaning borne by the words in question in the particular context.

    CASUS OMISSUS RULE
According to definition of Merriam-Webster, casus omissus rule is a situation omitted from or not provided for by
statute or regulation and therefore governed by the common law.
There are two basic rules of interpretation:
      1.   Every word in a statute to be given meaning.
     2.    The court cannot read anything into a statute or rewrite a provision which is unambiguous
A court generally interprets the law against rewriting.
1
 It is corollary to the general rule of literal construction that nothing is to be added to or taken out from a statute
unless there are adequate grounds to justify the inference the legislature intended something which it omitted
to express.
2
 When the language is clear and unambiguous and when there is no need to apply the tools of interpretation,
there is no need to interpret the word ‘or’, nor any need to read it as a substitute word, instead of its plain and
simple meaning denoting as ‘alternative’.
However, 3the judge may read in or read out words which he considers to be necessarily implied or surplus by
words which are already in the statute; and the judge has a limited power to add to, alter or ignore statutory
words in order to prevent a provision from being unintelligible, absurd or totally unreasonable, unworkable, or
totally irreconcilable with the rest of the statute.

    INTERPRETATION OF DEFINITION CLAUSE
Usually, every statute has a definition section (also called ‘interpretation clause’) which provides definitions of
various words and phrases used in the statute.
1. Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edn., page 33.
2. Sri Jeyaram Educational Trust v. A. G. Syed Mohideen & Others 2010 AIR SCW 871
3. Cross: Statutory Interpretation, 3rd edn., p. 93.

94
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                 LESSON 3

 Example
 Section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013 provides the definitions of various terms used in the statute.

In order to keep the definition relevant the words “unless the context otherwise required” are used in the
provisions relating to definition. These words means that the definition is only conclusive unless otherwise
context requires.
While interpreting, the interpreter should consider the context in which a word has been used, where the
definition of a word has not been given – the construction must be given in its popular sense and Object of the
statute should be given due consideration.
Further, the definitions may be exhaustive definitions and inclusive definitions. In exhaustive definitions, a
restricted meaning is provided for a particular word and in inclusive definitions, there is a scope of further
reading into of the words according to the context.

 Example
 Exhaustive Definition: “abridged prospectus” means a memorandum containing such salient features of a
 prospectus as may be specified by the Securities and Exchange Board by making regulations in this behalf.
 (section 2(1) of the Companies Act, 2013.
 Inclusive Definition: As per section 2(22AA) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 “document” includes an electronic
 record as defined in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000

 PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION INCLUDING HEYDON’S RULE OF INTERPRETATION, GOLDEN
 RULE OF INTERPRETATION
At the outset, it must be clarified that, it is only when the intention of the legislature as expressed in the statute
is not clear, that the Court in interpreting it will have any need for the rules of interpretation of statutes. It may
also be pointed out here that since our legal system is, by and large, modelled on Common Law system, our
rules of interpretation are also same as that of the system. It is further to be noted, that the so called rules of
interpretation are really guidelines.

                                                   Primary Rules

   l The Primary Rule: Literal Construction

   l The Mischief Rule or Heydon’s Rule

   l    Rule of Reasonable Construction i.e. Ut Res Magis Valeat Quam Pareat
   l Rule of Harmonious Construction

   l Rule of Ejusdem Generis


                                           Other Rules of Interpretation
   l Expressio Unis Est Exclusio Alterius

   l Contemporanea Expositio Est Optima Et Fortissima in Lege

   l Noscitur a Sociis

   l Strict and Liberal Construction


                                                                                                                   95
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Interpretation of Statutes

(i) Primary Rules
     (a)   The Primary Rule: Literal Construction
		According to this rule, the words, phrases and sentences of a statute are ordinarily to be understood
  in their natural, ordinary or popular and grammatical meaning unless such a construction leads to an
  absurdity or the content or object of the statute suggests a different meaning. The objectives ‘natural’,
  ‘ordinary’ and ‘popular’ are used interchangeably.
		 Interpretation should not be given which would make other provisions redundant (Nand Prakash Vohra
   v. State of H.P., AIR 2000 HP 65).
		         If there is nothing to modify, alter or qualify the language which the statute contains, it must be construed
           according to the ordinary and natural meaning of the words. “The safer and more correct course of
           dealing with a question of construction is to take the words themselves and arrive, if possible, at their
           meaning without, in the first instance, reference to cases.”
		 “Whenever you have to construe a statute or document you do not construe it according to the mere
   ordinary general meaning of the words, but according to the ordinary meaning of the words as applied
   to the subject matter with regard to which they are used”. (Brett M.R.)
		 It is a corollary to the general rule of literal construction that nothing is to be added to or taken from
   a statute unless there are adequate grounds to justify the inference that the legislature intended
   something which it omitted to express.
		 A construction which would leave without effect any part of the language of a statute will normally
   be rejected. Thus, where an Act plainly gave an appeal from one quarter sessions of another, it was
   observed that such a provision, though extraordinary and perhaps an oversight, could not be eliminated.
		 Similarly, the main part of the section must not be construed in such a way as to render a proviso to the
   section redundant.
		 Some of the other basic principles of literal construction are:
            (i) Every word in the law should be given meaning as no word is unnecessarily used.
            (ii)   One should not presume any omissions and if a word is not there in the Statute, it shall not be
                   given any meaning.
		 While discussing rules of literal construction the Supreme Court in State of H.P v. Pawan Kumar (2005)
   4 SCALE, P.1, held: One of the basic principles of interpretation of statutes is to construe them according
   to plain, literal and grammatical meaning of the words.
             –     If that is contrary to, or inconsistent with, any express intention or declared purpose of the Statute,
                   or if it would involve any absurdity, repugnancy or inconsistency, the grammatical sense must
                   then be modified, extended, abridged, so far as to avoid such an inconvenience, but no further.
             –     The onus of showing that the words do not mean what they say lies heavily on the party who
                   alleges it.
             –     He must advance something which clearly shows that the grammatical construction would be
                   repugnant to the intention of the Act or lead to some manifest absurdity.
     (b)   The Mischief Rule or Heydon’s Rule
		In Heydon’s Case, in [1584] [76 ER 637 360 REP 7a], it was resolved by the Barons of the Exchequer
  “that for the sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general (be they penal or beneficial, restrictive
  or enlarging of the Common Law) four things are to be discerned and considered:
            (1)    What was the Common Law before the making of the Act;

96
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                              LESSON 3

          (2)   What was the mischief and defect for which the Common Law did not provide;
          (3) What remedy the Parliament had resolved and appointed to cure the disease of the Commonwealth;
              and
          (4)   The true reason of the remedy.
		 Although judges are unlikely to propound formally in their judgments the four questions in Heydon’s
   Case, consideration of the “mischief” or “object” of the enactment is common and will often provide
   the solution to a problem of interpretation. Therefore, when the material words are capable of bearing
   two or more constructions, the most firmly established rule for construction of such words is the rule
   laid down in Heydon’s case which has “now attained the status of a classic”. The rule directs that the
   Courts must adopt that construction which “shall suppress the mischief and advance the remedy”. But
   this does not mean that a construction should be adopted which ignores the plain natural meaning of
   the words or disregard the context and the collection in which they occur. (See Umed Singh v. Raj Singh,
   A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 43)
		 The Supreme Court in Sodra Devi’s case, AIR 1957 S.C. 832 has expressed the view that the rule in
   Heydon’s case is applicable only when the words in question are ambiguous and are reasonably
   capable of more than one meaning.
		 The correct principle is that after the words have been construed in their context and it is found that
   the language is capable of bearing only one construction, the rule in Heydon’s case ceases to be
   controlling and gives way to the plain meaning rule.
   (c)   Rule of Reasonable Construction, i.e., Ut Res Magis Valeat Quam Pereat
		 Normally, the words used in a statute have to be construed in their ordinary meaning, but in many
   cases, judicial approach finds that the simple device of adopting the ordinary meaning of words, does
   not meet the ends as a fair and a reasonable construction. Exclusive reliance on the bare dictionary
   meaning of words’ may not necessarily assist a proper construction of the statutory provision in which
   the words occur. Often enough interpreting the provision, it becomes necessary to have regard to the
   subject matter of the statute and the object which it is intended to achieve.
		 According to this rule, the words of a statute must be construed ut res magis valeat quam pereat, so
   as to give a sensible meaning to them. A provision of law cannot be so interpreted as to divorce it
   entirely from common sense; every word or expression used in an Act should receive a natural and fair
   meaning.
		 It is the duty of a Court in constructing a statute to give effect to the intention of the legislature. If,
   therefore, giving of literal meaning to a word used by the draftsman particularly in penal statute would
   defeat the object of the legislature, which is to suppress a mischief, the Court can depart from the
   dictionary meaning which will advance the remedy and suppress the mischief.


          CASE LAWS

           It is only when the language of a statute, in its ordinary meaning and grammatical construction, leads
           to a manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the enactment, or to some inconvenience or
           absurdity, hardship of injustice, presumably not intended, a construction may be put upon it which
           modifies the meaning of the words and even the structure of the sentence (Tirath Singh v. Bachittar
           Singh, A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 830).



                                                                                                                97
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Interpretation of Statutes


            Courts can depart from dictionary meaning of a word and give it a meaning which will advance the
            remedy and suppress the mischief provided the Court does not have to conjecture or surmise. A
            construction will be adopted in accordance with the policy and object of the statute (Kanwar Singh
            v. Delhi Administration, AIR 1965 S.C. 871). To make the discovered intention fit the words used in the
            statute, actual expression used in it may be modified [Newman Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Marrables,
            (1931) 2 KB 297, Williams v. Ellis, 1880 49 L.J.M.C.]. If the Court considers that the litera legis is not
            clear, it, must interpret according to the purpose, policy or spirit of the statute (ratio-legis). It is, thus,
            evident that no invariable rule can be established for literal interpretation.
            In RBI v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. (1987) 1 SCC 424. The Supreme Court
            stated that if a statute is looked at in the context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute
            makers provided by such context, its scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take
            colour and appear different than when the statute is looked at without the glasses provided by the
            context. With these glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover what each section,
            each clause each phrase and each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme of
            the entire Act. (See also Chairman Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke and Chemicals
            Ltd., AIR 2007 SC 2458).
            In Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad vs. P.N. Murthy & Ors., 1987 SCR (2) 107 It was observed
            by the Supreme Court that the scheme of the relevant sections has to be read and construed in
            a meaningful, purposeful and rational manner. The expression ‘vest’ employed in Section 202(1)
            (c), under the circumstances must of necessity be construed as vesting both in title as well as in
            possession.

     (d)   Rule of Harmonious Construction
		 A statute must be read as a whole and one provision of the Act should be construed with reference
   to other provisions in the same Act so as to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute. Such
   a construction has the merit of avoiding any inconsistency or repugnancy either within a section or
   between a section and other parts of the statute. It is the duty of the Courts to avoid “a head on clash”
   between two sections of the same Act and, “whenever it is possible to do so, to construct provisions
   which appear to conflict so that they harmonise” (Raj Krishna v. Pinod Kanungo, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 202 at
   203).
		 Where in an enactment, there are two provisions which cannot be reconciled with each other, they
   should be so interpreted that, if possible, effect may be given to both. This is what is known as the “rule
   of harmonius construction”.

            CASE LAWS

            The Supreme Court applied this rule in resolving a conflict between Articles 25(2)(b) and 26(b) of
            the Constitution and it was held that the right of every religious denomination or any section thereof
            to manage its own affairs in matters of religion [Article 26(b)] is subject to a law made by a State
            providing for social welfare and reform or throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a public
            character to all classes and sections of Hindus [Article 25(2)(b)]. (Venkataramana Devaru v. State of
            Mysore, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 255).
            In M/s New India Sugar Mills Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar. SC, 1963 AIR 1207 It was
            observed by Supreme Court that It is a recognised rule of interpretation of statutes that the
            expressions used therein should ordinarily be understood in a sense in which they best harmonise
            with the object of the statute, and which effectuate the object of the Legislature.


98
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                LESSON 3

   (e)    Rule of Ejusdem Generis
		Ejusdem Generis, literally means “of the same kind or species”. The rule can be stated thus:
           (i) In an enumeration of different subjects in an Act, general words following specific words may be
               construed with reference to the antecedent matters, and the construction may be narrowed down
               by treating them as applying to things of the same kind as those previously mentioned, unless of
               course, there is something to show that a wide sense was intended;
           (ii)   If the particular words exhaust the whole genus, then the general words are construed as
                  embracing a larger genus.
In other words, the ejusdem generis rule is that, where there are general words following particular and specific
words, the general words following particular and specific words must be confined to things of the same kind
as those specified, unless there is a clear manifestation of a contrary purpose. It is merely a rule of construction
to aid the Courts to find out the true intention of the Legislature (Jage Ram v. State of Haryana, A.I.R. 1971 S.C.
1033). To apply the rule the following conditions must exist:
    (1)   The statute contains an enumeration by specific words,
   (2)    The members of the enumeration constitute a class,
   (3)    The class is not exhausted by the enumeration,
   (4)    A general term follows the enumeration,
   (5)    There is a distinct genus which comprises more than one species, and
   (6)    There is no clearly manifested intent that the general term be given a broader meaning that the doctrine
          requires. (See Thakura Singh v. Revenue Minister, AIR 1965 J & K 102)

 Question: Which of the given is not a primary rule of Interpretation?
 Options:
  (A) Literal Construction
  (B) Heydon’s rule
  (C) Noscitur a Sociis
  (D) Ejusdem Generis
 Answer: (C)

The rule of ejusdem generis must be applied with great caution because, it implies a departure from the natural
meaning of words, in order to give them a meaning or supposed intention of the legislature. The rule must be
controlled by the fundamental rule that statutes must be construed so as to carry out the object sought to be
accomplished. The rule requires that specific words are all of one genus, in which case, the general words may
be presumed to be restricted to that genus.
Whether the rule of ejusdem generis should be applied or not to a particular provision depends upon the
purpose and object of the provision which is intended to be achieved.
(ii) Other Rules of Interpretation
   (a)    Expressio Unis Est Exclusio Alterius
		 The rule means that express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another.


                                                                                                                 99
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Interpretation of Statutes

		 At the same time, general words in a statute must receive a general construction, unless there is in the
   statute some ground for limiting and restraining their meaning by reasonable construction; because
   many things are put into a statute ex abundanti cautela, and it is not to be assumed that anything not
   specifically included is for that reason alone excluded from the protection of the statute. The method
   of construction according to this maxim must be carefully watched. The failure to make the ‘expressio’
   complete may arise from accident. Similarly, the ‘exclusio’ is often the result of inadvertence or accident
   because it never struck the draftsman that the thing supposed to be excluded requires specific mention.
   The maxim ought not to be applied when its application leads to inconsistency or injustice.
		 Similarly, it cannot be applied when the language of the Statute is plain with clear meaning. (Parbhani
   Transport Co-operative Society Ltd. v. Regional Transport Authority, AIR 1960 SC 801)
  (b)   Contemporanea Expositio Est Optima Et Fortissima in Lege
		 The maxim means that a contemporaneous exposition is the best and strongest in law. Where the words
   used in a statute have undergone alteration in meaning in course of time, the words will be construed
   to bear the same meaning as they had when the statute was passed on the principle expressed in the
   maxim. In simple words, old statutes should be interpreted as they would have been at the date when
   they were passed and prior usage and interpretation by those who have an interest or duty in enforcing
   the Act, and the legal profession of the time, are presumptive evidence of their meaning when the
   meaning is doubtful.
		 But if the statute appears to be capable of only interpretation, the fact that a wrong meaning had been
   attached to it for many years, will be immaterial and the correct meaning will be given by the Courts
   except when title to property may be affected or when every day transactions have been entered into
   on such wrong interpretation.
  (c)   Noscitur a Sociis
		‘Noscitur a Sociis’, i.e., “It is known by its associates”. In other words, meaning of a word should be
  known from its accompanying or associating words. It is not a sound principle in interpretation of
  statutes, to lay emphasis on one word disjuncted from its preceding and succeeding words. A word in
  a statutory provision is to be read in collocation with its companion words. The pristine principle based
  on the maxim ‘noscitur a socitis’ has much relevance in understanding the import of words in a statutory
  provision (K. Bhagirathi G. Shenoy v. K.P. Ballakuraya, AIR 1999 SC 2143).
		 The rule states that where two or more words which are susceptible of analogous meaning are coupled
   together, they are understood in their cognate sense. It is only where the intention of the legislature
   in associating wider words with words of narrower significance, is doubtful that the present rule of
   construction can be usefully applied.
		 The same words bear the same meaning in the same statute. But this rule will not apply:
           (i) When the context excluded that principle.
           (ii)   If sufficient reason can be assigned, it is proper to construe a word in one part of an Act in a
                  different sense from that which it bears in another part of the Act.
        (iii)     Where it would cause injustice or absurdity.
        (iv) Where different circumstances are being dealt with.
         (v)      Where the words are used in a different context.


100
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                    LESSON 3

   (d)     Strict and Liberal Construction
		 In Wiberforce on Statute Law, it is said that what is meant by ‘strict construction’ is that “Acts, are not
   to be regarded as including anything which is not within their letter as well as their spirit, which is not
   clearly and intelligibly described in the very words of the statute, as well as manifestly intended”, while
   by ‘liberal construction’ is meant that “everything is to be done in advancement of the remedy that
   can be done consistently with any construction of the statute”. Beneficial construction to suppress the
   mischief and advance the remedy is generally preferred.
		 A Court invokes the rule which produces a result that satisfies its sense of justice in the case before
   it. “Although the literal rule is the one most frequently referred to in express terms, the Courts treat all
   three (viz., the literal rule, the golden rule and the mischief rule) as valid and refer to them as occasion
   demands, but do not assign any reasons for choosing one rather than another. Sometimes a Court
   discusses all the three approaches. Sometimes it expressly rejects the ‘mischief rule’ in favour of the
   ‘literal rule’. Sometimes it prefers, although never expressly, the ‘mischief rule’ to the ‘literal rule’.

 PRESUMPTIONS
Where the meaning of the statute is clear, there is no need for presumptions. But if the intention of the legislature
is not clear, there are number of presumptions. These are:
   (a)     That the words in a statute are used precisely and not loosely.
   (b)     That vested rights, i.e., rights which a person possessed at the time the statute was passed, are not
           taken away without express words, or necessary implication or without compensation.
   (c)     That “mens rea”, i.e., guilty mind is required for a criminal act. There is a very strong presumption that a
           statute creating a criminal offence does not intend to attach liability without a guilty intent. The general
           rule applicable to criminal cases is “actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea” (The act itself does not
           constitute guilt unless done with a guilty intent).
   (d)     That the state is not affected by a statute unless it is expressly mentioned as being so affected.
   (e)     That a statute is not intended to be inconsistent with the principles of International Law. Although
           the judges cannot declare a statute void as being repugnant to International Law, yet if two possible
           alternatives present themselves, the judges will choose that which is not at variance with it.
    (f)    That the legislature knows the state of the law.
   (g)     That the legislature does not make any alteration in the existing law unless by express enactment.
   (h)     That the legislature knows the practice of the executive and the judiciary.
    (i)    Legislature confers powers necessary to carry out duties imposed by it.
    ( j)   That the legislature does not make mistake. The Court will not even alter an obvious one, unless it be
           to correct faulty language where the intention is clear.
   ( jj)   The law compels no man to do that which is futile or fruitless.
   (k)     Legal fictions may be said to be statements or suppositions which are known, to be untrue, but which
           are not allowed to be denied in order that some difficulty may be overcome, and substantial justice
           secured. It is a well settled rule of interpretation that in construing the scope of a legal fiction, it would
           be proper and even necessary to assume all those facts on which alone the fiction can operate.
    (l)    Where powers and duties are inter-connected and it is not possible to separate one from the other in
           such a way that powers may be delegated while duties are retained and vice versa, the delegation of
           powers takes with it the duties.

                                                                                                                    101
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Interpretation of Statutes

  (m)    The doctrine of natural justice is really a doctrine for the interpretation of statutes, under which the
         Court will presume that the legislature while granting a drastic power must intend that it should be fairly
         exercised.

 AIDS TO INTERPRETATION




In coming to a determination as to the meaning of a particular Act, it is permissible to consider two points,
namely,
   (1)   The external evidence derived from extraneous circumstances, such as, previous legislation and
         decided cases etc., and
   (2)   The internal evidence derived from the Act itself.

 (a) Internal Aids in Interpretation
Title
The long title of an Act is a part of the Act and is admissible as an aid to its construction. The long title sets out
in general terms, the purpose of the Act and it often precedes the preamble. It must be distinguished from short
title which implies only an abbreviation for purposes of reference, the object of which is identification and not
description. The true nature of the law is determined not by the name given to it but by its substance. However,
the long title is a legitimate aid to the construction.
While dealing with the Supreme Court Advocates (Practice in High Court) Act, 1951 bearing a full title as “An Act to
authorise Advocates of the Supreme Court to practice as of right in any High Court”, S.R. Das, J. observed:“ One
cannot but be impressed at once with the wording of the full title of the Act. Although there are observations in
earlier English Cases that the title is not a part of the statute and is, therefore, to be excluded from consideration
in construing the statutes. It is now a settled law that the title of a statute is an important part of the Act and
may be referred to for the purpose of ascertaining its general scope and of throwing light on its construction,
although it cannot override the clear meaning of an enactment.

102
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                 LESSON 3

Preamble
The true place of a preamble in a statute was at one time, the subject of conflicting decisions. In Mills v. Wilkins,
(1794) 6 Mad. 62, Lord Hold said: “the preamble of a statute is not part thereof, but contains generally the
motives or inducement thereof”. On the other hand, it was said that “the preamble is to be considered, for
it is the key to open the meaning of the makers of the Act, and the mischief it was intended to remedy”. The
modern rule lies between these two extremes and is that where the enacting part is explicit and unambiguous
the preamble cannot be resorted to, control, qualify or restrict it, but where the enacting part is ambiguous, the
preamble can be referred to explain and elucidate it (Raj Mal v. Harnam Singh, (1928) 9 Lah. 260). In Powell v.
Kempton Park Race Course Co., (1899) AC 143, 157, Lord Halsbury said: “Two propositions are quite clear – One
that a preamble may afford useful light as to what a statute intends to reach and another that, if an enactment is
itself clear and unambiguous, no preamble can qualify or cut down the enactment”. This rule has been applied
to Indian statutes also by the Privy Council in Secretary of State v. Maharaja Bobbili, (1920) 43 Mad. 529, and by
the Courts in India in a number of cases (See for example, Burrakur Coal Co. v. Union of India, AIR 1961 SC 154.
Referring to the cases in Re. Kerala Education Bill, AIR 1958 SC 956 and Bishambar Singh v. State of Orissa, AIR
1954 SC 139, the Allahabad High Court has held in Kashi Prasad v. State, AIR 1967 All. 173, that even though the
preamble cannot be used to defeat the enacting clauses of a statute, it has been treated to be a key for the
interpretation of the statute.
Supreme Court in Kamalpura Kochunni v. State of Madras, AIR 1960 SC 1080, pointed out that the preamble may
be legitimately consulted in case any ambiguity arises in the construction of an Act and it may be useful to fix
the meaning of words used so as to keep the effect of the statute within its real scope.
Heading and Title of a Chapter
In different parts of an Act, there is generally found a series or class of enactments applicable to some special
object, and such sections are in many instances, preceded by a heading. It is now settled that the headings
or titles prefixed to sections or group of sections can be referred to in construing an Act of the legislature.
But conflicting opinions have been expressed on the question as to what weight should be attached to the
headings. A “heading”, according to one view “is to be regarded as giving the key to the interpretation of
clauses ranged under it, unless the wording is inconsistent with such interpretation; and so that headings,
might be treated “as preambles to the provisions following them”. But according to the other view, resort to the
heading can only be taken when the enacting words are ambiguous. So Lord Goddard, C.J. expressed himself
as: However, the Court is entitled to look at the headings in an Act of Parliament to resolve any doubt they may
have as to ambiguous words, the law is clear that those headings cannot be used to give a different effect to
clear words in the sections where there cannot be any doubt as to the ordinary meaning of the words”. Similarly,
it was said by Patanjali Shastri, J.: “Nor can the title of a chapter be legitimately used to restrict the plain terms
of an enactment”. In this regard, the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Suresh Kumar v. Town Improvement Trust,
AIR 1975 MP 189, has held: “Headings or titles prefixed to sections or group of sections may be referred to as to
construction of doubtful expressions; but the title of a chapter cannot be used to restrict the plain terms of an
enactment”.
The Supreme Court observed that, “the headings prefixed to sections or entries (of a Tariff Schedule) cannot
control the plain words of the provision; they cannot also be referred to for the purpose of construing the
provision when the words used in the provision are clear and unambiguous; nor can they be used for cutting
down the plain meaning of the words in the provision. Only in the case of ambiguity or doubt the heading or the
sub-heading may be referred to as an aid for construing the provision but even in such a case aid could not be
used for cutting down the wide application of the clear words used in the provision” (Frick India Ltd. v. Union of
India, AIR 1990 SC 689).


                                                                                                                 103
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Interpretation of Statutes

Marginal Notes
In England, the disposition of the Court is to disregard the marginal notes. In our country the Courts have
entertained different views. Although opinion is not uniform, the weight of authority is in favour of the view that
the marginal note appended to a section cannot be used for construing the section.
“There seems to be no reason for giving the marginal notes in an Indian statute any greater authority than the
marginal notes in an English Act of Parliament” (Balraj Kumar v. Jagatpal Singh, 26 All. 393). Patanjali Shastri,
J., after referring to the above case with approval observed: “Marginal notes in an Indian statute, as in an Act of
Parliament cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing the Statute” (C.I.T. v. Anand Bhai Umar Bhai, A.I.R.
1950 S.C. 134). At any rate, there can be no justification for restricting the section by the marginal note, and the
marginal note cannot certainly control the meaning of the body of the section if the language employed therein
is clear and unambiguous (Chandraji Rao v. Income-tax Commissioner, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 158).
The Privy Council in Balraj Kumar v. Jagatpal Singh, (1904) 26 All. 393, has held that the marginal notes to the
sections are not to be referred to for the purpose of construction. The Supreme Court in Western India Theatres
Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Poona, (1959) S.C.J. 390, has also held, that a marginal note cannot be invoked
for construction where the meaning is clear.
Marginal notes appended to the Articles of the Constitution have been held to constitute part of the Constitution
as passed by the Constituent Assembly and therefore, they have been made use of in consulting the Articles,
e.g. Article 286, as furnishing prima facie, “some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the Article”.
When reference to marginal note is relevant? The Supreme Court has held that the marginal note although
may not be relevant for rendition of decisions in all types of cases but where the main provision is sought to be
interpreted differently, reference to marginal note would be permissible in law. [Sarbajit Rick Singh v. Union of
India (2008) 2 SCC 417; See also Dewan Singh v. Rajendra Prasad (2007) 1 Scale 32].
Interpretation Clauses
It is common to find in statutes “definitions” of certain words and expressions used elsewhere in the body of
the statute. The object of such a definition is to avoid the necessity of frequent repetitions in describing all the
subject-matter to which the word or expression so defined is intended to apply. A definition section may borrow
definitions from an earlier Act and definitions so borrowed need not be found in the definition section but in
some provisions of the earlier Act.
The definition of a word in the definition section may either be restrictive of its ordinary meaning or it may be
extensive of the same. When a word is defined to ‘mean’ such and such, the definition is prima facie restrictive
and exhaustive, whereas where the word defined is declared to ‘include’ such and such, the definition is prima
facie extensive. Further, a definition may be in the form of ‘means and includes’, where again the definition is
exhaustive. On the other hand, if a word is defined ‘to apply to and include’, the definition is understood as
extensive. (See Balkrishan v. M. Bhai AIR 1999 MP 86)
A definition section may also be worded in the form ‘so deemed to include’ which again is an inclusive or
extensive definition and such a form is used to bring in by a legal fiction something within the word defined
which according to ordinary meaning is not included within it.
A definition may be both inclusive and exclusive, i.e., it may include certain things and exclude others. In such
a case limited exclusion of a thing may suggest that other categories of that thing which are not excluded fall
within the inclusive definition.
The definition section may itself be ambiguous and may have to be interpreted in the light of the other provisions
of the Act and having regard to the ordinary connotation of the word defined. A definition is not to be read in
isolation. It must be read in the context of the phrase which it defines, realising that the function of a definition


104
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                 LESSON 3

is to give precision and certainty to a word or a phrase which would otherwise be vague and uncertain but not
to contradict or supplement it altogether.

When a word has been defined in the interpretation clause, prima facie that definition governs whenever that
word is used in the body of the statute.

When a word is defined to bear a number of inclusive meanings, the sense in which the word is used in a
particular provision must be ascertained from the context of the scheme of the Act, the language, the provision
and the object intended to be served thereby.

Proviso

“When one finds a proviso to a section the natural presumption is that, but for the proviso, the enacting part of
the section would have included the subject-matter of proviso”. In the words of Lord Macmillan: “The proper
function of a proviso is to except and to deal with a case which would otherwise fall within the general language
of the main enactment, and its effect is confined to the case”.

As stated by Hidayatullah, J. : “As a general rule, a proviso is added to an enactment to qualify or create an
exception to what is in the enactment, and ordinarily, a proviso is not interpreted as stating a general rule”.

A distinction is said to exist between the provisions worded as ‘proviso’, ‘exception’ or ‘saving clause’. ‘Exception’
is intended to restrain the enacting clause to particular cases; ‘proviso’ is used to remove special cases from
the general enactment and provide for them specially; and ‘saving clause’ is used to preserve from destruction
certain rights, remedies or privileges already existing.

Illustrations or Explanation

“Illustrations attached to sections are part of the statute and they are useful so far as they help to furnish same
indication of the presumable intention of the legislature. An explanation is at times appended to a section to
explain the meaning of words contained in the section. It becomes a part and parcel of the enactment. But
illustrations cannot have the effect of modifying the language of the section and they cannot either curtail or
expand the ambit of the section which alone forms the enactment. The meaning to be given to an ‘explanation’
must depend upon its terms, and ‘no theory of its purpose can be entertained unless it is to be inferred from the
language used” (Lalla Ballanmal v. Ahmad Shah, 1918 P.C. 249).

An explanation, normally, should be so read as to harmonise with and clear up any ambiguity in the main section
and should not be so construed as to widen the ambit of the section. It is also possible that an explanation may
have been added ex abundanti cautela to allay groundless apprehension.

Schedules

The schedules form a part of the statute and must be read together with it for all purposes of construction. But
expression in the schedule cannot control or prevail against the express enactment (Allen v. Flicker, 1989, 10 A
and F 6.40).

In Ramchand Textile v. Sales Tax Officer, A.I.R. 1961, All. 24, the Allahabad High Court has held that, if there is
any appearance of inconsistency between the schedule and the enactment, the enactment shall prevail. If the
enacting part and the schedule cannot be made to correspond, the latter must yield to the former.

There are two principles or rules of interpretation which ought to be applied to the combination of an Act and
its schedule. If the Act says that the schedule is to be used for a certain purpose and the heading of the part of
the schedule in question shows that it is prima facie at any rate devoted to that purpose, then the Act and the
schedule must be read as if the schedule were operating for that purpose only. If the language of a clause in
the schedule can be satisfied without extending it beyond for a certain purpose, in spite of that, if the language


                                                                                                                 105
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Interpretation of Statutes

of the schedule has in its words and terms that go clearly outside the purpose, the effect must be given by them
and they must not be treated as limited by the heading of the part of the schedule or by the purpose mentioned
in the Act for which the schedule is prima facie to be used. One cannot refuse to give effect to clear words
simply because prima facie they seem to be limited by the heading of the schedule and the definition of the
purpose of the schedule contained in the Act.

Whether a particular requirement prescribed by a form is mandatory or directory may have to be decided in
each case having regard to the purpose or object of the requirement and its interrelation with other enacting
provisions of the statute; and it is difficult to lay down any uniform rule. Where forms prescribed under the rules
become part of rules and, the Act confers an authority prescribed by rules to frame particulars of an application
form, such authority may exercise the power to prescribe a particular form of application.

The statement of objects and reasons as well as the ‘notes on clauses of the Bill relating to any particular
legislation may be relied upon for construing any of its provisions where the clauses have been adopted by
the Parliament without any change in enacting the Bill, but where there have been extensive changes during
the passage of the Bill in Parliament, the objects and reasons of the changed provisions may or may not be the
same as of the clauses of the original Bill and it will be unsafe to attach undue importance to the statement of
objects and reasons or notes on clauses.

The Courts have only to enquire, what the legislature has thought fit to enact?

Regarding the reference to the statement of objects and reasons, it is a settled law that it can legitimately be
referred to for a correct appreciation of:

   (1)   what was the law before the disputed Act was passed;

   (2)   what was the mischief or defect for which the law had not provided;

   (3)   what remedy the legislature has intended; and

   (4)   the reasons for the statute.

 (b) External Aids in Interpretation
Apart from the intrinsic aids, such as preamble and purview of the Act, the Court can consider resources outside
the Act, called the extrinsic aids, in interpreting and finding out the purposes of the Act. Where the words of
an Act are clear and unambiguous, no resource to extrinsic matter, even if it consists of the sources of the
codification, is permissible. But where it is not so, the Court can consider, apart from the intrinsic aids, such as
preamble and the purview of the Act, both the prior events leading up to the introduction of the Bill, out of the
which the Act has emerged, and subsequent events from the time of its introduction until its final enactment like
the legislation, history of the Bill, Select Committee reports.

Parliamentary History

The Supreme Court, enunciated the rule of exclusion of Parliamentary history in the way it is enunciated by
English Courts, but on many occasions, the Court used this aid in resolving questions of construction. The Court
has now veered to the view that legislative history within circumspect limits may be consulted by Courts in
resolving ambiguities.

It has already been noticed that the Court is entitled to take into account “such external or historical facts
as may be necessary to understand the subject-matter of the statute”, or to have regard to “the surrounding
circumstances” which existed at the time of passing of the statute. Like any other external aid, the inferences
from historical facts and surrounding circumstances must give way to the clear language employed in the
enactment itself.

106
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                LESSON 3

Reference to Reports of Committees
The report of a Select Committee or other Committee on whose report an enactment is based, can be looked
into “so as to see the background against which the legislation was enacted, the fact cannot be ignored that
Parliament may, and often does, decide to do something different to cure the mischief. So we should not be
unduly influenced by the Report [Letang v. Cooper (1964) 2 All. E.R. 929; see also Assam Railways & Trading Co.
Ltd. v. I.R.C. (1935) A.C. 445].
When Parliament has enacted a statute as recommended by the Report of a Committee and there is ambiguity
or uncertainty in any provision of the statute, the Court may have regard to the report of the Committee for
ascertaining the intention behind the provision (Davis v. Johnson (1978) 1 All. E.R. 1132). But where the words used
are plain and clear, no intention other than what the words convey can be imported in order to avoid anomalies.
Present trends in the European Economic Community Countries and the European Court, however, is to interpret
treaties, conventions, statutes, etc. by reference to travaux preparatories, that is, all preparatory records such
as reports and other historical material.
Reference to other Statutes
It has already been stated that a statute must be read as a whole as words are to be understood in their context.
Extension of this rule of context, permits reference to other statutes in pari materia, i.e., statutes dealing with
the same subject matter or forming part of the same system. Viscount Simonds conceived it to be a right and
duty to construe every word of a statute in its context and he used the word in its widest sense including other
statutes in pari materia.
The meaning of the phrase ‘pari materia’ has been explained in an American case in the following words:
“Statutes are in pari materia which relate to the same person or thing, or to the same class of persons or things.
The word par must not be confounded with the words simlis. It is used in opposition to it intimating not likeness
merely, but identity. It is a phrase applicable to public statutes or general laws made at different times and in
reference to the same subject. When the two pieces of legislation are of differing scopes, it cannot be said that
they are in pari materia.
It is well accepted legislative practice to incorporate by reference, if the legislature so chooses, the provisions
of some other Act in so far as they are relevant for the purposes of and in furtherance of the scheme and
subjects of the Act.
Words in a later enactment cannot ordinarily be construed with reference to the meaning given to those or
similar words in an earlier statute. But the later law is entitled to weight when it comes to the problem of
construction.
Generally speaking, a subsequent Act of a legislature affords no useful guide to the meaning of another Act
which comes into existence before the later one was ever framed. Under special circumstances the law does,
however, admit of a subsequent Act to be resorted to for this purpose but the conditions, under which the later
Act may be resorted to for the interpretation of the earlier Act are strict. Both must be laws on the same subject
and the part of the earlier Act which is sought to be construed must be ambiguous and capable of different
meanings.
Although a repealed statute has to be considered, as if it had never existed, this does not prevent the Court from
looking at the repealed Act in pari materia on a question of construction.
The regulations themselves cannot alter or vary the meaning of the words of a statute, but they may be looked
at as being an interpretation placed by the appropriate Government department on the words of the statute.
Though the regulations cannot control construction of the Act, yet they may be looked at, to assist in the
interpretation of the Act and may be referred to as working out in detail the provisions of the Act consistently
with their terms.

                                                                                                                107
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Interpretation of Statutes

Dictionaries
When a word is not defined in the Act itself, it is permissible to refer to dictionaries to find out the general sense
in which that word is understood in common parlance. However, in selecting one out of the various meanings of
the word, regard must always be had to the context as it is a fundamental rule that “the meaning of words and
expressions used in an Act must take their colour from the context in which they appear”. Therefore, when the
context makes the meaning of a word quite clear, it becomes unnecessary to search for and select a particular
meaning out of the diverse meanings a word is capable of, according to lexicographers”. As stated by Krishna
Aiyar, J. “Dictionaries are not dictators of statutory construction where the benignant mood of a law, and more
emphatically the definition clause furnish a different denotation”. Further, words and expressions at times have
a ‘technical’ or a ‘legal meaning’ and in that case, they are understood in that sense. Again, judicial decisions
expounding the meaning of words in construing statutes in pari materia will have more weight than the meaning
furnished by dictionaries.
Use of Foreign Decisions
Use of foreign decisions of countries following the same system of jurisprudence as ours and rendered on
statutes in pari materia has been permitted by practice in Indian Courts. The assistance of such decisions is
subject to the qualification that prime importance is always to be given to the language of the relevant Indian
Statute, the circumstances and the setting in which it is enacted and the Indian conditions where it is to be
applied.

 Question : Which of the following is Internal aid to Interpretation?
 Options:
      (A)   Marginal Notes
      (B)   Parliamentary History
      (C)   Reference to Reports of Committees
      (D)   Reference to other Statutes
 Answer: (A)


 CASE LAW

 The Authority for Clarification and Advance Ruling & Anr. v. M/s. Aakavi Spinning Mills (P) Ltd decided by
 Supreme Court on 12.01.2022
 The Authority for Clarification and Advance Ruling, had held that the commodity “Hank Yarn”, as stipulated
 in Entry 44 of Part B of the Fourth Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (‘the Act’), meant
 only “Cotton Hank Yarn” and not “Viscose Staple Fiber (‘VSF’) Hank Yarn”. The learned Single Judge of the
 Hon’ble High Court agreed with the interpretation. Per contra, the Division Bench of the High Court was of
 the view that no external aid for interpretation was called for when the language of the Entry in question
 was clear in itself. The Division Bench was also of the view that even the referred Budget speech did not
 specifically mention that there was any intention to restrict the exemption only to “Cotton Hank Yarn”. The
 appeal was made to the Apex Court.
 The Hon’ble Supreme Court decided and reiterated that, there is no occasion to refer to the external aids like
 Finance Minister Speech in the present case, in view of the plain language in Entry 44 and even if one were
 to do so, there is no occasion to make an inference from the said Budget Speech that only cotton Hank yarn
 was entitled to be exempted. Cotton Hank yarn continues to be exempt in Entry 44 ….


108
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                 LESSON 3

 LEGAL TERMINOLOGIES & LEGAL MAXIMS
A priori: From the antecedent to the consequent.
Ab initio: From the beginning.
Absolute sententia expositore non indiget: Plain words require no explanation.
Actio mixta: Mixed action.
Actio personalis moritur cum persona: A personal right of action dies with the person.
Actionable per se: The very act is punishable and no proof of damage is required.
Actus Curiae Neminem Gravabit: Act of the Court shall prejudice no one.
Actus non facit reumnisi mens sit rea: An act does not make a man guilty unless there be guilty intention.
Actus reus: Wrongful act.
Ad hoc: For the particular end or case at hand.
Ad idem: At the same point.
Ad valorem: According to value.
Aliunde: From another source.
Amicus Curiae: A friend of court member of the bar who is appointed to assist the Court.
Animus possidendi: Intention to possess
Audi alteram partem: Hear the other side.
Benami: Nameless.
Bona fide: Good faith; genuine.
Caveat: A caution registered with the public court to indicate to the officials that they are not to act in the matter
mentioned in the caveat without first giving notice to the caveator.
Caveat emptor: Let the buyer beware.
Caveat actor: Let the doer beware.
Caveat venditor: Let the seller beware.
Certiorari: A writ by which records of proceeding are removed from inferior courts to High Court and to quash
decision that goes beyond its jurisdiction.
Cestui que trust: The person who has the equitable right to property in India he is known as beneficiaries.
Consensus ad idem: Common consent necessary for a binding contract.
Contemporanea expositio est optima et fortissima lege: A contemporaneous exposition or language is the best
and strongest in Law.
Corpus delicti: Body/gist of the offence.
Cy pres: As nearly as may be practicable.
Damnum sine injuria: Damage without injury.
De facto: In fact.

                                                                                                                 109
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Interpretation of Statutes

De jure: By right (opposed to de facto) in Law.
Dehors: Outside; foreign to (French term).
De novo: To make something new; To alter.
Dies non: Day on which work is not performed.
Deceit: Anything intended to mislead another.
Del credre agent: Is a mercantile agent who in consideration of extra remuneration called a del credre
commission undertakes to indemnify his employer against loss arising from the failure of persons with whom he
contracts to carry out their contracts.
Delegate potestas nonpotest delegari: A delegated power cannot be delegated further.
Delegatus non potest delegare: A delegate cannot delegate.
Dictum: Statement of law made by judge in the course of the decision but not necessary to the decision itself.
Dispono: Convey legally.
Ejusdem generis: Where there are general words following particular and specific words, the general words
must be confined to things of the same kind as those specified.
Estoppel: Stopped from denying.
Ex parte: Proceedings in the absence of the other party.
Expressio unius est exclusio alterius: Express mention of one thing implies the exclusion of another or which is
shortly put.
Ex turpi causa non oritur actio: No action arises from an illegal or immoral cause.
Fatum: Beyond human foresight.
Fait accompli: Things done and no longer worth arguing against; an accomplished act.
Factum probandum: Fact in issue which is to be proved.
Factum probans: Relevant fact.
Ferae naturae: Dangerous by nature.
Force majeure: Circumstance beyond one’s control, irresistible force or compulsion.
Generalia specialibus non derogant: General things do not derogate from special.
Habeas corpus: A writ to have the body to be brought up before the judge.
Ignorantia legis neminem excusat: Ignorance of law excuses no one.
Injuria sine damno: Injury without damage.
Interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium: State or public interest requires that there should be a limit to litigation.
Ipso facto: By the very nature of the case.
In promptu: In readiness.
In posse: In a state of possibility.
In limine: Initial stage; at the outset.


110
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                           LESSON 3

In lieu of: Instead of.
Inter alia: Among other things.
Inter se: Among themselves.
In specie: In kind.
Inter vivos: Between living persons.
Intra vires: Within the powers.
In personam: A proceeding in which relief is sought against a specific person.
Indicia: A symbol; token; mark.
Innuendo: Allusive remark.
Jus in personam: Right against a person.
Jus in rem: Right against the world at large.
Jus non scriptum: Unwritten law; Customary Law.
Jus scriptum: Written Law.
Lex Marcatoria: The law merchant, is a body of legal principles founded on the customs of merchants in their
dealings with each other, and though at first distinct from the common law, afterwards became incorporated
into it.
Lex fori: The law of the forum of court.
Lis: A suit cause of action.
Lis pendens: A pending suit.
Locus standi: Right of a party to an action to appear and be heard on the question before any tribunal.
Mala fide: In bad faith.
Mandamus: A writ of command issued by a Higher Court to a Lower Court/Government/ Public Authority.
Mens rea: Guilty mind.
Manesuetae natureae: Harmless by nature.
Mesne profits: The rents and profits which a trespasser has received/made during his occupation of premises.
Misnormer: A wrong name.
Mutatis-mutandis: With necessary changes in points of detail.
Noscitur a sociis: A word is known by its associated, one is known by his companions.
Obiter dictum: An incidental opinion by a judge which is not binding.
Onus Probandi: Burden of proof.
Pari passu: On equal footing or proportionately.
Per se: By itself taken alone.
Persona non-grata: Person not wanted.
Per incuriam: Through want of care; through inadvertance.

                                                                                                          111
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Interpretation of Statutes

Prima facie: At first sight; on the face of it.
Profit a prendre: A right for a man in respect of his tenement.
Pro bono publico: For the public good.
Pro forma: As a matter of form.
Pro rata: In proportion.
Posteriori: From the consequences to the antecendent.
Puisne mortgage: Second mortgage.
Pari causa: Similar circumstances, with equal right.
Pari materia: Relating to same person or thing.
Qui facit per alium facit per se: He who acts through another is acting by himself.
Quo warranto: A writ calling upon one to show under what authority he holds or claims an office.
Quia timet: Protective justice for fear. It is an action brought to prevent a wrong that is apprehended.
Quid pro quo: Something for something.
Ratio decidendi: Principle or reason underlying a decision.
Res judicata: A decision once rendered by a competent court on a matter in issue between the parties after a
full enquiry should not be permitted to be agitated again.
Res ipsa loquitur: The things speak for itself.
Respondent superior: Let the principal be liable.
Res sub judice: Matter under consideration.
Res gestae: Facts relevant to a case and admissible in evidence.
Rule nisi: A rule which will become imperative and final unless cause to be shown against it.
Scire facias: Your cause to know.
Status quo: The existing state of things at any given date.
Scientiet volenti non fit injuria: Injury is not done to one who knows and wills it.
Spes successionis: Chance of a person to succeed as heir on the death of another.
Supra: Above; this word occurring by itself in a book refers the reader to a previous part of the book.
Suppressio veri: Suppression of previous knowledge.
Sui juris: Of his own right.
Simpliciter: Simply; without any addition.
Scienter: Being aware of circumstances, the knowledge of which is necessary to make one liable, as applied
to the keeper of a vicious dog, means no more than reasonable cause to apprehend that he might commit the
injury complained of.
Sine qua non: An indispensable condition.
Situs: Position; situation; location.
Suo motu: On its own motion.


112
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                   LESSON 3

Stare decisis: Precedent. Literally let the decision stand.
Sine die: Without a day being appointed.
Travaux preparatotries: Preparatory records.
Tortum: Civil wrong actionable without contract.
Uberrimae fide: Of utmost good faith.
Ubi jus ibi remedium: Where there is a right there is remedy.
Ultra vires: Beyond the scope, power or authority.
Ut lite pendente nihil innovertur: Nothing new to be introduced during ligitation.
Usufructuary: One who has the use and reaps the profits of property, but not ownership.
Ut res magis valeat quam pereat: The words of a statue must be construed so as to give a sensible or reasonable
meaning to them.
Vis major: Act of God.
Vigilantibuset, non dormientibus, jura subveniunt: The laws help those who are vigilant and not those who are
slumber or lazy.
Vice versa: The order being reversed; other way round.
Volenti non fit injuria: Damage suffered by consent gives no cause of action.

 READING A BARE ACT & CITATION OF CASES

 Reading a Bare Act
Bare Act is the text of the legislation passed by the Parliament or State Legislature. It is essential for professionals
working with regulatory framework to understand a Bare Act. Reading a bare act may look simple but it becomes
difficult due to the use of legal language. Therefore, reading a bare act requires skills such as interpretational,
comprehension, analytical and command over the language in which the act has been written.
The purpose of reading a bare act is to understand the correct meaning of a provision. A professional should
read the bare act after keeping in consideration the object of the statute. Few important rules are as under:
    1.   A Bare Act should be read according to the context
    2.   Definition clause of the Act & pari materia statutes and General Clauses Act may be referred to
    3.   Literal interpretation should be given initially
    4.   Break the sentence but understand a provision as a whole
    5.   Read – understand – apply rule would be beneficial
    6.   Read the updated version of the bare act

 Citation of Cases
Citation is a reference to a statute, reported case, regulation etc. The decisions of Higher Court are having
binding force on the subordinate courts. This results to the need of citation of cases in the pleadings to made
before the authorities and courts. Citations are also used by the authors in referring the cases in the books and
publications.


                                                                                                                    113
EP-JI&GL                                                                                  Interpretation of Statutes

Generally, law reports are referred by the professionals in their pleadings. The examples of the law reports
used are as under:

      1.   All India Reporter (AIR)

   2.      Supreme Court Cases (SCC)

   3.      Supreme Court Journal (SCJ)

   4.      Supreme Court Reports (SCR)

   5.      Delhi Law Times (DLT)

Equivalent Citation is also an important mean to refer the cases which means parallel citations. They are used
to refer to the citations of same cases published in other journal.

The citation generally gives an indication to the name of the parties, year of judgement, volume number,
Abbreviated title of journal, page number.

 PROSPECTIVE AND RETROSPECTIVE OPERATION

 Interpretation of Statutory and Procedural provisions
Statutory provisions creating substantive rights or taking away substantive rights are ordinarily prospective.
However, they are retrospective only if by express words or by necessary implication the Legislature has made
them retrospective. Generally, an amendment of substantive law is not retrospective unless expressly laid
down. It may be noted that Declaration about existing law is not an amendment. Whether the law is declaratory
and therefore retrospective or not depends upon the language of the Statute.

With respect to provisions of procedural nature, no person has a vested right in any course of procedure. He has
only the right of prosecution or defence in the manner prescribed for the time being by or for the Court in which
the case is pending and if by an Act of Parliament the mode of procedure is altered he has no other right than
to proceed according to the altered mode. A change in the law of procedure may operate retrospectively and
unlike the law relating to vested right is not only prospective.

 CASE LAW

 In Nabendu Dutta v. Arindam Mukherjee [2004] 121 Comp Cas 150 (Cal) it was held that interpretation of the
 words of any statute cannot be given effect so as to frustrate or defeat the object of the act or to lead to an
 absurdity. The language mentioned in clause (g) of sub section (1) of section 274 of the Companies Act, 1956,
 clearly suggests that on the date of the commencement of the amending act (Companies (Amendment) Act,
 2000) if any person has been a director in the defaulting company he will be affected by this subsection.
 Although the Legislature has not made any retrospective operation expressly, yet the language employed
 therein contextually makes it implicit that the Legislature intends retrospective operation. The words
 “is already a director” suggest, a person continuing to be director till the date of commencement of the
 amendment act. This is supported by the words “has failed to repay its deposits”. The plain grammatical
 position of these latter few words suggests that the failure has started even before the commencement
 of the amendment act. If the operation of the language is intended by the Legislature to indicate a future
 event or occurrence, then the words “has failed to deposit” or “is already a director” would not have been
 employed in the sub section.




114
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                LESSON 3

 USE OF “MAY” AND “SHALL”
The words “shall” or “may” used in a provision depends on the nature of compliance and gravity of non-
compliance. The standard rule is that the provision containing ‘shall’ is mandatory and the provision containing
‘may’ is either permissive or discretionary. In other words, ‘shall’ conveys mandatory nature of the provision,
while ‘may’ conveys permissive or discretionary nature. The word ‘may’ is used where a power, permission,
benefit or privilege given to some person may but need not be exercised: exercise is discretionary. The provision
using the word ‘may’ is an enabling provision and permissive in nature.
However, this rule cannot be applied in all the situations while interpreting a statute. There are many cases
where ‘shall’ is used even if the nature of the provision is permissive or discretionary and may is used when
nature of the provision is mandatory. This may happen due to various reasons including mistake or confusion of
the draftsman. Also the drafters may find it easy to use ‘shall’ leaving it to the courts to interpret the provision.
The word “may” is often read as “shall” or “must” when there is something in the nature of the thing to be done
which makes it the duty of the person on whom the power is conferred to exercise the power. There are several
court decisions in which the word ‘shall’ is held as ‘may’ and vice versa.

 CASE LAW

 P.N. Chockalingam Pillai vs A. Natarajan And Ors.: (2001) 3 MLJ 661
 The Madras High Court has decided the matter in which a question relating to nature of provision regarding
 laying the notification before the Legislature was raised. The Madras High Court has decided as under:
 “Considering the word “shall” used, the circumstance that the Legislature has used a language of compulsive
 force is always of great relevance and in the absence of anything contrary in the context indicating that a
 permissive interpretation is permissible, the statute ought to be construed as pre-emptory. The term “shall”
 in its ordinary significance is mandatory and the Court shall ordinarily give that interpretation to that term
 unless such interpretation leads to absurd or inconvenient or be at variance with the intent of the Legislature
 to be collected from the other parts of the Act….
 …We are in the agreement with the conclusion of the learned Judge that the provisions of the statute
 conferring on the State Government to lay the notification before the Legislature should be strictly followed.
 We hold that the provision, namely Sub-section (6) in Section 1 is mandatory and not directory.”

 USE OF “AND” AND “OR”
In ordinary usage, ‘and’ is conjunctive (that connects words, phrases and clauses in a sentence) and ‘or’ is
disjunctive (that separates words, phrases and clauses in a sentence). Thus ‘and’ connects two or more items
and makes a cumulative group of them whereas ‘or’ separates two or more items and makes them alternative
to one another. If a series of items lays down stipulations or conditions, all of them must be complied with if they
are connected by ‘and’. But sometimes it may be required to read ‘and’ in place of ‘or’ and vice versa. This may
be understood with the help of following examples:

 Example
 Under Companies Act, 2013 “document” includes summons, notice, requisition, order, declaration, form and
 register, whether issued, sent or kept in pursuance of this Act or under any other law for the time being in
 force or otherwise, maintained on paper or in electronic form.
 Under this situation if ‘and’ is used as conjunctive than the interpretation would not be correct.



                                                                                                                 115
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Interpretation of Statutes

 INTERPRETATION OF PROVISO
A clause, as in a document or statute, that begins with the words Provided that is called ‘proviso’. The term
‘proviso’ is defined as a clause making some condition or stipulation; a clause in a statute, deed, or other
legal document introducing a qualification or condition to some other provision, frequently the one immediately
preceding the proviso itself.
Normally, a proviso is meant to be an exception to something within the main enactment or to qualify something
enacted therein which but for the proviso would be within the purview of the enactment. In other words, a
proviso cannot be torn apart from the main enactment nor can it be used to nullify or set at naught the real
object of the main enactment. While interpreting a proviso care must be taken that it is used to remove special
cases from the general enactment and provide for them separately.
Thus, a proviso in a statutory provision carves out an exception to the main provision to which it has been
enacted and to no other. The proper function of a proviso is to except and deal with a case, which would
otherwise fall within the general language of the main enactment, and its effect is to confine to that case.
It may ordinarily be presumed in construing a proviso that it was intended that the enacting part of the section
would have included the subject-matter of the proviso. There is no rule that the proviso must always be restricted
to the ambit of the main enactment. Occasionally in a statute, a proviso is unrelated to the subject-matter of the
preceding section, or contains matters extraneous to that section, and it may then have to be interpreted as a
substantive provision, dealing independently with the matter specified therein, and not as qualifying the main
or the preceding section.
In some cases a proviso may be an exception to the main provision though it cannot be inconsistent with what is
expressed in the main provision. As a general rule in construing an enactment containing a proviso, it is proper
to construe the provisions together without making either of them redundant.

 CASE LAW

 In A.N. Sehgal & Ors 1991 AIR SCW 1246, the Supreme Court stated as follows:
 “It is a cardinal rule of interpretation that a proviso to a particular provision of a statute only embraces the
 field which is covered by the main provision. It carves out an exception to the main provision to which it has
 been enacted by the proviso and to no other. The proper function of a proviso is to except and deal with
 a case which would otherwise fall within the general language of the main enactment and its effect is to
 confine to that case. Where the language of the main enactment is explicit and unambiguous, the proviso
 can have no repercussion on the interpretation of the main enactment, so as to exclude from it, by implication
 what clearly falls within its express terms. The scope of the proviso, therefore, is to carve out an exception
 to the main enactment and it excludes something which otherwise would have been within the rule. It has
 to operate in the same field and if the language of the main enactment is clear, the proviso cannot be torn
 apart from the main enactment nor can it be used to nullify by implication what the enactment clearly says
 nor set at naught the real object of the main enactment, unless the words of the proviso are such that it is its
 necessary effect.

 DEEMING PROVISIONS
A provision in a statute which contains the word ‘deemed’ is called a deeming provision or legal faction. To
deem means to regard or consider (something) in a specified way; to treat something as if it were something
else; assuming a fact which does not really exist.




116
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                  LESSON 3

 Example
 Section 314(2)(a) of the Companies Act 1956 provides that ‘If any office or place of profit is held in contravention
 of the provisions of sub-section (1), the director, partner, relative, firm, private company, or the manager
 concerned, shall be deemed to have vacated his or its office as such on and from the date next following the
 date of the general meeting of the company referred to in the first proviso....’

Sometimes a deeming provision is used simply to provide that something will not be treated as a particular way,
e.g. ‘Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to give validity to acts done by a director after his
appointment has been shown to the company to be invalid or to have terminated’.
It is well settled that a deeming provision is an admission of the non- existence of the fact deemed. The
Legislature is quite competent to enact a deeming provision for the purpose of assuming the existence of a fact
which does not really exist.
In construing the scope of legal fiction, it would be proper and necessary to assume all those facts, on which
alone the legal fiction can operate. The court is entitled and bound to ascertain the purpose for which the
statutory fiction is created to ascertain as to what persons are entitled to the benefit of statutory fiction.
But a fiction created by law cannot operate beyond the purpose for which it has been created, It is a well
known principle of construction that in interpreting a provision creating a legal fiction, the Court is to ascertain
for what purpose the fiction is created, and after ascertaining this, the Court is to assume all those facts and
consequences which are incidental or inevitable corollaries to giving effect to the fiction. The full effect must be
given to the fiction and then it should be carried to its logical end.

 REPUGNANCY WITH OTHER STATUTES
To ascertain the meaning of a section, it is not permissible to omit any part of it, the whole section must be read
together and an attempt should be made to reconcile all the parts. When reconciliation however is not possible,
it has to be determined as to which is the leading provision and which must give way to the other. If this method
also is not possible, then resort must be had to yet another well-established rule, namely that if two sections
are repugnant, the known rule is that the last one must prevail.
Therefore, an attempt should be made in construing different provisions to reconcile them if it is reasonably
possible to do so, and to avoid repugnancy. If repugnancy cannot possibly be avoided, then a question may
arise as to which of the two provisions should prevail. But that question can arise only if repugnancy cannot be
avoided.

 CONFLICT BETWEEN GENERAL PROVISION AND SPECIAL PROVISION
Another well known rule of construction is that general provisions yield to special provisions. The rule that
general provisions should yield to specific provisions is not an arbitrary principle made by lawyers and judges
but springs from the common understanding that when the same person gives two directions one covering a
large number of matters in general and another to only some of them his intention is that these latter directions
should prevail as regards these while as regards all the rest the earlier direction should have effect.
It is the duty of courts to avoid that and, whenever it is possible to do so, to construe provisions which appear to
conflict so that they harmonise. Provisions of one Section of a statute cannot be used to defeat those of another
unless it is impossible to effect re-conciliation between them.
This principle is also expressed in the Latin maxim Generalia specialibus non derogant (also known as the rule
of implied exception) meaning general things do not derogate from special things; things general do not restrict
or detract from things special; universal things do not detract from specific things. This well-known proposition


                                                                                                                  117
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Interpretation of Statutes

of law says that when a matter falls under any specific provision, then it must be governed by that provision and
not by the general provision. The general provisions must admit to the specific provisions of law. It is a basic
principle of statutory interpretation.
In Pretty v. Solly (1859-53 ER 1032) quoted in Craies on Statute Law at p. 206, 6th Edition) Romilly, M. R.,
mentioned the rule thus:
“The rule is that whenever there is a particular enactment and a general enactment in the same statute and
the latter, taken in its most comprehensive sense, would overrule the former, the particular enactment must be
operative, and the general enactment must be taken to affect only the other parts of the statute to which it may
properly apply.”

 SOCIALLY BENEFICIAL CONSTRUCTION
For a sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general (be they penal or beneficial, restrictive or enlarging
of common law), four things are to be discerned and considered:
    (1)   what was the common law before the making of the Act,
   (2)    what was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide,
   (3)    what remedy the Parliament had resolved and appointed to cure the disease
   (4)    the true reason of the remedy
After discerning, the office of all the Judges is always to make such construction as shall suppress the mischief
and advance the remedy and to suppress subtle inventions and evasions for the continuance of the mischief
and pro privato commodo, and to add force and life to the cure and remedy according to the true intent of the
makers of the statute pro bono publico.
In interpreting legislation which was clearly in furtherance of the Directive Principles of State Policy under
article 39 (b) and (c) of the constitution of India, the court cannot adopt a doctrinaire or pedantic approach. It is
a well-known rule of construction that in dealing with such a beneficent piece of legislation, the court ought to
adopt a construction which would subserve and carry out the purpose and object of the Act rather than defeat
it. Surplus Lands of the textile mills taken over under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Textile Undertakings
(Taking over of Management) Act, 1983 are but a vital physical resource capable of generating and sustaining
economic growth of the Textile mills. There can be no doubt that the legislative intent and object of the Act was
to secure the socialization of such surplus lands with a view to sustain the sick textile undertakings so that they
could properly be utilized by the company for social good, i.e. in resuscitating the dying textile undertakings.4
In construing social welfare legislation, the courts should adopt a beneficent rule of construction and in any
event, that construction should be preferred which fulfils the policy of the legislation. Construction to be adopted
should be more beneficial to the purpose in favour of and in whose interest the Act has been passed. So it is
clear that in the matter of interpretation of a beneficial legislation, the approach of the courts is to adopt a
construction which advances the beneficent purpose underlying the enactment in preference to a construction
which tends to defeat that purpose.
Further, it is a well-known canon of interpretation of statutes that in interpreting social welfare legislation, the
court will normally adopt an interpretation which would favour persons sought to be benefited by the legislation.
Where the courts are faced with a choice between a wider meaning which carries out more fully what appears
to have been the object of the Legislature and a narrow meaning which carries it out less fully or not at all, they
will often choose the former.
It is a sound rule of construction to confine the provisions of a statute to itself. The benefits intended by
4. National Textile Corporation Ltd. v. Sitaram Mills Ltd. (1987) 61 Comp Cas 373 (SC)

118
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                  LESSON 3

social welfare legislation such as the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act and the
Employees State Insurance Act 1948, cannot be defeated by granting relief under section 633 of the Companies
Act to directors of the Companies in relation to offences under those Acts.5

 INTERPRETATION OF PROCEDURAL LAW
By its very nomenclature, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, is a compendium of law relating to
criminal procedure. The provisions contained therein are required to be interpreted keeping in view the well
recognized rule of construction that procedural prescription are meant for doing substantial justice. If violation
of the procedural provision does not result in denial of fair hearing or causes prejudice to the parties, the same
has to be treated as directory notwithstanding the use of the word ‘shall’.6

 INTERPRETATION OF FISCAL AND TAXING STATUTES
While dealing with a taxing provision, the principle of ‘strict interpretation’ should be applied. The court should
not interpret the statutory provision in such a manner which would create an additional fiscal burden on a
person. It would never be done by invoking the provisions of another Act, which are not attracted.

The principle was succinctly stated by Lord Russell of Killowon in Inland Revenue Commrs. v. Duke of West-
Minster, 1936 AC 1 at p. 24(A):

“I confess that I view with disfavour the doctrine that in taxation cases the subject is to be taxed if in accordance
with a Court’s view of what it considers the substance of the transaction, the Court thinks that the case falls
within the contemplation or spirit of the statute. The subject is not taxable by inference or by analogy, but only
by the plain words of a statute applicable to the facts and circumstance of his case.’

As Lord Cairns said many years ago in Partington v. The Attorney General, (1869) 4 H L 100 at p. 122 (B):

‘As I understand the principle of all fiscal legislation it is this; if the person sought to be taxed, comes within the
letter of the law he must be taxed however great the hardship may appear to the judicial mind to be. On the
other hand, if the Crown, seeking to recover the tax, cannot bring the subject within the letter of the law, the
subject is free, however apparently within the spirit of the law the case might otherwise appear to be.’

Relying on the above cases and discarding the suggestion that in revenue cases ‘the substance of the matter’
may be regarded as distinguished from the strict legal position, the Supreme Court said in A. V. Fernandez v.
The State of Kerala AIR 1957 SC 657:
“It is no doubt true that in construing fiscal statutes and in determining the liability of a subject to tax one must
have regard to the strict letter of the law and not merely to the spirit of the statute or the, substance of the law.
If the Revenue satisfies the Court that the case falls strictly within the provisions of the law, the subject can be
taxed. If, on the other hand, the case is not covered within the four corners of the provisions of the taxing statute,
no tax can be imposed by inference or by analogy or by trying to probe into the intentions of the legislature and
by considering what was the substance of the matter.”

 DELEGATED LEGISLATIONS
Delegated legislation (subordinate legislation) is legislation made under powers conferred by an Act of
Parliament (an enabling statute, often called the parent Act). The bulk of delegated legislation is governmental.
It consists mainly of orders, regulations rules, directions, and schemes made by ministers. Its primary use is
to supplement Acts of Parliament by prescribing the detailed and technical rules required for their operation.
Unlike an Act, it has the advantage that it can be made (and later amended if necessary) without taking up

5. Rabindra Chamaria v. Registrar of Companies (1992) 73 Comp Cas 257 (SC)
6. Shivjee Singh v. Nagendra Tiwary 2010 AIR SCW 4064

                                                                                                                   119
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Interpretation of Statutes

parliamentary time. Delegated legislation is also made by a variety of bodies outside central government,
examples being the Rules of the Supreme Court, and bodies such as SEBI.
It is a principle of statutory interpretation that when rules are validly framed, they should be treated as a part
of the Act. Rules made under a statute must be treated for all purposes of construction or obligation exactly
as if they were in the Act and are to be of the same effect as if contained in the Act, and are to be judicially
noticed for all purposes of construction or obligation. The statutory rules cannot be described as, or equated
with, administrative directions.
However, in the preface to the Government publication ‘Clarifications and Circulars on Company Law’, Mr. K.K.
Ray, the then Secretary to the Government of India and Chairman, Company Law Board said:
“A perusal of these clarifications, circulars, instructions and orders will show that the Department has tried to
take a broad and balanced view of the various issues in the light of the intention underlying the statute and the
accepted administrative policies of the Government relating to trade, industry and corporate management. It
should, however, be noted that these clarifications, etc., only reflect the thinking of the Department at the time
when they were issued and do not bind it to that line of thinking. The Department has always an open mind and
will be perfectly willing to change its thinking on any particular aspect of the matter, if a better view is shown
to be possible. These clarifications should not, therefore, be cited as an authority of a binding character as is
usually done in courts.”
Therefore, delegated legislations are valid laws but inter alia are subject to the parent act and should be based
on principle of Natural Justice.

 CONFLICT BETWEEN STATUTE, RULES AND REGULATIONS
It is well settled rule of statutory interpretation that when a rule or form prescribed under a statute conflicts with
a statutory provision, the latter will prevail.
In General Officer Commanding-in-Chief v. Dr. Subhash Chandra Yadav AIR 1988 SC 876, the Supreme Court
inter alia stated that:
“It is well settled that rules framed under the provisions of a statute form part of the statute. In other words,
rules have statutory force. But before a rule can have the effect of a statutory provision, two conditions must be
fulfilled, namely, (1) it must conform to the provisions of the statute under which it is framed; and (2) it must also
come within the scope and purview of the rule making power of the authority framing the rule. If either of these
two conditions is not fulfilled, the rule so framed would be void.”
In the case Union of India v. Namit Sharma 2013 AIR SCW 5382, it was inter alia stated that if the rules are made
by the rule making authority and the rules are not in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Court can
strike down such rules as ultra vires the Act, but the Court cannot direct the rule making authority to make the
rules where the Legislature confers discretion on the rule making authority to make rules.

 DOCTRINE OF SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE
In the domain of statutory interpretation, there exists the doctrine of substantial compliance. The Merriam
Webster’s Dictionary of Law defines the expression “substantial compliance” as “compliance with the substantial
or essential requirements of something (as a statute or contract) that satisfies or purpose or objective even
though its formal requirements are not complied with.”
The Black’s Law Dictionary, 8th edition, gives the following meaning of “substantial compliance” as under:
“substantial performance doctrine. The rule that if a good-faith attempt to perform does not precisely meet
the terms of an agreement or statutory requirements, the performance will still be considered complete if the
essential purpose is accomplished, subject to a claim for damages for the shortfall.”


120
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                  LESSON 3

The Supreme Court has held that tendency towards technicality is to be deprecated; it is the substance that
counts and must take precedence over mere form. Some rules are vital and go to the root of the matter;
they cannot be broken; others are only directory and a breach of them can be overlooked provided there is
substantial compliance with the rules read as whole and provided no prejudice ensures. Substance must take
precedence over form. Of course, there are some rules which are vital and go to the root of the matter which
cannot be broken. There are others where non-compliance may be condoned or dispensed with. In the latter
case, the rule is merely directory provided there is substantial compliance with the rules read as a whole and
no prejudice is caused.7

 CASE LAW

  In the case of Umesh Challiyil vs K.P. Rajendran 2008 AIR SCW 1743, the matter of minor defect has been
  decided. It may be summarized as under:
  Where in an affidavit it was stated “no part thereof is false” instead of “I believe to be true”, the Supreme Court
  held that the substance and the essence had been conveyed by the words used; both the phraseologies
  convey the same meaning; practically the same sense was conveyed and it was not such a defect which
  could entail dismissal of the election petition.

 DOCTRINE OF IMPOSSIBILITY OF PERFORMANCE
The “doctrine of impossibility of performance” which is reflected in the following legal maxims which court apply
in interpreting a statutory provision:
A l’impossible nul n’est tenu (No one is bound to do what is impossible; Nobody is expected to do the impossible);
Impossibilium nulla obligatio est (There is no obligation to perform impossible things);
Lex non cogit ad impossibilia (The law does not compel a man do to that which he cannot possibly perform);
Impotentia excusat legem (Impossibility excuses the law; The law excuses someone from doing the impossible;
Impossibility is an excuse in the law).
Enactments which impose duties are subject to these maxims and are understood as dispensing with the
performance of what is prescribed when performance of it is impossible. 8
In Broom’s Legal Maxims, 10th edition, page 162,163, the doctrine of impossibility is explained as follows:
A general rule which admits of ample practical illustration, that impotentia excusat legem; where the law creates
a duty or charge, and the party is disabled to perform it, without default in him, and has no remedy over, there
the law will in general excuse him; and though impossibility of performance is in general no excuse for not
performing an obligation which a party has expressly undertaken by contract, yet when the obligation is one
implied by law, impossibility of performance is a good excuse.

 CASE LAW

  In the case of Raj Kumar Dey and Others vs Tarapada Dey and Others 1987 AIR 2195, 1988 SCR (1) 118, where
  the arbitrators could not take back the award from the custody of the Court to take any further steps for its
  registration, the Supreme Court held that the entire period during which award remained in custody of Court
  should be excluded and it could not be said that they failed to get the award registered as the law required
  i.e. within period of four months.

7 J. P. Srivastava & Sons v. Gwalior Sugar Co. Ltd. [2004] 122 Com Cas 696 (SC)
8. Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edition, page 326.

                                                                                                                  121
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Interpretation of Statutes

 STRICT CONSTRUCTION OF PENAL STATUTES
Generally, penal provisions should be construed strictly.
But at the same time it is one of the settled principles of interpretation of statutes that when two interpretations
are possible of a penal provision, that which is less onerous should be preferred.9
The rule of strict interpretation of penal statutes in favour of an accused may not be of rigid or universal
application. It may be considered along with other well established rules of interpretation. When it is seen that
the scheme and object of the statute are likely to be defeated by a strict interpretation, courts may endeavour
to resort to that interpretation which furthers the object of the legislation.
Section 138 of the Act being a penal provision as is held in Tolaram Relumal v. State of Bombay, AIR 1954
SC 496, if two possible and reasonable constructions can be put on the said provision the court should lean
towards that construction which would exempt the subject from the penalty rather than the one which would
impose penalty.10

 BRIEF OF GENERAL CLAUSE ACT, 1897
The General Clauses Act, 1897 is a consolidating Act. It consolidate the General Clauses Act, 1868 and the
General Clauses Act, 1887. Before the enactment of the General Clauses Act, 1868, provisions of Interpretation
Act, 1850 were followed. The provisions of that Act and certain additions were framed together and thus emerged
the General Clauses Act, 1868. The object of the General Clauses Act, 1868 was to shorten the language used
in the Acts of the Governor-General of India in Council. It contained only 8 sections.
The General Clauses Act, 1897 has been enacted with the aim and objective to provide a one single statute as a
composite structure in defining different provisions as regards to the interpretation of words and legal principles
which would better placed to be defined for the general application for various rules and regulations.




 Importance of the General Clauses Act, 1897
The General Clauses Act 1897 belongs to the class of Acts which may be called as interpretation Acts.
An interpretation Act lays down the basic rules as to how courts should interpret the provisions of an Act
of Parliament. It also defines certain words or expressions so that there is no unnecessary repetition of the
definition of those words in other Acts. The General Clauses Act is a consolidating as well as an extending
measure. As a consolidating measure it did not purport to make any changes in the provisions of law repealed
and reenacted by it. By reason of section 3, the Act becomes statutorily a part of every Central Act passed after
1897 and by its own force applies to the interpretation of every such enactment.
The Central Acts to which the General Clauses Act applies are:
      (i)   Acts of the Indian Parliament;
9. State of Madhya Bharat v. Hiralalji and another [1953] 23 Comp Cas 201
10. Smt. Sosamma vs Rajendran And Anr. 994 80 CompCas 503 Ker, 1993 CriLJ 2196

122
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                               LESSON 3

   (ii)    Acts of the Dominion Legislature passed between the 15th August, 1947 and the 26th January, 1950;
   (iii)   Acts passed before the commencement of the Constitution by the Governor-General in Council or the
           Governor-General acting in a legislative capacity.

 CASE LAW

 In the case of Chief Inspector of Mines vs. K.C.Thapar, AIR 1961, SC 838, 843, Supreme Court has observed
 that “Whatever the General Clauses Act say whether as regards the meaning of words or as regards legal
 principles, has to be read into every Act to which it applies.”

 Definitions
Section 3 is the principal section of the Act which contain definitions. The section applies to the General Clauses
Act itself and to post- 1897 Central Acts and Regulations.
This section seeks to define phrases and terms commonly used in enactments and is intended to serve as a
dictionary for the phrases and terms so used and the Courts are expected to look into this dictionary in the
first instance for their interpretation. The reason why the definition section contains words like “unless there
is anything repugnant in the subject or context”. Ordinarily, terms defined in the section will have the same
meaning in subsequent enactments which employ the same terms unless there is anything inconsistent with or
repugnant to the context of the latter Act (N. Subramania Iyer v. Official Receiver, AIR 1958 SC 1).
Even when a definition given in an Act is exhaustive, it may have to be read differently in the context in which
it occurs. That is why definition sections always begin with the words “unless the context otherwise requires”
(which is another variation of the expression “unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context”). It
has been observed in cases like Knightsbridge Estates Trust Ltd. v. Byrne & Co. (1940) AC 613 and Choudhary
Mohammed v. Sebait of Sri Sri Ishwar etc., AIR 1943 Cal. 36, that the omission of words like “unless there is
anything repugnant in the subject or context” may be of little import in certain cases because some such words
would always be implied in statutes where the expressions which are interpreted by a definition clause are used
in a number of section with meanings sometimes of a wide and sometimes of an obviously limited character.
Important provisions of General Clauses Act, 1897 (GCA) are as under:
     1.    Applicability of the definitions to Central Laws: The definitions for the following words provided in
           GCA apply also, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, to all Central Acts made
           after the third day of January, 1868, and to all Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of
           January, 1887. The words are:
		 “affidavit”, “barrister”, “District Judge”, “father”, “immovable property”, “imprisonment”, “Magistrate”,
   “month”, “movable “movable property”, “oath”, “person”, “section”, “son”, “swear”, “will”, and “year”.
		 “abet”, “Chapter”, “commencement”, “financial year”, “local authority”, “master”, “offence”, “part”,
   “public nuisance”, “registered”, “schedule”, “ship”, “sign”, “sub-section” and “writing”.
    2.     Applicability of the definitions to all Laws: The following definitions in section 3 of the expressions
           shall apply, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, to all Indian laws. The words
           are:
		 “British India”, “Central Act”, “Central Government”, “Chief Controlling Revenue Authority”, “Chief
   Revenue Authority”, “Constitution”, “Gazette”, “Government”, “Government securities”, “High Court”,
   “India”, “Indian Law”, “Indian State”, “merged territories”, “Official Gazette”, “Part A State”, “Part B State”,
   “Part C State”, Provincial Government”, “State” and “State Government”.
    3.     Revenues of the Central Government or of any State Government: In any Indian law, references, by

                                                                                                               123
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Interpretation of Statutes

           whatever form of words, to revenues of the Central Government or of any State Government shall, on
           and from the first day of April, 1950, be construed as references to the Consolidated Fund of India or
           the Consolidated Fund of the State.
   4.      Effect of repeal: If GCA or any central Act or regulations repeals any enactment then, unless a different
           intention appears, the repeal shall not-
            (i) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes effect.
            (ii)   affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done or suffered
                   thereunder.
           (iii)   affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment
                   so repealed.
           (iv) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against
                any enactment so repealed.
           (v)     affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,
                   obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid.
		 and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and
   any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation had
   not been passed.
   5.      Repeal of Act making textual amendment in Act or Regulation: If Central Act or Regulation repeals
           any enactment by which the text of any Central Act or Regulation was amended by the express
           omission, insertion or substitution, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect
           the continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the
           time of such repeal.
   6.      Revival of repealed enactment: It shall be necessary, for the purpose of reviving` either wholly or
           partially, any enactment wholly or partially repealed, expressly to state that purpose.
      7.   Computation of time: Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this
           Act, any act or proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any Court or office on a certain
           day or within a prescribed period, then, if the Court or office is closed on that day or the last day of the
           prescribed period, the act or proceeding shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done
           or taken on the next day afterwards on which the Court or office is open.
   8.      Gender and number: In all Central Acts and Regulations, unless there is anything repugnant in the
           subject or context,:
            (i) words importing the masculine gender shall be taken to include females; and
            (ii)   words in the singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
   9.      Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind: Where, by any Central Act or
           Regulation, a power to issue notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws is conferred, then that power
           includes a power, exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions (if any),
           to add to, amend, vary or rescind any notifications, orders, rules or bye-laws so issued.
  10.      Recovery of fines: Sections 63 to 70 of the Indian Penal Code and the provisions of the Code of Criminal
           Procedure for the time being in force in relation to the issue and the execution of warrants for the levy
           of fines shall apply to all fines imposed under any Act, Regulation, rule or bye-law, unless the Act,
           Regulation, rule or bye-law contains and express provision to the contrary.


124
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                              LESSON 3

   11.   Provision as to offences punishable under two or more enactments: where an act or omission
         constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, then the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted
         and punished under either or any of those enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for
         the same offence.
		 According to the Supreme Court in Baliah v. Rangachari, AIR 1969 SC 701, a plain reading of section
   26 shows that there is no bar to the trial or conviction of an offender under two enactments, but there
   is only a bar to the punishment of the offender twice for the same offence. In other words, the section
   provides that where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two enactments, the offender may
   be prosecuted and punished under either or both the enactments but shall not be liable to be punished
   twice for the same offence.
  12.    Meaning of service by post: Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement
         of this Act authorizes or requires any document to be served by post, where the expression “serve”
         or either of the expressions “give” or “send” or any other expression is used, then, unless a different
         intention appears, the service shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and
         posting by registered post, a letter containing the document, and, unless the contrary is proved, to have
         been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.

 READING METHODOLOGY OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 AND ITS LEGAL AURA
The Companies Act, 2013 is not a standalone piece of legislation but a complete ecosystem. It contains Orders,
Rules, Notifications and Circulars. One should read each Section of the Act, with relevant Rule, Notification and
Circular.
The Act is a superior authority in law passed by the Legislature. Notifications and Rules are notified by the
Executive under the powers derived from the Act itself.
Understanding the structure of Companies Act and the manner of identifying complementary legislations.
The Principal Legislation/Statute
Statute law is the body of law contained in Acts of Parliament. The Companies Act, 2013 is principal legislation.
Schedules- It is appended to an Act, to form part of it. They are generally added to avoid encumbering the
statutes with matter of excessive details.
Delegated Legislations
Delegated legislation (subordinate legislation) is a legislation made under powers conferred by an Act of
Parliament (an enabling statute, of ten called the parent Act). Here Parent Act is The Companies Act and
the delegated legislations are Rules notified by Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Example Companies (Corporate
Social Responsibility Policy) Rules 2014.
Rule, Regulation or By-Laws must not be ultra-vires, that is to say, if a power exists by statute to make rules,
regulations, by laws, forms etc., that power must be exercised strictly in accordance with the provisions of
the statute which confers the power, for a rule, etc.,if ultra-vires it will be held incapable of being enforced.
Before a Rule can have the effect of a statutory provision, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely (1) It must
confirm to the provision of statute under which it is framed; and (2) It must also come within the scope and
purview of the rule making power of the authority framing the rule. If either of these two conditions is not
fulfilled, the rules so framed would be void.



                                                                                                              125
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Interpretation of Statutes

Notifications/Circulars/Clarifications by Ministry of Corporate Affairs
A Notification means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression ‘notify’ and ‘notified’
shall be construed accordingly.
In Bachu Lal vs. State-Allahabad High Court, it was held that the words “notification, orders, rules and by-laws”
have no reference to judicial orders the passing and cancellation whereof is subject to and regulated by the
procedural law of the land.
The Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has been entrusted with the responsibility of administering the Companies
Act, 2013 (Act). The MCA, from time to time, issues circulars and clarifications to clarify the provisions of the Act
and the rules made thereunder (Rules).
The Circulars are issued by the Department interpreting a particular provision of the Act or the Rule in certain
circumstances. The Companies Act, 2013 does not empower the Department to issue circular.
In a series of judicial decisions, the Supreme Court has consistently held that clarificatory circulars cannot amend
or substitute statutory rules. But if the Act or the Rules are silent then the Government can issue clarifications to
supplement the Rules by issuing instructions.
Notifications under Section 462 exempt certain companies from the applicable provision of the Act. At the time
of reading a Section mentioned under an Exemption Notification dealing with a certain class of companies, one
must read such Section in respect of that class of companies as amended by the Exemption Notification for that
class. Exemption notifications effectively amend these Sections for the purpose of the class of companies with
which the Exemption Notification deals.
The Central Government may amend schedules of the Act using power given under Section 467. Schedules
must be read with the main Section.
Wherever a Section of the Companies Act, 2013 use words “as may be prescribed” it is an indication the
Legislature has delegated powers to the Executive on that particular point. Section 469 empowers the Central
Government to make rules for Sections which do not delegate such powers to the Central Government.
While provisions of the Act along with Exemption Notifications and Schedules, deals with the policy framework
of the law; rules deals with the procedures. Rules cannot change policy framework in any manner and cannot
override substantial provision of the Section empowering the Rules.
Secretarial Standards are standards prepared by Institute of Company Secretaries of India to standardize
secretarial practices under the Companies Act and other areas related to Secretarial Practices. By virtue of
Explanation to Section 205(1), secretarial standards issued by the Institute of Company Secretaries of India
constituted under section 3 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 and approved by the Central Government
are part of law itself. Further Section 118(10) mandates that every company shall observe secretarial standards
with respect to General and Board meetings.
This whole ecosystem is called the Companies Law and should be read collectively and comprehensive.

 How to read and understand a Section?
The Companies Act, 2013 is to be read with relevant Rules, Schedules under Companies Act, Circulars/
Clarifications issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
For example Section 135 (Relating to Corporate Social Responsibility) is to be read with the Companies (Corporate
Social Responsibility Policy) Rules 2014, Schedule VII (Activities relating to Corporate Social Responsibility) and
circulars/clarifications issued by Ministry of Corporate Affairs on Section 135 & Rules made thereunder.

126
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                       LESSON 3

Reading provisions of Companies Act, 2013 with delegated legislations
For example when you read sections relating to issue of capital you should read the sections with Companies
(Share Capital and Debentures) Rules, Companies (Prospectus and Allotment of Securities) Rules. Besides,
other legislative aspects including the provisions of SEBI Act, SEBI (ICDR) Regulations, SEBI (LODR) Regulations,
provisions of Depositories Act for dematerialization provisions and even the provisions of FEMA when the shares
are issued to non-residents, wherever applicable, are required to be read in collusion.
Breaking sections into parts and preparing notes for each section:
Company law is so wide that it cannot be easily remembered after only one reading. Students may make
notes for each topic about sections, the genesis, amendments notified, reasons for amendments along with
delegated legislation. They may also make notes on exemptions provided, exceptions and the reasons behind
such exemptions/ exceptions. This will help in understanding the background of the provisions, the spirit of law
and would help in remembering the provisions also. The exemptions provided for certain class of companies
under Section 462 of Companies Act are provided in the e-book at MCA portal under respective sections.
Students may break the sections at relevant places and giving emphasis on critical words and read for getting
more clarity.
For examples Section 2(6) deals with the Definition of “Associate Company” which may be read with the
following breaks.
“associate company”, in relation to another company ............................./,
means a company in which that other company has a significant influence ............................./,
but which is not a subsidiary company of the company having such influence and ............................./.
includes a joint venture company.
Explanation. – For the purpose of this clause, –
   (a)   the expression “significant influence” means control of at least twenty percent of total voting power, or
         control of or participation in business decisions under an agreement;
   (b)   the expression “joint venture” means a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of
         the arrangement have rights to the net assets of the arrangement;
Thus the definition can be read by breaking at the places as indicated above, by understanding the terms ‘joint
venture company’, ‘significant influence’ and the definition of subsidiary as mentioned in section 2(87).
Interpretations of some standard words and Phrases used in Statutes
“Proviso”- A clause, as in a document or statute, that begins with the words “Provided that” is called ‘proviso’.
The term ‘proviso’ is defined as a clause making some condition or stipulation; a clause in a statute, deed,
or other legal document introducing a qualification or condition to some other provision, frequently the one
immediately preceding the proviso itself.
It is well settled that “the effect of an excepting or qualifying proviso, according to the ordinary rules of
construction, is to except out of the preceding portion of the enactment, or to qualify something enacted therein,
which but for the proviso would be within it.”
“Notwithstanding anything contained”
Notwithstanding means, in spite of; without being opposed or prevented by; nevertheless; although, regardless
of. A provision in a statute beginning with the words ‘Notwithstanding anything contained’ is called a ‘non-
obstante’ provision and is generally used in a statute to give an overriding effect to a particular section or the


                                                                                                                     127
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Interpretation of Statutes

statute as a whole. A non-obstante clause is used in a statutory drafting to create an exception to or override the
provision which this phrase follows.
“Subject to”- The ordinary meaning of the phrase ‘subject to’ is being dependent upon; conditional upon;
subordinate to; subservient to something else to happen or to be true; that on the condition of the provisions
of the specified section being observed or complied with. It is used to express the intention that when while
complying with one statutory provision, another provision relating to the subject matter also must be complied
with.
“Nothing contained in this section” shall apply
The phrase “Nothing in this section shall apply” or “Nothing contained in this section shall apply”, is frequently
used in legislative drafting. Literally, it means anything contained in the preceding part of the section would not
apply in the situation stated in the provision that begins with this phrase.
“Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act/any other Act”
The phrase ‘without prejudice’ means without dismissing, damaging, or otherwise affecting; without detriment;
harm. So when one provision says ‘without prejudice to any other provision’, it means that no other provision is
affected by that provision or that other provisions remain unaffected. This is a qualifying phrase used in statutory
drafting in a provision to protect the operation of another provision which it refers to. In other words, both the
provisions operate independently.
“That is to say”
This phrase explains or clarifies the preceding word, phrase or expression.
“For the purposes of this section/provision/definition”
It has limited applicability; it apples to only the relevant section / provision/ definition but applies to the whole
of it.
“As the case may be”- The phrase is used when in a provision two or more things are covered and the provision
is applicable to both or all of them.
“Shall”-When used in a statute, the presumption is that its use is mandatory and not merely directory.
“May” is either permissive or directory.



                                               LESSON ROUND-UP

   l A statute normally denotes the Act enacted by the legislature. The object of interpretation in all cases is
       to see what is the intention expressed by the words used. The words of the statute are to be interpreted
       so as to ascertain the mind of the legislature from the natural and grammatical meaning of the words
       which it has used.

   l The General Principles of Interpretation are Primary Rules and other Rules of Interpretation.

   l The primary rules are:

            – Literal Construction

            – The Mischief Rule or Heydon’s Rule

            – Rule of Reasonable Construction, i.e., Ut Res Magis Valeat Quam Pereat



128
Interpretation of Statutes                                                                                 LESSON 3

             – Rule of Harmonious Construction

             – Rule of Ejusdem Generis

    l Other Rules of Interpretation are:

             – Expressio Unis Est Exclusio Alterius

             – Contemporanea Expositio Est Optima Et Fortissima in Lege

             – Noscitur a Sociis

             – Strict and Liberal Construction

    l Internal Aids in Interpretation are: Title; Preamble; Heading and Title of a Chapter; Marginal Notes;
        Interpretation Clauses; Proviso; Illustrations or Explanations; and Schedules.

    l External Aids in Interpretation: Apart from the intrinsic aids, such as preamble and purview of the Act,
        the Court can consider resources outside the Act, called the extrinsic aids, in interpreting and finding
        out the purposes of the Act. There are: Parliamentary History; Reference to Reports of Committees;
        Reference to other Statutes; Dictionaries and Use of Foreign Decisions.

    l Statutory provisions creating substantive rights or taking away substantive rights are ordinarily
        prospective. However, they are retrospective only if by express words or by necessary implication the
        Legislature has made them retrospective.
    l The words “shall” or “may” used in a provision depends on the nature of compliance and gravity
        of non-compliance. The standard rule is that the provision containing ‘shall’ is mandatory and the
        provision containing ‘may’ is either permissive or discretionary.
    l A clause, as in a document or statute, that begins with the words Provided that is called ‘proviso’. The
        term ‘proviso’ is defined as a clause making some condition or stipulation; a clause in a statute, deed,
        or other legal document introducing a qualification or condition to some other provision.
    l To ascertain the meaning of a section, it is not permissible to omit any part of it, the whole section must
        be read together and an attempt should be made to reconcile all the parts.
    l While dealing with a taxing provision, the principle of ‘strict interpretation’ should be applied.

    l The “doctrine of impossibility of performance” which is reflected in the legal maxims which court apply
        in interpreting a statutory provision
    l The General Clauses Act 1897 belongs to the class of Acts which may be called as interpretation Acts.
        An interpretation Act lays down the basic rules as to how courts should interpret the provisions of an
        Act of Parliament.
    l The Companies Act, 2013 is not a standalone piece of legislation but a complete ecosystem. It contains
        Orders, Rules, Notifications and Circulars. One should read each Section of the Act, with relevant Rule,
        Notification and Circular.


                                                   GLOSSARY

 Statute Law: A Body of Law contained in Acts of the Parliament.
 Delegated Legislation: A legislation made under the under powers conferred by an Act of parliament



                                                                                                               129
EP-JI&GL                                                                                  Interpretation of Statutes


 Literal Construction: It is when the words, phrases and sentences of a statute are ordinarily to be understood
 in their natural, ordinary or popular and grammatical meaning unless such a construction leads to an
 absurdity or the content or object of the statute suggests a different meaning.
 The Mischief Rule or Heydon’s Rule: The construction which “shall suppress the mischief and advance the
 remedy”.
 Reasonable Construction: It means to have regard to the subject matter of the statute and the object which
 it is intended to achieve in place of the words construed in their ordinary meaning.
 Harmonious Construction: A statute must be read as a whole and one provision of the Act should be
 construed with reference to other provisions in the same Act so as to make a consistent enactment of the
 whole statute.


                                                 TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
      1. Discuss the need and object for interpretation of statutes.
  2. Write notes on the following indicating their importance as an aid to interpretation of statutes:

             (i) Marginal Notes

             (ii) Interpretation clause.

  3. What are the internal and external aids which could be taken into account while interpretation. Write
     short notes on:

             (i) Rule of Reasonable Construction, i.e., Ut Res Magis Valeat Quam Pereat

             (ii) The Mischief Rule or Heydon’s Rule

  4. Briefly discuss general principles of interpretation.

  5. Explain the benefits of “Rule of Literal Interpretation”.

  6. Write a note on “Rule of Ejusdem Generis”.

   7. Write a short note on reading methodology of the Companies Act, 2013.

  8. Explain the importance of General Clauses Act, 1897.


                                           LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l Essential Rules of Interpretation of Statutes for Company Secretaries by CS (Dr.) K.R. Chandratre

                                                                                               ICSI Publication
   l Jagdish Swarup : Legislation and Interpretation

   l Lawman’s : General Clauses Act

   l G.P. Singh : Principles of Statutory Interpretation; Wadhwa Publishing Company, Nagpur.

   l B.M.Gandhi : Interpretation of Statutes; Eastern Book Company, 34, Lalbagh, Lucknow-226 001




130
Interpretation of Statutes   LESSON 3




                                 131
EP-JI&GL   Interpretation of Statutes




132
                                                                                                      Lesson
Administrative Laws
                                                                                                         4
KEY CONCEPTS
n   Sources of Administrative Law     n   Rule of Law   n   Principle of Natural Justice   n   Regulations   n   Rules
n   Notifications


Learning Objectives
To understand:
         Administrative Law as a Branch of Public Law
         The necessity of Administrative Laws
         Origin and process of development of Administrative Laws
         Rule of law and its applicability
         The extent of discretion
         Principles of Natural Justice
         Responsibility of the government and contracts with government




Lesson Outline
         Introduction – Conceptual Analysis
         Need for Administrative Law
         Sources of Administrative Law
         Administrative Discretion
                                                                                               Administrative
         Judicial Review & Other Remedies                                                    law determines
                                                                                             the organisation,
         Principles of Natural Justice
                                                                                           power and duties of
         Liability of the Government, Public Corporation                                   the administrative
                                                                                                authorities.
         Lesson Round-Up
         Glossary
         Test Yourself
         List of Further Readings and References




                                                                                                                  133
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Administrative Law


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
         Constitution of India
         Delegated Legislations
         Judicial Precedents

 INTRODUCTION – CONCEPTUAL ANALYSIS
Administrative law is that branch of public law that deals with powers, functions and responsibilities of
various organs of the state. It controls the executive branch and makes sure that it deals fairly with the public.
There is no single universal definition of ‘administrative law’ because it means different things to different
theorists
A subset of public law is administrative law. It establishes the administrative and quasi-judicial authorities’
organisational framework and power structure in order to enforce the law. It establishes a control system by
which administrative agencies maintain their boundaries and is primarily concerned with official actions and
processes.
Kenneth Culp Davis
He was a leading an American legal scholar on administrative law. He defines it as the law concerning the
powers and procedures of administrative agencies, including especially the law governing the judicial review of
administrative action. An administrative agency, according to him, is a government authority, other than a court
and other than a legislative body, which affects the rights of private parties either through adjudication or rule-
making. He further adds that apart from judicial review, the manner in which public officials handle business
unrelated to adjudication or rule-making is not a part of administrative law. The formulation of administrative
agency in this definition is restrictive as it seeks to exclude agencies having administrative authority pure
and simple and not having adjudicative or legislative functions. This definition also does not cover purely
discretionary functions which may be called (administrative) of administrative agencies not falling within the
category of legislative or quasi-judicial.
Albert Venn Dicey
He was the great British constitutional scholar. According to him administrative law relates to that portion of a
nation’s legal system which determines the legal status and liabilities of all state officials, which defines the
rights and liabilities of private individuals in their dealings with public officials, and which specifies the procedure
by which those rights and liabilities are enforced. Dicey’s formulation focuses on one aspect of administrative
law, i.e., judicial control over public officials. This definition is narrow as it leaves out of consideration many
aspects of administrative law, e.g., Public Corporations would not be covered under this definition because,
strictly speaking, they are not state officials.
Ivor Jennings
He defined administrative law as the law relating to administration. It determines the organization, powers
and duties of administrative authorities. This formulation is too broad and general as it does not differentiate
between administrative and constitutional law. It excludes the manner of exercise of powers and duties.
Administrative law is the by-product of ever increasing functions of the Governments. States are no longer police
states, limited to maintaining internal order and protecting from external threats. These, no doubt continue to

134
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

be the basic functions but a state that is limited to this traditional role will de-legitimize itself. With the rise of
political consciousness, the citizens of a state are no longer satisfied with the state’s provisioning of traditional
services. The modern state is, therefore, striving to be a welfare state. It has taken the task to improve social
and economic condition of its people. It involves undertaking a large number of complex tasks. Development
produces great economic and social changes and creates challenges in the field of health, education, pollution,
inequality etc. These complex problems cannot be solved except with the growth of administration. States have
also taken over a number of functions, which were previously left to private enterprise. All this has led to the
origin and the growth of administrative law.

 NEED AND SOURCES OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW

 Need for Administrative Law
The modern state has three organs- legislative, executive and judiciary. Traditionally, the legislature was tasked
with the making of laws, the executive with the implementation of the laws and judiciary with the administration
of justice and settlement of disputes. However, this traditional demarcation of role has been found wanting
in meeting the challenges of present era. The legislature is unable to come up with the required quality and
quantity of legislations because of limitations of time, the technical nature of legislation and the rigidity of their
enactments. The traditional administration of justice through judiciary is technical, expensive and dilatory. The
states have empowered their executive (administrative) branch to fill in the gaps of legislature and judiciary.
This has led to an all pervasive presence of administration in the life of a modern citizen. In such a context, a
study of administrative law assumes great significance.
The ambit of administration is wide and embraces following elements within its ambit:-
    1.   It makes policies.
   2.    It executes, administers and adjudicates the law.
   3.    It exercises legislative powers and issues rules, bye- laws and orders of a general nature.
The ever-increasing administrative functions have created a vast new complex of relations between the
administration and the citizen. The modern administration is present everywhere in the daily life of an individual
and it has assumed a tremendous capacity to affect their rights and liberties.
Since the whole purpose of bestowing the administration with larger powers is to ensure a better life for the
people, it is necessary to keep a check on the administration, consistent with efficiency, in such a way that it does
not violate the rights of the individual. There is an age-old conflict between individual liberty and government
control. There must be a constant vigil to ensure that a proper balance be evolved between private interest and
government which represents public interest. It is the demand of prudence that when large powers are conferred
on administrative organs, effective control-mechanism be also evolved so as to ensure that the officers do not
use their powers in an undue manner or for an unwarranted purpose. It is the task of administrative law to
ensure that the governmental functions are exercised according to law and legal principles and rules of reason
and justice.
The goal of administrative law is to ensure that the individual is not at receiving end of state’s administrative
power and in cases where the individual is aggrieved by any action of the administration, he or she can
get it redressed. There is no antithesis between an effective government and controlling the exercise of
administrative powers. Administrative powers are exercised by thousands of officials and affect millions
of people. Administrative efficiency cannot be the end-all of administrative powers and the interests of
people must be at the centre of any conferment of administrative power. If exercised properly, the vast
powers of the administration may lead to the welfare state; but, if abused, they may lead to administrative
despotism and a totalitarian state.
A careful and systematic study and development of administrative law becomes a desideratum as administrative
law is an instrument of control on the exercise of administrative powers.

                                                                                                                  135
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Administrative Law


  Example:
  There are many areas of law where economic stakes of the public are involved. In these areas, offenders
  find new ways of non-compliances to gain unjust enrichment. Therefore, it is very difficult for Parliament
  to provide a comprehensive law covering all the aspects due to paucity of time and the dynamic nature
  of these laws.
  So, the parliament delegates the power to legislate to the executive branch of government. Power of
  Government to make rules under the Companies Act, 2013 and power of Securities Exchange Board of
  India to make regulations under SEBI Act, 1992 may be seen as good examples of delegated legislation
  i.e. is administrative law.

 Sources of Administrative Law
There are four principal sources of administrative law in India. They are as under -
      1.   Constitution of India: It is the primary source of
           administrative law. Article 73 of the Constitution provides   Example: Article 318 of the Constitution
           that the executive power of the Union shall extend to         of India empowers the President (Union
           matters with respect to which the Parliament has power        Public service Commission) and Governor
           to make laws. Similar powers are provided to States           (State Public service commission) to make
           under Article 62. Indian Constitution has not recognized      regulations with respect to the number of
           the doctrine of separation of powers in its absolute          members or staff of the Commission(s)
           rigidity. The Constitution also envisages tribunals, public   and their conditions of service.
           sector and government liability which are important
           aspects of administrative law.
   2.      Acts/ Statutes: Acts passed by the Central and State
                                                                         Example: Insolvency and Bankruptcy
           Governments for the maintenance of peace and order,
                                                                         Board of India is empowered to make
           tax collection, economic and social growth empower
                                                                         regulations   under    Insolvency   and
           the administrative organs to carry on various tasks
                                                                         Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
           necessary for it. These Acts list the responsibilities of the
           administration, limit their power in certain respects and provide for grievance redressal mechanism for
           the people affected by the administrative action.
   3.      Ordinances, Administrative directions, Notifications
                                                                         Example: Ordinance – President of
           Circulars,: Ordinances are issued when there are
                                                                         India promulgated The Criminal Law
           unforeseen developments and the legislature is not in
                                                                         (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013.
           session and therefore cannot make laws. Ordinances
           allow the administration to take necessary steps to           Notifications – State Government may
           deal with such developments. Administrative directions,       notify the rates of Minimum Wages for that
           notifications and circulars are issued by the executive in    particular state.
           the exercise of power granted under various Acts.
   4.      Judicial decisions: Judiciary is the final arbiter in case
                                                                        Example: Article 141 provides that the law
           of any dispute between various wings of government
                                                                        declared by the Supreme Court shall be
           or between the citizen and the administration. In
                                                                        binding on all courts within the territory of
           India, we have the supremacy of Constitution and the
                                                                        India.
           Supreme Court is vested with the authority to interpret
           it. The courts through their various decisions on the exercise of power by the administration, the liability
           of the government in case of breach of contract or tortuous acts of Governments servants lay down
           administrative laws which guide their future conduct.

136
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

 Rule of Law
Rule of Law was developed by British Jurist A.V. Dicey. He derived this term from French Principle ‘La principle
de legalite’ which means the principle of legality. It states that the government should be governed by Rule
of Law instead of Rule of Individual. Any dictator, monarch or one particular person should not govern the
functioning of any nation. Each country should follow legality of law.
Dicey was highly influenced by the French concept of administrative law’ (droit administratif) or the ‘administrative
tribunals’ (tribunaux administratifs). According to this, a citizen’s lawsuit against a public servant for a wrongdoing
done in that capacity will be handled by a special court rather than a regular court of law. Droit administratif
contains a regulation that was created by the judges of the administrative court rather than laws and rules
created by the French parliament.
Three major principles given by Dicey in his book “Rule of Law” are –
    1.   Supremacy of law: It means that ordinary or regular laws shall remain supreme. Supremacy here
         means absolute and pre-dominance of regular laws as against arbitrary or wide discretionary
         powers.
   2.    Equality before the law: According to Dicey, all classes must be equally subject to the ordinary law of
         the land as administered by the ordinary law courts. He states that there should be equality between
         people. According to Dicey, all classes must be equally subject to the ordinary law of the land as
         administered by the ordinary law courts. It provides that all are equal before law and everyone will be
         subjected to the same law.
   3.    The predominance of a legal spirit: Legal Spirit refers to the judicial precedents upon any dispute
         raised by any individual. The judgment given in any case will be the legal spirit of that particular case.
         It basically refers to the law as set by the precedents that have evolved over time.
Few jurists have criticized his rule of law theory being not clear between administrative discretion with arbitrary
discretion, emphasising on equality before law and feels that specific tribunals should not exist, opposition
between ordinary courts and special courts, failed to recognise the need of specific laws and bodies etc.

Rule of Law in India the evolution of Rule of Law in India can be traced to British concept
The evolution of Rule of Law in India can be traced to British concept but the modern concept of Rule of Law was
introduced, only after the drafting of Constitution of India. Constitution of India laid the very foundation of rule
of law in India and is the essence of it. Rule of Law is embedded in Constitution under multiple parts, important
aspects are as under:
    1.   Preamble – the Preamble to the Constitution of India upholds the basic structure of the Constitution. It
         talks about the justice, equality, liberty and dignity to all individuals. All of these aspects ensure Rule
         of Law in the country.
   2.    Part III- Fundamental Rights – These are the rights and fundamental or core of the Constitution of
         India. They imply a duty on the state towards ensuring the welfare of its citizens. It helps to keep a
         check on the actions of administrative authorities and legislature.
   3.    Part IV- Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP) – These are the basic guidelines to be followed
         by all especially the government of India to ensure smooth functioning of the country. They are not
         enforceable by court of law. Few examples of Laws made under DPSP includes law relating to wages,
         labor laws etc.
Judicial Aspect
Rule of Law in India has evolved with time. It can be understood with the help of given cases hereafter.


                                                                                                                  137
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Administrative Law


 CASE LAW

 State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors. vs. Thakur Bharat Singh (23.01.1967 - SC) : AIR 1967 SC 1170
 The Supreme Court in this case, held that section 3 of Madhya Pradesh Public Security Act, 1959 is
 unconstitutional on grounds that it vest wide discretionary powers to the District Magistrate without any proper
 safeguards over such powers. It was observed that -
 “Our federal structure is founded on certain fundamental principles : (1) the sovereignty of the people with limited
 Government authority i.e. the Government must be conducted in accordance with the will of the majority of the
 people….the official agencies of the executive Government possess only such powers as have been conferred
 upon them by the people; (2) There is distribution of powers between the three organs of the State - legislative,
 executive and judicial - each organ having some check direct or indirect on the other; and (3) the rule of law which
 includes judicial review of arbitrary executive actions. We have adopted under our Constitution not the continental
 system but the British system under which the rule of law prevails. Every Act done by the Government or by its
 officers must, if it is to operate to the prejudice of any person, be supported by some legislative authority.”
 Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors. vs. State of Kerala and Anr. (1973) 4 SCC 225
 The most critical case in Indian Judicial history with respect to the evolution of Rule of Law in India was
 Kesavananda Bharati case. This case changed the entire notion of doctrine of basic structure. A constitutional
 bench, consisting of 13 judges stated that Rule of law is the part of basic structure of the constitution of India.
 They observed -
 “That Article 31C subverts seven essential features of the Constitution, and destroys ten Fundamental Rights,
 which are vital for the survival of democracy, the rule of law and integrity and unity of the Republic.
 An amendment must be confined in its scope to an alteration or improvement of that which is already
 contained in the Constitution and cannot change its basic structure, include new grants of power to the Federal
 Government, nor relinquish to the State those which already have been granted to it”

 ADMINISTRATIVE DISCRETION
It means the freedom of an administrative authority to choose from amongst various alternatives but with
reference to rules of reason and justice and not according to personal whims and fancies. The exercise of
discretion should not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful, but legal and regular.
The government cannot function without the exercise of some discretion by its officials. It is necessary because
it is humanly impossible to lay down a rule for every conceivable eventuality that may arise in day-to-day
affairs of the government. It is, however, equally true that discretion is prone to abuse. Therefore there needs to
be a system in place to ensure that administrative discretion is exercised in the right manner.
Administration has become a highly complicated job needing a good deal of flexibility apart from technical knowledge,
expertise and know-how. Freedom to choose from various alternatives allows the administration to fashion its best
response to various situations. If a certain rule is found to be unsuitable in practice, the administration can change,
amend or abrogate it without much delay. Even if the administration is dealing with a problem on a case to case
basis it can change its approach according to the exigency of situation and the demands of justice.

  Example
  Mr. A approaches RTO office for confirmation of his driving license. It is the administrative discretion of RTO
  office to issue him his driving license after observing performance in driving tests.


138
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

 JUDICIAL REVIEW AND OTHER REMEDIES
Judiciary has played a key role in imposing restrictions on administrative discretion and has from time to
time directed the law makers to formulate the necessary guidelines and rules to maintain the conduct of
administrative officers.
Any country which claims to have a rule of law cannot have a government authority which has no checks on its
power. Administrative organs have wide powers and their exercise of discretion can be vitiated by a number of
factors. Therefore, the government must also provide for proper redressal mechanism. For India, it is of special
significance because of the proclaimed objectives of Indian polity to build a socialistic pattern of society that
has led to huge proliferation of administrative agencies and processes

In India the modes of judicial control of administrative action can be conveniently grouped into three heads:




(A) Constitutional
The Constitution of India is supreme and all the organs of the state derive their existence from it. Indian
Constitution expressly provides for judicial review. Consequently, an Act passed by the legislature is required to
be in conformity with the requirements of the Constitution and it is for the judiciary to decide whether or not that
Act is in conformity with the Constitutional requirements. If it is found in violation of the Constitutional provisions
the Court has to declare it unconstitutional and therefore, void. The limits laid down by the Constitution may be
express or implied. Articles 13, 245 and 246, etc., provide the express limits of the Constitution.

Judicial Review

The biggest check over administrative action is the power of judicial review. Judicial review is the authority of
Courts to declare void the acts of the legislature and executive, if they are found in violation of provisions of the
Constitution. Judicial Review is the power of the highest Court of a jurisdiction to invalidate on Constitutional
grounds, the acts of other Government agency within that jurisdiction.

It is the power of the both Supreme and High Court to determine the validity of the legislature and executive
actions of the government. Constitution is considered as Supreme law and all other laws follows from it. Public
authorities are bound by supreme law, i.e., Constitution and are bound to act in good faith.

The doctrine of judicial review has been originated and developed by the American Supreme Court, although
there is no express provision in the American Constitution for judicial review. Judicial review is not an appeal
from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision has been made. It is concerned not with the
decision but with the decision making process.

The power of judicial review controls not only the legislative but also the executive or administrative act. The
Court scrutinizes the executive act for determining the issue as to whether it is within the scope of authority or
power conferred on the authority exercising the power. Where the act of executive or administration is found
ultra vires the Constitution or the relevant Act, it is declared as such and, therefore, void. The Courts attitude
appears to be stiffer in respect of discretionary powers of the executive or administrative authorities. The Court
is not against the vesting of discretionary power in the executive, but it expects that there would be proper
guidelines for the exercise of power. The Court interferes when the uncontrolled and unguided discretion is
vested in the executive or administrative authorities or the repository of the power abuses its discretion.

                                                                                                                  139
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Administrative Law


 CASE LAWS
 Airport Authority of India vs. Centre for Aviation Policy, Safety and Research and Ors. (30.09.2022 - SC) :
 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6615-6616 OF 2022

 In this case, the Supreme Court observed that the Court has erred in interfering with the administration/policy
 decision of the tender making authority in exercise of powers Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
 even deciding it on merits. The Court observed that -

 “as per the settled position of law, setting of terms and conditions of invitation to tender are within the ambit
 of the administration/policy decision of the tender making authority and as such are not open to judicial
 scrutiny unless they are arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide. In the matter of formulating conditions of a
 tender document and awarding a contract, greater latitude is required to be conceded to the State authorities
 unless the action of the tendering authority is found to be malicious and a misuse of its statutory powers,
 interference by courts is not warranted”

 S. Pratap Singh vs. The State of Punjab: AIR1964SC72

 In this case Supreme Court summarised the power of judicial review by stating that -

 “The Court is not an appellate forum where the correctness of an order of Government could be canvassed
 and, indeed, it has no jurisdiction to substitute its own view as to the necessity or desirability of initiating
 disciplinary proceedings, for the entirety of the power, jurisdiction and discretion in that regard is vested by
 law in the Government. The only question which could be considered by the Court is whether the authority
 vested with the power has acted in mala fide for satisfying a private or personal grudge of the authority
 against the officer. If the act is in excess of the power granted or is an abuse or misuse of power, the matter is
 capable of interference and rectification by the Court.”

 Hind Construction and Engineering Co. Ltd. vs. Their Workmen: AIR1965SC917

 In this case the Supreme Court held that the action taken by the employer was unreasonable, unjust and
 disproportionate. Court observed that -

 “The Tribunal is not required to consider the propriety or adequacy of the punishment or whether it is
 excessive or too severe. But where the punishment is shockingly disproportionate, regard being had to the
 particular conduct and the past record or is such, as no reasonable employer would ever impose in like
 circumstances, the Tribunal may treat the imposition of such punishment as itself showing victimization or
 unfair labour practice.”

Stages of Judicial Review

                                         Judicial review is exercised at
                                                   two stages



      at the stage of delegation of                                                at the stage of exercise of
             discretion, and                                                       administrative discretion.
   (i)   Judicial review at the stage of delegation of discretion
		 Any law can be challenged on the ground that it is violative of the Constitution and therefore laws
   conferring administrative discretion can thus also be challenged under the Constitution. In the case of
   delegated legislation the Constitutional courts have often been satisfied with vague or broad statements

140
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

        of policy, but usually it has not been so in the cases where administrative discretion has been conferred
        in matters relating to fundamental rights.

		      The courts exercise control over delegation of discretionary powers to the administration by adjudicating
        upon the constitutionality of the law under which such powers are delegated with reference to the
        fundamental rights enunciated in Part III of the Indian Constitution. Therefore, if the law confers vague
        and wide discretionary power on any administrative authority, it may be declared ultra vires Article 14,
        Article 19 and other provisions of the Constitution.

		      In certain situations, the statute though does not give discretionary power to the administrative authority
        to take action, may still give discretionary power to frame rules and regulations affecting the rights of
        citizens. The court can control the bestowing of such discretion on the ground of excessive delegation.

		 The fundamental rights thus provide a basis to the judiciary in India to control administrative discretion
   to a large extent. There have been a number of cases in which a law, conferring discretionary powers,
   has been held violative of a fundamental right.

		Administrative Discretion and Article 14

		 Article 14 of the Constitution of India provides for equality before law. It prevents arbitrary discretion
   being vested in the executive. Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in state action and ensures fairness and
   equality of treatment. Right to equality affords protection not only against discretionary laws passed
   by legislature but also prevents arbitrary discretion being vested in the executive. Often executive or
   administrative officer of government is given wide discretionary power.

		      In a number of cases, the statute has been challenged on the ground that it conferred on an administrative
        authority wide discretionary powers of selecting persons or objects discriminately and therefore, it
        violated Article 14.

		 The Court in determining the question of validity of such statute examines whether the statute has laid
   down any principle or policy for the guidance of the exercise of discretion by the government in the
   matter of selection or classification. The Court will not tolerate the delegation of uncontrolled power in
   the hands of executive to such an extent as to enable it to discriminate.


         CASE LAW
          State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali, AIR 1952 SC 75
          In this case, it was held that in so far as the Act empowered the Government to have cases or class
          of offences tried by special courts, it violated Article 14 of the Constitution. The court further held the
          Act invalid as it laid down “no yardstick or measure for the grouping either of persons or of cases
          or of offences” so as to distinguish them from others outside the purview of the Act. Moreover, the
          necessity of “speedier trial” was held to be too vague, uncertain and indefinite criterion to form the
          basis of a valid and reasonable classification.

		 Administrative Discretion and Article 19
		 Article 19 guarantees certain freedoms to the citizens of India, but they are not absolute. Reasonable
   restrictions can be imposed on these freedoms under the authority of law. The reasonableness of the
   restrictions is open to judicial review. These freedoms can also be afflicted by administrative discretion.
		 A number of cases have come up involving the question of validity of law conferring discretion on the


                                                                                                                  141
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Administrative Law

         executive to restrict the right under Article19(1)(b) and 19(1)(e) (the right to assemble peacefully and
         without arms and the right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India). The government has
         conferred powers on the executive through a number of laws to extern a person from a particular area
         in the interest of peace and safety.
		 In a large number of cases, the question as to how much discretion can be conferred on the executive
   to control and regulate trade and business has been raised. The general principle laid down is that the
   power conferred on the executive should not be arbitrary, and that it should not be left entirely to the
   discretion of any authority to do anything it likes without any check or control by any higher authority.
   Where the Act provides some general principles to guide the exercise of discretion and thus saves it
   from being arbitrary and unbridled, the court will uphold it, but where the executive has been granted
   unfettered power to interfere with the freedom of property or trade and business, the court will strike
   down such provision of law.

           CASE LAW
           Dr. Ram Manohar v. State of Delhi, AIR 1950 SC 211,
           In this case, the D.M. was empowered under East Punjab Safety Act, 1949, to make an order of
           externment from an area in case he was satisfied that such an order was necessary to prevent a
           person from acting in any way prejudicial to public peace and order, the Supreme Court upheld
           the law conferring such discretion on the executive on the grounds, inter alia, that the law in the
           instant case was of temporary nature and it gave a right to the externee to receive the grounds of
           his externment from the executive.
           Hari v. Deputy Commissioner of Police, AIR 1956 SC 559,
           The Supreme Court upheld the validity of section 57 of the Bombay Police Act authorizing any of
           the officers specified therein to extern convicted persons from the area of his jurisdiction if he had
           reasons to believe that they are likely to commit any offence similar to that of which they were
           convicted. This provision of law, which apparently appears to be a violation of the residence, was
           upheld by court mainly on the considerations that certain safeguards are available to the externee,
           i.e., the right of hearing and the right to file an appeal to the State Government against the order.
           H.R. Banthis v. Union of India, 1979 1 SCC 166,
           The Supreme Court in this case, declared a licensing provision invalid as it conferred an uncontrolled
           and unguided power on the executive. The Gold (Control) Act, 1968, provided for licensing of dealers
           in gold ornaments. The Administrator was empowered under the Act to grant or renew licenses
           having regard to the matters, inter alia, the number of dealers existing in a region, anticipated
           demand, suitability of the applicant and public interest. The Supreme Court held that all these
           factors were vague and unintelligible. The term ‘region’ was nowhere defined in the Act. The
           expression ‘anticipated demand’ was vague one. The expression ‘suitability of the applicant and
           ‘public interest’ did not contain any objective standards or norms.

  (ii)   Judicial review at the stage of exercise of discretion
		 No law can clothe administrative action with a complete finality even if the law says so, for the courts
   always examine the ambit and even the mode of its exercise to check its conformity with fundamental
   rights. The courts in India have developed various formulations to control the exercise of administrative
   discretion, which can be grouped under two broad heads, as under:
           1. Authority has not exercised its discretion properly- ‘abuse of discretion’.
           2.   Authority is deemed not to have exercised its discretion at all- ‘non-application of mind.”

142
Administrative Law                                                                                           LESSON 4

          1.   Abuse of discretion
                 i.   Mala fides: If the discretionary power is exercised by the authority with bad faith or dishonest
                      intention, the action is quashed by the court. Malafide exercise of discretionary power is
                      always bad and taken as abuse of discretion. Malafide (bad faith) may be taken to mean
                      dishonest intention or corrupt motive. In relation to the exercise of statutory powers it may
                      be said to comprise dishonesty (or fraud) and malice. A power is exercised fraudulently if
                      its repository intends to achieve an object other than that for which he believes the power
                      to have been conferred. The intention may be to promote another public interest or private
                      interest.

                       CASE LAW
                       Tata Cellular v. Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 11
                       The Supreme Court has held that the right to refuse the lowest or any other tender is
                       always available to the Government but the principles laid down in Article 14 of the
                       Constitution have to be kept in view while accepting or refusing a tender. There can be
                       no question of infringement of Article 14 if the Government tries to get the best person or
                       the best quotation. The right to choose cannot be considered to be an arbitrary power.
                       Of course, if the said power is exercised for any collateral purpose the exercise of that
                       power will be struck down.

                ii. Irrelevant considerations: If a statute confers power for one purpose, its use for a different
                    purpose is not regarded as a valid exercise of power and is likely to be quashed by the courts.
                    If the administrative authority takes into account factors, circumstances or events wholly
                    irrelevant or extraneous to the purpose mentioned in the statute, then the administrative
                    action is vitiated.
                iii. Leaving out relevant considerations: The administrative authority exercising the
                     discretionary power is required to take into account all the relevant facts. If it leaves out
                     relevant consideration, its action will be invalid.
                iv. Arbitrary orders: The order made should be based on facts and cogent reasoning and not
                    on the whims and fancies of the adjudicatory authority.
                 v. Improper purpose: The discretionary power is required to be used for the purpose for which
                    it has been given. If it is given for one purpose and used for another purpose it will amount
                    to abuse of power.
                vi. Colourable exercise of power: Where the discretionary power is exercised by the authority
                    on which it has been conferred ostensibly for the purpose for which it has been given but in
                    reality for some other purpose, it is taken as colourable exercise of the discretionary power
                    and it is declared invalid.
               vii. Non-compliance with procedural requirements and principles of natural justice: If the
                    procedural requirement laid down in the statute is mandatory and it is not complied, the
                    exercise of power will be bad. Whether the procedural requirement is mandatory or directory
                    is decided by the court. Principles of natural justice are also required to be observed.
               viii. Exceeding jurisdiction: The authority is required to exercise the power within the limits of
                     the statute. Consequently, if the authority exceeds this limit, its action will be held to be ultra
                     vires and, therefore, void.


                                                                                                                   143
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Administrative Law

             2.   Non-application of mind
                   (i) Acting under dictation: Where the authority exercises its discretionary power under the
                       instructions or dictation from superior authority it is taken as non-exercise of power by the
                       authority and its decision or action is bad. In such condition the authority purports to act
                       on its own but in substance the power is not exercised by it but by the other authority. The
                       authority entrusted with the powers does not take action on its own judgment and does
                       not apply its mind. For example in Commissioner of Police v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR 1952
                       SC 60, the Police Commissioner empowered to grant license for construction of cinema
                       theatres, granted the license but later cancelled it on the direction of the Government. The
                       cancellation order was declared bad as the Police Commissioner did not apply his mind and
                       acted under the dictation of the Government.
                  (ii) Self-restriction: If the authority imposes fetters on its discretion by announcing rules of policy
                       to be applied by it rigidly to all cases coming before it for decision, its action or decision
                       will be bad. The authority entrusted with the discretionary power is required to exercise it
                       after considering the individual cases and the authority should not imposes fetters on its
                       discretion by adopting fixed rule of policy to be applied rigidly to all cases coming before it.
                  (iii) Acting mechanically and without due care: Non-application of mind to an issue that requires
                        an exercise of discretion on the part of the authority will render the decision bad in law.

(B) Statutory
The method of statutory review can be divided into two parts:
      (i)   Statutory appeals: There are some Acts, which provide for an appeal from statutory tribunal to the High
            Court or Supreme Court on point of law.
		Example
		Under section 53B of the Competition Act, 2002 the Central Government or the State Government
  or a local authority or enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any direction, decision or order may
  prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT).
		 Further, under section 53T of the said act, the Central Government or any State Government or
   the Commission or any statutory authority or any local authority or any enterprise or any person
   aggrieved by any decision or order of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may file an
   appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or
   order.
   (ii)     Reference to the High Court or statement of case: There are several statutes, which provide for a
            reference or statement of case by an administrative tribunal to the High Court.
		Example
		Under Section 256 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, where an application is made to the Tribunal by the
  assessee and the Tribunal refuses to state the case the assessee may apply to the High Court and if
  the High Court is not satisfied about the correctness of the decision of the Tribunal, it can require the
  Tribunal to state the case and refer it to the Court.

(C) Ordinary or Equitable
Apart from the remedies as discussed above there are certain ordinary remedies, which are available to person
against the administration, the ordinary courts in exercise of the power provide the ordinary remedies under

144
Administrative Law                                                                                              LESSON 4

the ordinary law against the administrative authorities. These remedies are also called equitable remedies and
include:
    (i)   Injunction
		 An injunction is a preventive remedy. It is a judicial process by which one who has invaded or is
   threatening to invade the rights of another is restrained from continuing or commencing such wrongful
   act. In India, the law with regard to injunctions has been laid down in the Specific Relief Act, 1963. An
   action for declaration lies where a jurisdiction has been wrongly exercised or where the authority itself
   was not properly constituted. Injunction is issued for restraining a person to act contrary to law or in
   excess of its statutory powers. An injunction can be issued to both administrative and quasi-judicial
   bodies. Injunction is highly useful remedy to prevent a statutory body from doing an ultra vires act,
   apart from the cases where it is available against private individuals e.g. to restrain the commission or
   torts, or breach of contract or breach of statutory duty. Injunction may be prohibitory or mandatory.
          (a)   Prohibitory Injunction: Prohibitory injunction forbids the defendant to do a wrongful act, which
                would infringe the right of the plaintiff. A prohibitory injunction may be interlocutory or temporary
                injunction or perpetual injunction.
                (1)    Interlocutory or temporary injunction: Temporary injunctions are such as to continue until a
                       specified time or until the further order of the court. (Section 37 for the Specific Relief Act). It
                       is granted as an interim measure to preserve status quo until the case is heard and decided.
                       Temporary injunction may be granted at any stage of a suit. Temporary injunctions are
                       regulated by the Civil Procedure Code and are provisional in nature. It does not conclude or
                       determine a right. Besides, a temporary injunction is a mere order. The granting of temporary
                       injunction is a matter of discretion of the court.
                (2)    Perpetual injunction: A perpetual injunction is granted at the conclusion of the proceedings
                       and is definitive of the rights of the parties, but it need not be expressed to have perpetual
                       effect, it may be awarded for a fixed period or for a fixed period with leave to apply for an
                       extension or for an indefinite period terminable when conditions imposed on the defendant
                       have been complied with; or its operation may be suspended for a period during which
                       the defendant is given the opportunity to comply with the conditions imposed on him, the
                       plaintiff being given leave to reply at the end of that time.
          (b)   Mandatory injunction: When to prevent the breach of an obligation it is necessary to compel
                the performance of certain acts which the court is capable of enforcing, the court may in
                its discretion grant an injunction to prevent the breach complained of and also to compel
                performance of the requisite acts. The mandatory injunction may be taken as a command to
                do a particular act to restore things to their former condition or to undo, that which has been
                done. It prohibits the defendant from continuing with a wrongful act and also imposes duty on
                him to do a positive act.
   (ii)   Declaratory Action
		 In some cases where wrong has been done to a person by an administrative act, declaratory judgments
   may be the appropriate remedy. Declaration may be taken as a judicial order issued by the court
   declaring rights of the parties without giving any further relief. Thus a declaratory decree declares
   the rights of the parties. In such a decree there is no sanction, which an ordinary judgment prescribes
   against the defendant. By declaring the rights of the parties it removes the existing doubts about the
   rights and secures enjoyment of the rights. It is an equitable remedy. It is a discretionary remedy and
   cannot be claimed as a matter of right.


                                                                                                                      145
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Administrative Law

   (iii)   Action for damages
		 If any injury is caused to an individual by wrongful or negligent acts of the Government servant, the
   aggrieved person can file suit for the recovery of damages from the Government concerned.

 PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL JUSTICE
One of the most important principles in the administration of justice is that justice must not only be done but
also seen to be done. This is necessary to inspire confidence in the people in the judicial system. Natural justice
is a concept of Common Law and represents procedural principles developed by judges. Though it enjoys no
express constitutional status, it is one of the most important concepts that ensure that people retain their faith in
the system of adjudication. Principles of natural justice are not precise rules of unchanging content; their scope
varies according to the context. Nevertheless it provides the foundation on which the whole super- structure of
judicial control of administrative action is based.
In India, the principles of natural justice are derived from Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution. The courts have
always insisted that the administrative agencies must follow a minimum of fair procedure, i.e. principles of
natural justice. The concept of natural justice has undergone a tremendous change over a period of time. In the
past, it was thought that it included just two rules: (i) rule against bias and (ii) rule of fair hearing. In the course of
time many sub-rules were added which are explained as under:
Rule against bias (nemo judex in causa sua)
According to this rule no person should be made a judge in his own cause. Bias means an operative prejudice
whether conscious or unconscious in relation to a party or issue. It is a presumption that a person cannot take
an objective decision in a case in which he has an interest. The rule against bias has two main aspects- one,
that the judge must not have any direct personal stake in the matter at hand and two, there must not be any
real likelihood of bias.
Bias can be of the following three types:
   (1)     Pecuniary bias: The judicial approach is unanimous on the point that any financial interest of the
           adjudicatory authority in the matter, howsoever small, would vitiate the adjudication. Thus a pecuniary
           interest, howsoever insufficient, will disqualify a person from acting as a Judge.

            CASE LAW
            J. Mohapatra and Co. and Ors. vs. State of Orissa and Ors. (10.08.1984 - SC) : 1984 AIR 1572
            In this case Odisha government formed an assessment committee to recommend books of certain
            authors to be sent to government schools. Committee consisted of authors whose books were
            recommended. The Supreme Court struck down the recommendation stating that one cannot be
            both a writer and part of recommending committee, stating possibility of bias. Court observed that-
            “when a book of an author-member comes up for consideration, the other members would feel
            themselves embarrassed in frankly discussing its merits. Such author-member may also be a person
            holding a high official position whom the other members may not want to displease. It can be that
            the other members may not be influenced by the fact that the book which they are considering for
            approval was written by one of their members. Whether they were so influenced or not is, however, a
            matter impossible to determine. It is not, therefore, the actual bias in favour of the author-member that
            is material but the possibility of such bias. All these considerations require that an author-member
            should not be a member of any such committee or sub-committee.”


146
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

  (2)    Personal bias: There are number of situations which may create a personal bias in the Judge’s mind
         against one party in dispute before him. He may be friend of the party, or related to him through family,
         professional or business ties. The judge might also be hostile to one of the parties to a case. All these
         situations create bias either in favour of or against the party and will operate as a disqualification for a
         person to act as a Judge.

          CASE LAWS
          Mineral Development Ltd. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1960 SC 468.
          This is the leading case on the matter of personal bias. In this case, the petitioner company was
          owned by Raja Kamakhya Narain Singh, who was a lessee for 99 years of 3026 villages, situated
          in Bihar, for purposes of exploiting mica from them. The minister of revenue acting under Bihar Mica
          Act cancelled his license. The owner of the company Raja Kamakhya Narain Singh, had opposed
          the minister in general election of 1952 and the minister had filed a criminal case under section
          500, Indian Penal Code, against him. The act of cancellation by the Minister was held to be a
          quasi- judicial act. Since the personal rivalry between the owner of the petitioner’s company and the
          minister concerned was established, the cancellation order became vitiated in law.
          Manek Lal v. Prem Chand, AIR 1957 SC 425.
          Here the respondent had filed a complaint of professional misconduct against Manek Lal who was an
          advocate of Rajasthan High Court. The Chief Justice of the High Court appointed Bar Council tribunal to
          enquire into the alleged misconduct of the petitioner. The tribunal consisted of the Chairman who had
          earlier represented the respondent in a case. He was a senior advocate and was once the advocate-
          General of the State. The Supreme Court held the view that even though Chairman had no personal
          contact with his client and did not remember that he had appeared on his behalf in certain proceedings,
          and there was no real likelihood of bias, yet he was disqualified to conduct the inquiry on the ground that
          justice not only be done but must appear to be done to the litigating public. Actual proof of prejudice was
          not necessary; reasonable ground for assuming the possibility of bias is sufficient.

  (3)    Subject matter bias: A judge may have a bias in the subject matter, which means that he himself is a
         party, or has some direct connection with the litigation. To disqualify on the ground of bias there must
         be intimate and direct connection between adjudicator and the issues in dispute. To vitiate the decision
         on the ground of bias as for the subject matter there must be real likelihood of bias. Such bias can be
         classified into four categories.
          (1) Partiality or connection to the issue
         (2) Departmental bias
          (3) Prior utterances and pre-judgment of issues
          (4) Acting under dictation
Rule of fair hearing (audi alteram partem):
The second principle of natural justice is audi alteram partem (hear the other side) i.e. no one should be
condemned unheard. It requires that both sides should be heard before passing the order. This rule implies
that a person against whom an order to his prejudice is passed should be given information as to the charges
against him and should be given opportunity to submit his explanation thereto. Following are the ingredients of
the rule of fair hearing:
   (1)   Right to notice: Hearing starts with the notice by the authority concerned to the affected person.
         Consequently, notice may be taken as the starting point of hearing. Unless a person knows the

                                                                                                                  147
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Administrative Law

        case against him, he cannot defend himself. Therefore, before the proceedings start, the authority
        concerned is required to give to the affected person the notice of the case against him. The proceedings
        started without giving notice to the affected party, would violate the principles of natural justice. The
        notice is required to be served on the concerned person properly. However, the omission to serve
        notice would not be fatal if the notice has not been served on the concerned person on account of
        his own fault.
		 The notice must give sufficient time to the person concerned to prepare his case. Whether the person
   concerned has been allowed sufficient time or not depends upon the facts of each case. The notice must
   be adequate and reasonable. The notice is required to be clear and unambiguous. If it is ambiguous
   or vague, it will not be treated as reasonable or proper notice. If the notice does not specify the action
   proposed to be taken, it is taken as vague and therefore, not proper.

           CASE LAW

           Annamalai Cotton Mills (P) Ltd. vs. The Chairman, Tamilnadu Electricity Board (02.01.1996 - MADHC)
           : AIR 1996 Mad 364
           In this case the court insisted upon the adequacy of the show cause notice with respect to alleged
           electricity theft without any details such as meter reading, time period, authority taking the action
           etc. Court observed that –
           “where an authority makes an order in exercise of a quasi judicial function, it must record its reasons
           in support of the order it makes and that every quasi judicial order must be supported by reasons.
           In the instant case, the 3rd respondent, who passed the impugned order, has not recorded his
           reasons in support of the order. Therefore, it is clear that the impugned order has been passed in
           violation of the principles of natural justice and that it is without jurisdiction. The show cause notice
           is also as vague as any notice can be since it only states that the petitioner’s service connection
           was inspected and theft of energy was reported. The notice itself, therefore, has to be quashed
           for the reason of vagueness. As no one can be condemned unless he is given full and adequate
           opportunity of being heard, issue of notice calling upon to show cause is always the first step in that
           direction. Therefore, the show cause notice as well as the impugned order are bad in law as they
           both violated the basic principle of natural justice.”

  (2)   Right to present case and evidence: The party against whom proceedings have been initiated must be
        given full opportunity to present his or her case and the evidence in support of it. The reply is usually
        in the written form and the party is also given an opportunity to present the case orally though it is not
        mandatory.
  (3)   Right to rebut adverse evidence: For the hearing to be fair the adjudicating authority is not only
        required to disclose to the person concerned the evidence or material to be taken against him but also
        to provide an opportunity to rebut the evidence or material.
           (i)   Cross-examination: Examination of a witness by the adverse party is called cross-examination.
                 The main aim of cross-examination is the detection of falsehood in the testimony of the witness.
                 The rules of natural justice say that evidence may not be read against a party unless the same
                 has been subjected to cross-examination or at least an opportunity has been given for cross-
                 examination.




148
Administrative Law                                                                                              LESSON 4

               CASE LAW
                S.C. Girotra vs. United Commercial Bank (UCO Bank) and Ors. (18.02.1994 - SC) : 1995 Supp (3)
                SCC 212
                In this case, bank dismissed the petitioner on the basis of a committee report. Report was
                prepared by an enquiry officer. The petitioner claimed that he was not given the opportunity
                to cross examine enquiry offer. Court held that, denial of such opportunity is in violation of
                principle of natural justice, since he was not given the opportunity to cross examine the officer
                it was stated that the:
                “It is also clear that no opportunity was given to the appellant to cross-examine either the
                makers of that report, Mr. ........... and Mr ......... or the officers who had granted such certificates
                which formed evidence to prove the charges which led to the order of dismissal passed by the
                disciplinary authority, even though those persons were examined for the purpose of proving
                the documents relating to them. In our opinion, the grievance made by the appellant that
                refusal of permission to cross-examine these witnesses was denial of reasonable opportunity
                of defence to the appellant, is justified.”

         (ii) Legal Representation: Ordinarily the representation through a lawyer in the administrative adjudication
              is not considered as an indispensable part of the fair hearing. However, in certain situations denial of
              the right to legal representation amounts to violation of natural justice. Thus where the case involves a
              question of law or matter which is complicated and technical or where the person is illiterate or expert
              evidence is on record or the prosecution is conducted by legally trained persons, the denial of legal
              representation will amount to violation of natural justice because in such conditions the party may
              not be able to meet the case effectively and therefore he must be given the opportunity to engage
              professional assistance to make his right to be heard meaningful.

               CASE LAWS
                Nandini Satpathy vs. P.L. Dani and Ors. (07.04.1978 - SC) : 1978 AIR 1025
                The Supreme Court in this case stated that the accused must be allowed the legal representative
                during custodial interrogation and police must wait for reasonable time for arrival of such
                representative. If not allowed, it would not only be violative of Article 22(1) of Constitution of
                India but also against the principle of natural justice. It was observed that -
                “The right to consult an advocate of his choice shall not be denied to any person who is arrested.
                This does not mean that persons who are not under arrest or custody can be denied that right.
                The spirit and sense of Article 22(1) is that it is fundamental to’ the rule of law that the services
                of a lawyer shall be available for consultation to any accused person under circumstances of
                near custodial interrogation.”
                Suresh Koshy George vs. University of Kerala and Ors. (15.07.1968 - SC) : 1969 AIR 198
                In this case a committee was appointed to inquire about the alleged malpractice by petitioner
                during examination. Committee gave a show cause notice to petitioner to represent his case
                but was not given inquiry report. Court held that there was no breach of principle of natural
                justice. It observed that -
                “the officer appointed to inquire was an impartial person; he cannot be said to have been
                biased against the appellant; the charge against the appellant was made known to him before


                                                                                                                      149
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Administrative Law


                  the commencement of the inquiry; the witnesses who gave evidence against him were
                  examined in his presence and he was allowed to cross-examine them and lastly he was given
                  every opportunity to present his case before the Inquiry Officer. Hence we see no merit in the
                  contention that there was any breach of the principles of natural justice”

  (4)      Disclosure of evidence: A party must be given full opportunity to explain every material that is sought
           to be relied upon against him. Unless all the material (e.g. reports, statements, documents, evidence)
           on which the proceeding is based is disclosed to the party, he cannot defend himself properly.
  (5)      Speaking orders: Reasoned decision may be taken to mean a decision which contains reason in its
           support. When the adjudicatory bodies give reasons in support of their decisions, the decisions are
           treated as reasoned decision. It is also called speaking order. In such condition the order speaks for itself
           or it tells its own story. Reasoned decision introduces a check on the administrative powers because
           the decisions need to be based on cogent reasons. It excludes or at least minimizes arbitrariness. It
           has been asserted that a part of the principle of natural justice is that a party is entitled to know the
           reason for the decision apart from the decision itself. Reason based judgments and orders allow the
           party affected by it to go into the merits of the decision and if not satisfied, exercise his right to appeal
           against the judgment/ order. In the absence of reasons, he might not be able to effectively challenge
           the order.

            CASE LAWS
            Canara Bank and Ors. vs. Debasis Das and Ors. (12.03.2003 - SC) : [(2003) 4 SCC 557].
            The Supreme Court in this case held that Natural Justice rules are not codified, written but can be
            traced backed in statues especially in Constitution. In this case, it was observed that
            “Principles of natural justice are those rules which have been laid down by the Courts as being
            the minimum protection of the rights of the individual against the arbitrary procedure that may be
            adopted by a judicial, quasi-judicial and administrative authority while making an order affecting
            those rights. These rules are intended to prevent such authority from doing injustice.”
            Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration AIR 1980 SC 1579,
            The Supreme Court while interpreting section 56 of the Prisons Act, 1894, observed that there is an
            implied duty on the jail superintendent to give reasons for putting bar fetters on a prisoner to avoid
            invalidity of that provision under Article 21 of the Constitution. Thus, the Supreme Court laid the
            foundation of a sound administrative process requiring the adjudicatory authorities to substantiate
            their order with reasons.

 Exceptions to Natural Justice
Though the normal rule is that a person who is affected by administrative action is entitled to claim natural
justice, that requirement may be excluded under certain exceptional circumstances.
      1.   Statutory Exclusion: The principle of natural justice may be excluded by the statutory provision. Where
           the statute expressly provides for the observance of the principles of natural justice, the provision is
           treated as mandatory and the authority is bound by it. Where the statute is silent as to the observance
           of the principle of natural justice, such silence is taken to imply the observance thereto. However,
           the principles of natural justice are not incapable of exclusion. The statute may exclude them. When
           the statute expressly or by necessary implication excludes the application of the principles of natural
           justice the courts do not ignore the statutory mandate. But one thing may be noted that in India,
           Parliament is not supreme and therefore statutory exclusion is not final. The statute must stand the


150
Administrative Law                                                                                          LESSON 4

        test of constitutional provision. Even if there is no provision under the statute for observance of the
        principle of natural justice, courts may read the requirement of natural justice for sustaining the law as
        constitutional.
   2.   Emergency: In exceptional cases of urgency or emergency where prompt and preventive action is
        required the principles of natural justice need not be observed. Thus, the pre-decisional hearing may
        be excluded where the prompt action is required to be taken in the interest of the public safety or public
        morality and any delay in administrative order because of pre-decisional hearing before the action
        may cause injury to the public interest and public safety. However, the determination of the situation
        requiring the exclusion of the rules of natural justice by the administrative authorities is not final and the
        court may review such determination.

         CASE LAWS
          Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India AIR 1978 SC 597
          In this case the Supreme Court observed that a passport may be impounded in public interest
          without compliance with the principles of natural justice but as soon as the order impounding the
          passport has been made, an opportunity of post decisional hearing, remedial in aim, should be
          given to the person concerned. In the case, it has also been held that “public interest” is a justiciable
          issue and the determination of administrative authority on it is not final.

   3.   Interim disciplinary action: The rules of natural justice are not attracted in the case of interim disciplinary
        action. For example, the order of suspension of an employee pending an inquiry against him is not final but
        interim order and the application of the rules of natural justice is not attracted in the case of such order.

         CASE LAWS
          Abhay Kumar v. K. Srinivasan AIR 1981 Delhi 381
          In this case an order was passed by the college authority debarring the student from entering the
          premises of the college and attending the class till the pendency of a criminal case against him
          for stabbing a student. The Court held that the order was interim and not final. It was preventive in
          nature. It was passed with the object to maintain peace in the campus. The rules of natural justice
          were not applicable in such case.

   4.   Academic evaluation: Where a student is removed from an educational institution on the grounds
        of unsatisfactory academic performance, the requirement of pre-decisional hearing is excluded. The
        Supreme Court has made it clear that if the competent academic authority assess the work of a student
        over the period of time and thereafter declare his work unsatisfactory the rule of natural justice may be
        excluded but this exclusion does not apply in the case of disciplinary matters.
   5.   Impracticability: Where the authority deals with a large number of person it is not practicable to give
        all of them opportunity of being heard and therefore in such condition the court does not insist on the
        observance of the rules of natural justice.

         CASE LAWS
          P. Radhakrishna v. Osmania University, AIR 1974 AP 283,
          In this case, the entire M.B.A. entrance examination was cancelled on the ground of mass copying.
          The court held that it was not possible to give all the examinees the opportunity of being heard
          before the cancellation of the examination.



                                                                                                                  151
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Administrative Law

 Effect of Failure of Natural Justice
When an authority required to observe natural justice in making an order fails to do so, should the order made
by it be regarded as void or voidable?
Generally speaking, a voidable order means that the order was legally valid at its inception, and it remains
valid until it is set aside or quashed by the courts, that is, it has legal effect up to the time it is quashed. On the
other hand, a void order is no order at all from its inception; it is a nullity and void ab initio.
In most cases a person affected by such an order cannot be sure whether the order is really valid or not until
the court decided the matter. Therefore, the affected person cannot just ignore the order treating it as a nullity.
He has to go to a court for an authoritative determination as to the nature of the order is void. For example, an
order challenged as a nullity for failure of natural justice gives rise to the following crucial question: Was the
authority required to follow natural justice?
Usually, a violable order cannot be challenged in collateral proceedings. It has to be set aside by the court in
separate proceedings for the purpose. Suppose, a person is prosecuted criminally for infringing an order. He cannot
then plead that the order is voidable. He can raise such a plea if the order is void. In India, by and large, the judicial
thinking has been that a quasi-judicial order made without following natural justice is void and nullity.

 CASE LAWS
 Nawabkhan v. Gujarat. 1974 AIR 1471
 In this case, Section 56 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951 is talked about. It empowers the Police Commissioner
 to extern any undesirable person on certain grounds set out therein. An order passed by the Commissioner
 on the petitioner was disobeyed by him and he was prosecuted for this in a criminal court. During the
 pendency of his case, on a writ petition filed by the petitioner, the High Court quashed the internment order
 on the ground of failure of natural justice. The trial court then acquitted the appellant. The government
 appealed against the acquittal and the High Court convicted him for disobeying the order. The High Court
 took the position that the order in question was not void ab initio; the appellant had disobeyed the order
 much earlier than date it was infringed by him; the High Court’s own decision invalidating the order in
 question was not retroactive and did not render it a nullity from its inception but it was invalidate only from
 the date the court declared it to be so by its judgment.
 However, the matter came in appeal before the Supreme Court, which approached the matter from a
 different angle. The order of internment affected a fundamental right (Article 19) of the appellant in a manner
 which was not reasonable. The order was thus illegal and unconstitutional and hence void. The court ruled
 definitively that an order infringing a constitutionally guaranteed right made without hearing the party
 affected, where hearing was required, would be void ab initio and ineffectual to bind the parties from the
 very beginning and a person cannot be convicted for non-observance of such an order. The Supreme Court
 held that where hearing is obligated by statute which affects the fundamental right of a citizen, the duty to
 give the hearing sound in constitutional requirement and failure to comply with such a duty is fatal.

 Question: One of the most important principles in the administration of justice is that justice must not only be
 done but also seen to be done. Choose the most suitable option relating to said principle.
 Options:
   (A) Principle of Bias
   (B) Principle of Natural Justice
   (C) Principle of Administrative Justice
   (D) Principle of Pecuniary Bias
 Answer: (B)

152
Administrative Law                                                                                       LESSON 4

 LIABILITY OF THE GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC CORPORATION
The liability of the government can either be contractual or tortious.

 Liability of State or Government in Contract
The Constitution of India allows the central and the state governments to enter into contracts under Article 299
of the Constitution of India. According to its provisions a contract with the Government of the Union or state will
be valid and binding only if the following conditions are followed:

    1.   The contract with the Government must be made in the name of the President or the Governor, as the
         case may be.

   2.    The contract must be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor of the State as the case may
         be. The word executed indicates that a contract with the Government will be valid only when it is in
         writing.

   3.    A person duly authorized by the President or the Governor of the State, as the case may be, must
         execute the contract.

Article 299 (2) of the Constitution makes it clear that neither the President nor the Governor shall be personally
liable in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of the Constitution or for the
purposes of any enactment relating to the Government of India. Subject to the provisions of Article 299 (1), the
other provisions of the general law of contract apply even to the Government contract.

The Supreme Court has made it clear that the provisions of Article 299 (1) are mandatory and therefore the
contract made in contravention thereof is void and therefore cannot be ratified and cannot be enforced even by
invoking the doctrine of estoppel.

According to section 65 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, when an agreement is discovered to be void, or when
a contract becomes void, any person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is
bound to restore it, or to make compensation for it to the person from whom he received it. Therefore if the
agreement with the Government is void as the requirement of Article 299(1) have not been complied, the party
receiving the advantage under such agreement is bound to restore it or to make compensation for it to the
person from whom he has received it.

 Effect of a valid contract with Government
As soon as a contract is executed with the Government in accordance with Article 299, the whole law of contract
as contained in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 comes into operation. In India, the remedy for the breach of a
contract with Government is simply a suit for damages.

Earlier the writ of mandamus could not be issued for the enforcement of contractual obligations but the Supreme
Court in its pronouncement in Gujarat State Financial Corporation v. Lotus Hotels, 1983 3 SCC 379, has taken a
new stand and held that the writ of mandamus can be issued against the Government or its instrumentality for
the enforcement of contractual obligations. The Court ruled that it cannot be contended that the Government
can commit breach of a solemn undertaking on which other side has acted and then contend that the party
suffering by the breach of contract may sue for damages and cannot compel specific performance of the
contract through mandamus.

In the case of Shrilekha Vidyarathi v. State of U.P., 1991 SCC 212, the Supreme Court has made it clear that the


                                                                                                               153
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Administrative Law

State has to act justly, fairly and reasonably even in contractual field. In the case of contractual actions of the
State the public element is always present so as to attract Article 14. State acts for public good and in public
interest and its public character does not change merely because the statutory or contractual rights are also
available to the other party. The court has held that the State action is public in nature and therefore it is
open to the judicial review even if it pertains to the contractual field. Thus the contractual action of the state
may be questioned as arbitrary in proceedings under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution. It is to be noted
that the provisions of sections 73, 74 and 75 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 dealing with the determination
of the quantum of damages in the case of breach of contract also applies in the case of Government
contract.

 Quasi-Contractual Liability
According to section 70 of the Indian Contracts Act, 1872, where a person lawfully does anything for another
person or delivers anything to him such other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make
compensation to the former in respect of or to restore, the thing so done or delivered. If the requirements of
section 70 of the Indian Contract Act are fulfilled, even the Government will be liable to pay compensation for
the work actually done or services rendered by the State. Section 70 is not based on any subsisting contract
between the parties but is based on quasi-contract or restitution. Section 70 enables a person who actually
supplies goods or renders some services not intending to do gratuitously, to claim compensation from the
person who enjoys the benefit of the supply made or services rendered. It is a liability, which arise on equitable
grounds even though express agreement or contract may not be proved.

 Suit against State in Torts
A tort is a civil wrong arising out of breach of a civil duty or breach of non-contractual obligation and the only
remedy for which is damages. The essential requirement for the tort is beach of duty towards people in general.
Although tort is a civil wrong, yet it would be wrong to think that all civil wrongs are torts. A civil wrong which
arises out of the breach of contact cannot be put in the category of tort as it is different from a civil wrong arising
out of the breach of duty towards public in general.
When the responsibility of the act of one person falls on another person, it is called vicarious liability. For
example, when the servant of a person harms another person through his act, we held the servant as well as
his master liable for the act done by the servant. Similarly, sometimes the State is held vicariously liable for the
torts committed by its servants in the exercise of their duty. The State would of course not be liable if the acts
done were necessary for protection life or property. Acts such as judicial or quasi-judicial decisions done in
good faith would not invite any liability. There are specific statutory provisions which protect the administrative
authorities from liability. Such protection, however, would not extend to malicious acts. The burden of proving
that an act was malicious would lie on the person who assails the administrative action. The principles of law
of torts would apply in the determination of what is a tort and all the defenses available to the respondent in a
suit for tort would be available to the public servant also.

 Damages
It may happen that a public servant may be negligent in exercise of his duty. It may, however, be difficult
to recover compensation from him. From the point of view of the aggrieved person, compensation is more
important than punishment. Therefore, like all other employers the State must be made vicariously liable for
the wrongful acts of its servants.
The Courts in India are now becoming conscious about increasing cases of excesses and negligence on
the part of the administration resulting in the negation of personal liberty. Hence, they are coming forward

154
Administrative Law                                                                                        LESSON 4

with the pronouncements holding the Government liable for damages even in those cases where the plea of
sovereign function could have negatived the governmental liability. One such pronouncement came in the case
of Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar, AIR 1983 SC 1036. Here the petitioner was detained illegally in the prison for
over fourteen years after his acquittal in a full dressed trial. The court awarded Rs. 30,000 as damages to the
petitioner.
In Bhim Singh v. State of J&K, AIR 1986 SC 494, where the petitioner, a member of Legislative Assembly was
arrested while he was on his way to Srinagar to attend Legislative Assembly in gross violation of his constitutional
rights under Articles 21 and 22(2) of the Constitution, the court awarded monetary compensation of Rs. 50,000
by way of exemplary costs to the petitioner.
Another landmark case namely, C. Ramkonda Reddy v. State, AIR 1989 AP 235, has been decided by the Andhra
Pradesh, in which State plea of sovereign function was turned down and damages were awarded despite its
being a case of exercise of sovereign function.
In Saheli a Women’s Resource Center v. Commissioner of Police, Delhi, AIR 1990 SC 513, where the death of
nine years old boy took place on account of unwarranted atrocious beating and assault by a police officer in
New Delhi, the State Government was directed by the court to pay Rs. 75,000 as compensation to the mother of
victim.
In Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta, 1994 1 SCC 245, the Supreme Court observed that where public
servant by malafide, oppressive and capricious acts in discharging official duty causes injustice, harassment
and agony to common man and renders the State or its instrumentality liable to pay damages to the person
aggrieved from public fund, the State or its instrumentality is duly bound to recover the amount of compensation
so paid from the public servant concerned.

 Liability of the Public Servant
Liability of the State must be distinguished from the liability of individual officers of the State. So far as the
liability of individual officers is concerned, if they have acted outside the scope of their powers or have acted
illegally, they are liable to same extent as any other private citizen would be. The ordinary law of contact or
torts or criminal law governs that liability. An officer acting in discharge of his duty without bias or malafides
could not be held personally liable for the loss caused to other person. However, such acts have to be done in
pursuance of his official duty and they must not be ultra vires his powers. Where a public servant is required to
be protected for acts done in the course of his duty, special statutory provisions are made for protecting him
from liability.
The term ‘Statutory Corporation’ (or Public Corporation) refers to such organisations which are incorporated
under the special Acts of the Parliament/State Legislative Assemblies. Its management pattern, its powers and
functions, the area of activity, rules and regulations for its employees and its relationship with government
departments, etc. are specified in the concerned Act. It may be noted that more than one corporation can
also be established under the same Act. State Electricity Boards and State Financial Corporation fall in this
category.

 Examples of Public Corporation
Life Insurance Corporation, Food Corporation of India (FCI), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), Air India,
State Bank of India, Reserve Bank of India, Employees State Insurance Corporation, Central Warehousing
Corporation, Damodar Valley Corporation, National Textile Corporation, Industrial Finance Corporation of
India (IFCI), Tourism Corporation of India, Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation (MMTC) etc are some of the
examples of Public Corporations.

                                                                                                                155
EP-JI&GL                                                                                          Administrative Law

The main features of Statutory Corporations are as follows:




The principal benefits of the Public Corporation as an organizational device are its freedom from government
regulations and controls and its high degree of operating and financial flexibility. In this form, there is a balance
between the autonomy and flexibility enjoyed by private enterprise and the responsibility to the public as
represented by elected members and legislators. However, this form, in its turn, has given rise to other problems,
namely the difficulty of reconciling autonomy of the corporation with public accountability.
The public corporation (statutory corporation) is a body having an entity separate and independent from the
Government. It is not a department or organ of the Government. Consequently, its employees are not regarded
as Government servants and therefore they are not entitled to the protection of Article 311 of the Constitution.
It is to be also noted that a public corporation is included within the meaning of ‘State’ under Article12 and
therefore the fundamental rights can be enforced against it. Public corporations are included with the meaning
of ‘other authorities’ and therefore it is subject to the writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and
of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
For the validity of the corporation contract, the requirements of a valid contract laid down in Article 299 are not
required to be complied with. On principles of vicarious liability, corporation is liable to pay damages for wrong
done by their officers or servants. They are liable even for tort requiring a mental element as an ingredient,
e.g. malicious prosecution. In India, local authorities like Municipalities and District Boards have been held
responsible for the tort committed by their servants or officers.




156
Administrative Law                                                                                      LESSON 4

                                              LESSON ROUND-UP

   l Administrative law is that branch of law that deals with powers, functions and responsibilities of various
       organs of the State. There is no single universal definition of ‘administrative law’ because it means
       different things to different theorists.

   l The ambit of administration is wide and embraces following things within its ambit:-

            –   It makes policies

            –   It executes and administers the law

            –   It adjudicates

            –   It exercises legislative power and issues a plethora of rules, bye- laws and orders of a general
                nature.

   l Dicey gave the principle of Rule of Law and stated that the government should be ruled by rule of law
       instead of rule of individuals. Law of land is the fundamental.

   l Four principal sources of administrative law in India are: (a) Constitution of India (b) Acts/ Statutes (c)
       Ordinances, Administrative directions, Notifications and Circulars (d) Judicial decisions.

   l In India the modes of judicial control of administrative are grouped into three heads (a) Constitutional
       (b) Statutory (c) Ordinary or Equitable.

   l One of the most important principles in the administration of justice is that justice must not only
       be done but also seen to be done. This is necessary to inspire confidence in the people in the
       judicial system. Natural justice is a concept of Common Law and represents procedural principles
       developed by judges. In India, the principles of natural justice are derived from Article 14 and 21 of the
       Constitution.

   l The liability of the government can either be contractual or tortious.



                                                   GLOSSARY

 Administrative Discretion: The freedom of an administrative authority to choose from amongst various
 alternatives but with reference to rules of reason and justice and not according to personal whims.

 Rule of Law: Everyone should be governed by rule of law instead of rule of individuals. Everyone stands
 equivalent in front of law.

 Arbitrary orders: The order which are at whims and fancies of the adjudicatory authority.

 Colourable exercise of power: Where the discretionary power is exercised ostensibly but in reality for some
 other purpose.

 Natural Justice: Natural justice is a concept of Common Law and represents procedural principles developed
 by judges. It supports the statement “Justice must not only be done but also seen to be done”.

 Nemo judex in causa sua: No one can be a judge in his own case.




                                                                                                              157
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Administrative Law


                                                     TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
      1. What are the four principal sources of administrative law in India?
  2. Briefly enumerate the various modes of judicial control of administrative action in India.
  3. Write a short note on:
             (i)    Judicial relief at the stage of delegation of discretion.
             (ii)   Judicial relief at the stage of exercise of administrative discretion.
  4. The liability of the government can either be contractual or tortious. Discuss.
  5. The liability of the State is vicarious for the wrongful acts of its servants. Comment.
  6. Write short note on ‘Constitution’ as a source of Administrative Law.
   7. Distinguish between ‘Tortious Liability’ and ‘Contractual Liability‘ of a State.
  8. Where does Rule of Law embedded under the Constitution of India?
  9. An Accountant, an employee of public corporation was prosecuted for offences under Section 161 IPC
     and Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and was ultimately convicted and sentenced.
     This was upheld by the High Court in appeal. The appellant contended that the entire proceedings before
     the trial court as also the High Court are liable to be set aside as there was no valid sanction within the
     meaning of Section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 with the consequence that the trial court
     had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of these offences. This contention is challenged by the State of
     Gujarat, who has contended that there was proper and valid sanction granted within the meaning of the
     Act. In this case, it was observed by the court that that while exercising the power of judicial review the
     Court does not sit as a Court of Appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made
     particularly as the Court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision.
 		 Discuss the above situation with the help of case Mansukhlal Vithaldas Chauhan v. State of Gujarat, AIR
    1997 SC 3400


                                              LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

       l    I.P. Massey, Administrative Law (7th ed., 2008)
       l    S.N. Jain, Administrative Tribunals in India (1977)
       l    A.V. Dicey, Law of the Constitution (1885)
       l    Lectures on Administrative Law by C.K. Takwani


                            OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

       l    https://www.icsi.edu/cs-journal/




158
                                                                                             Lesson
Law of Torts
                                                                                                5
KEY CONCEPTS
n Liquidated Damages n Unliquidated Damages n Strict Liability n Vicarious Liability n Tortfeasor n Battery
n Assault n Libel n Slander n Restitution n Abatement n Collateral n Negligence



Learning Objectives
To understand:
       The applicability and operation of Law of Torts
       Essential elements which constitute and fixes liability under Law of Torts
       Kinds of Liabilities
       The role of mens rea in fixing liability under Law of Torts
       Liability of the State under Law of Torts
       Torts against safety and freedom of individuals
       Remedies available against the torts




Lesson Outline
       Introduction to Law of Torts

       Kinds of Tortious Liability and General Condition of Liability for a Tort

       Torts or wrongs to personal safety and freedom

       Remedies in Torts

       Lesson Round-Up
       Glossary

       Test Yourself

       List of Further Readings & References




    The purpose of law is not to prevent a future offense, but to punish the one actually committed.
                                                                                              Ayn Rand


                                                                                                       159
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                   Law of Torts


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l     Judicial Precedents
      l     Section 2(m) of the Limitation Act, 1963

 INTRODUCTION TO LAW OF TORTS
“Law is the great civilizing machinery. It liberates the desire to build and subdues the desire to destroy. And
if war can tear us apart, Law can unite us – out of fear, or love or reason, or all three. Law is the greatest
human invention. All the rest, give man mastery over his world. Law gives him mastery over himself”. Lyndon B.
Johnson, TIME September 24, 1965 page 48.
Justice has been regarded as one of the greatest concerns of mankind on this planet. Edmund Burke said, that
justice is itself the “great standing policy of civil society”. Scholars of political Science and legal theory tell us,
that the administration of justice is one of the primary objects for which society was formed. Our Constitution, in
its preamble, speaks of justice as one of the great values which its makers have cherished.
The word ‘tort’ is a French equivalent of English word ‘wrong’. The word tort is derived from Latin language from
the word Tortum. Thus, simply stated ‘tort’ means wrong. But every wrong or wrongful act is not a tort. Tort is
really a kind of civil wrong as opposed to criminal wrong. Wrongs, in law, are either public or private.
Broadly speaking, public wrongs are the violations of ‘public law and hence amount to be offences against the
State, while private wrongs are the breaches of private law, i.e., wrongs against individuals. Public wrongs or
crimes are those wrongs which are made punishable under the penal law which belong to the public law group.
Section 2(m) of the Limitation Act, 1963, states: “Tort means a civil wrong which is not exclusively a breach of
contract or breach of trust.”
Salmond defines it as ”a civil wrong for which the remedy is a common law action for unliquidated damages and
which is not exclusively the breach of a contract or the breach of a trust or other merely equitable obligation.”
Fraser describes it as “an infringement of a right in rem of a private individual giving a right of compensation at
the suit of the injured party.”
Winfield says: “Tortious liability arises from the breach of duty, primarily fixed by law; this duty is towards
persons generally and its breach is redressable by an action for unliquidated damages”.
Two important elements can be derived from all these definitions, namely:
      (i)   that a tort is a species of civil injury of wrong as opposed to a criminal wrong, and
   (ii)     that every civil wrong is not a tort.
Accordingly, it is now possible to distinguish tort from a crime and from a contract, a trust and a quasi-contract. The
distinction between civil and criminal wrongs depends on the nature of the appropriate remedy provided by law.

 Elements of Tort
      1.    A civil wrong.
   2.       This civil wrong is not a breach of contract or breach of trust.
   3.       This wrong is redressible by an action for unliquidated damages.

160
Law of Torts                                                                                             LESSON 5

Damage and Damages

Damage means the legal loss or violation of legal right, i.e infringement of legal right.

Damages means monetary, pecuniary compensation or
compensation in terms of money. Further, the damages may be            Question: Which type of wrong the torts
Liquidated and Unliquidated Damages.                                   is?
                                                                       Option: (A) Civil Wrong
Liquidated and Unliquidated Damages
                                                                       (B) Criminal Wrong
Liquidated Damages means Pre-determined or fixed compensation
for some loss. Example – in case of breach of contract the damages     (C) Both Civil & Criminal Wrong
are known i.e pre-determined by parties.                               (D) Constitutional Wrong
Unliquidated Damages refers to damages which are not pre-              Answer: (A)
determined or decided by the parties, they are not known beforehand.


 CASE LAW
 In the case of Jay Laxmi Salt Words (P) Ltd vs State Of Gujarat, 1994 SCC (4) 1, JT 1994 (3) 492 judgement
 dated 4 May, 1994 the Supreme Court of India observed that ” Truly speaking entire law of torts is founded
 and structured on morality that no one has a right to injure or harm others intentionally or even innocently.
 Therefore, it would be primitive to class strictly or close finality the ever-expanding and growing horizon
 of tortious liability. Even for social development, orderly growth of the society and cultural refineness, the
 liberal approach to tortious liability by courts is more conducive” .....


 Example
 An action against the railway company for loss of goods in carriage is due to presence of contract but
 any action by a passengers for any injuries occurred due to negligence of the railway employees is
 tort.


 Example
 A patient while getting operated his injuries got seriously injured due to the negligence of surgeon. The
 surgeon shall be liable for breach of contract as well as in law of torts because his negligence caused the
 harm to other person without any lawful justification.

 KINDS OF TORTIOUS LIABILITY & GENERAL CONDITIONS




                                                                                                             161
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Law of Torts

 (A) Liability against Civil Wrong (In general)

Civil Wrong
Civil wrong refers to those, which satisfies the condition of liabilities and are remedied by law, when someone
loses money due to the negligence of another, this is known as a civil wrong. Damage to property or reputation,
failure to fulfil contractual duties, physical or mental harm, etc. are all examples of wrongful losses. The victim
of a civil wrong has the right to sue the offending party in order to recover damages for the harm suffered.
It includes Tort, Breach of Contract, Breach of Trust and Breach of Equitable Obligation.




General Conditions of Liability for a Tort
As stated earlier, there is no fixed catalogue of circumstances, which along and for all time mark the limit of what
are torts. Certain situations have been held to be torts and will continue to be so in the absence of statutory
repeal, and others have been held not to be torts. However, certain general conditions for tortuous liability can
be laid down.
In general, a tort consists of some act or omission done by the defendant (tortfeasor) whereby he has without
just cause or excuse caused some harm to plaintiff. To constitute a tort, there must be:




162
Law of Torts                                                                                               LESSON 5

   (i)    Wrongful act: The act complained of, should under the circumstances, be legally wrongful as regards
          the party complaining. In other words, it should prejudicially affect any of the above mentioned
          interests, and protected by law. Thus, every person whose legal rights, e.g., right of reputation, right of
          bodily safety and freedom, and right to property are violated without legal excuse, has a right of action
          against the person who violated them, whether loss results from such violation or not.

           CASE LAW
           In a case, Glasgow Corporation v. Taylor, 1922 , a corporation failed to put proper fencing to keep
           the children away from a poisonous tree and a child plucked and ate the fruit of the same tree and
           died. Court held corporation liable for such omission.
           In a case, General Cleaning Corporation v. Christmas, 1953, an employer failed to provide safety belt
           for safe system of work resulting in an employee suffering injuries. The employer shall be liable for
           the consequences of such omission.

   (ii)   Legal damages: It is not every damage that is a damage in the eye of the law. It must be a damage
          which the law recognizes as such. In other words, there should be legal injury or invasion of the legal
          right. In the absence of an infringement of a legal right, an action does not lie. Also, where there is
          infringement of a legal right, an action lies even though no damage may have been caused. As was
          stated in Ashby v. White, (1703) 2 Ld. Raym. 938 legal damage is neither identical with actual damage
          nor is it necessarily pecuniary.
		 Two maxims, namely :
          (a)   Damnum sine injuria (Damage without injury), and
          (b)   Injuria sine damnum (injury without damage),
		 explain this proposition.
		 Damnum Sine Injuria
		Damnum means harm, loss or damage in respect of money, comfort, health, etc. Injuria means
  infringement of a right conferred by law on the plaintiff. The maxim means that in a given case, a man
  may have suffered damage and yet have no action in tort, because the damage is not to an interest
  protected by the law of torts. Therefore, causing damage, however substantial to another person is not
  actionable in law unless there is also a violation of a legal right of the plaintiff. Common examples are,
  where the damage results from an act done in the exercise of legal rights.

           CASE LAW
           Gloucester Grammar School Case, 1410
           In this case, defendant after leaving Plaintiff’s School where he worked as a teacher, started his own
           school. Being a teacher of standing, many students of Plaintiff’s school left and enrolled themselves
           into defendant’s school. Plaintiff filed a suit for monetary damages incurred by his own. Court held that
           defendant is not liable because competition is no ground of action even though monetary loss is caused.
           Chasemore V Richards, 1859
           In this case, water supply to Plaintiff’s mill was disrupted due to defendant’s digging of his well.
           This resulted in cutting of water supply to plaintiff’s mill due to which it was shut down. Court held
           defendant not liable because although monetary losses were incurred there was no violation of
           legal right.


                                                                                                                 163
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                   Law of Torts

		Injuria Sine Damnum
		        It means injury without damage, i.e., where there is no damage resulted yet it is an injury or wrong in
          tort, i.e. where there is infringement of a legal right not resulting in harm but plaintiff can still sue in
          tort.
		 Some rights or interests are so important that their violation is an actionable tort without proof of
   damage. Thus when there is an invasion of an “absolute” private right of an individual, there is an injuria
   and the plaintiff’s action will succeed even if there is no Damnum or damages. An absolute right is one,
   the violation of which is actionable per se, i.e., without the proof of any damage. Injuria sine Damnum
   covers such cases and action lies when the right is violated even though no damage has occurred. Thus
   the act of trespassing upon another’s land is actionable even though it has not caused the plaintiff even
   the slightest harm.

           Case Law
           Ashby V White, 1703
           In this case, the plaintiff was prevented from voting at an election by the defendant. Plaintiff
           sued defendant for compensation even if no monetary loss was incurred by him. It was held that
           defendant was liable to pay compensation because he has violated legal right of plaintiff to cast his
           vote. Defendant had committed a tort.



  (iii)   Legal remedy: The third condition of liability for a tort is legal remedy. This means that to constitute
          a tort, the wrongful act must come under the law. The main remedy for a tort is an action for
          unliquidated damages, although some other remedies, e.g., injunction, may be obtained in addition
          to damages or specific restitution may be claimed in an action for the detention of a chattel. Self-
          help is a remedy of which the injured party can avail himself without going to a law court. It does
          not apply to all torts and perhaps the best example of these to which it does apply is trespass to
          land.
  Example :
  if “A” finds a drunken stranger in his room who has no business to be there in it, and is thus a trespass, he
  (A) is entitled to get rid of him, if possible without force but if that be not possible with such force as the
  circumstances of the case may warrant.

 Mens Rea
How far a guilty mind of persons is required for liability for tort?
Mens Rea or guilty mind creates liability on the principle that mere act of the person is not enough to create his
liability. The General principle lies in the maxim “actus non facit reum nisi mens sit rea” i.e. the act itself creates
no guilt in the absence of a guilty mind. It does not mean that for the law or Torts, the act must be done with
an evil motive, but simply means that mind must concur in the Act, the act must be done either with wrongful
intention or negligence. It is not so easy to make such generalization about liability in tort. Mens rea can be
interpreted into two ways –
   a)     Fault/ state of mind when relevant: Many branches of law of torts like assault, battery, false
          imprisonment, deceit, malicious prosecution and conspiracy, the state of mind of other person is taken
          into account to ascertain his liability. Defendant’s conduct may be innocent and the act done might be
          due to an accident. That all should be taken into account.

164
Law of Torts                                                                                                     LESSON 5

    b)          Liability without fault: There are cases wherein the mental state of the doer stands irrelevant and
                the liability still falls on the shoulder of the doer even if that act was done without any wrongful
                intentions or malice. So, liability under law of torts may also be fixed even if mens rea is not
                present.

 Example
           1.    In case of defamation, the defendant is liable even when he did not intend to defame but acted in a
                 way that turned out to be defamatory.
       2.        The provisions regarding no fault liability are covered in Section 140 of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, it
                 says.
 Where death or permanent disablement of any person has resulted from an accident arising out of the use
 of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles, the owner of the vehicle shall, be jointly and severally, liable to pay
 compensation in respect of such death or disablement. The amount of compensation in respect of the death
 is fifty thousand rupees and in case of permanent disablement twenty-five thousand rupees.

 (B) Strict or Absolute Liability
In some torts, the defendant is liable even though the harm to the plaintiff occurred without intention or
negligence on the defendant’s part. In other words, the defendant is held liable without fault. These cases fall
under the following categories:
    (i)         Liability for Inevitable Accident – Such liability arises in cases where damage is done by the escape of
                dangerous substances brought or kept by anyone upon his land. Such cases are where a man is made
                by law an insurer of other against the result of his activities.
   (ii)         Liability for Inevitable Mistake – Such cases are where a person interferes with the property or reputation
                of another.
   (iii)        Vicarious Liability for Wrongs committed by others – Responsibility in such cases is imputed by law on
                grounds of social policy or expediency. These case involve liability of master for the acts of his servant.
Rule in Rylands v. Fletcher
The rule in Rylands v. Flethcer (1868) L.R. 3 H.L. 330 is that a man acts at his peril and is the insurer of the safety
of his neighbour against accidental harm. Such duty is absolute because it is independent of negligence on
the part of the defendant or his servants. It was held in that case that: “If a person brings or accumulates on
his land anything which, if it should escape may cause damage to his neighbours, he does so at his own peril.
If it does not escape and cause damage he is responsible, however careful he may have been, and whatever
precautions he may have taken to prevent damage.”
The facts of this case were as follows: B, a mill owner employed independent contractors, who were
apparently competent to construct a reservoir on his land to provide water for his mill. There were old
disused mining shafts under the site of the reservoir which the contractors failed to observe because they
were filled with earth. The contractors therefore, did not block them. When the water was filled in the
reservoir, it bursts through the shafts and flooded the plaintiff’s coal mines on the adjoining land. It was
found as a fact that B did not know of the shafts and had not been negligent, though the independent
contractors, had been, B was held liable. Blackburn, J., observed; “We think that the true rule of law is that
the person, who for his own purposes brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to
do mischief if it escapes, must keep it at his peril and if, he does not do so is, prima facie answerable for all
the damage which is the natural consequence of its escape.”


                                                                                                                       165
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Law of Torts

Later in the caser of Read v. Lyons [(1946) 2 All. E.R. 471 (H.L.)], it has been explained that two conditions are
necessary in order to apply the rule in Ryland v. Fletcher, these are:
   (i)    Escape from the Control: Escape from a place of which the defendant has occupation or over which he
          has a control to a place which is outside his occupation or control or something likely to do mischief if
          it escapes; and
   (ii)   Non-natural use of Land: The defendant is liable if he makes a non-natural use of land. If either of
          these conditions is absent, the rule of strict liability will not apply.
If either of these conditions is absent, the rule of strict liability will not apply.

 Exceptions to the Rule of Strict Liability




The following exceptions to the rule of strict liability have been introduced in course of time, some of them being
inherent in the judgment itself in Ryland v. Fletcher:
   (i)    Damage due to Natural Use of the Land
		In Ryland v. Fletcher water collected in the reservoir in such large quantity, was held to be non-
  natural use of land. Keeping water for ordinary domestic purpose is ‘natural use’. Things not
  essentially dangerous which is not unusual for a person to have on his own land, such as water
  pipe installations in buildings, the working of mines and minerals on land, the lighting of fire in a
  fire-place of a house, and necessary wiring for supplying electric light, fall under the category of
  “natural use” of land.
		Example
		Establishing a reservoir for generating power on a residential land amounts to the non-natural use
  of land. Building a swimming pool, or water storage tanks for domestic use is a natural use of land.
   (ii)   Consent of the plaintiff
		 Where the plaintiff has consented to the accumulation of the dangerous thing on the defendant’s land,
   the liability under the rule in Ryland v. Flethcher does not arise. Such a consent is implied where the
   source of danger is for the ‘common benefit’ of both the plaintiff and the defendant.



166
Law of Torts                                                                                          LESSON 5

		Example
		A and B living in the same housing complex gives permission to install water pipes. One of the water
  pipes leaks thereby causing leakage problem. Neither A nor B will can seek for damages under Law
  of Torts.
  (iii)   Act of Third Party
		 If the harm has been caused due to the act of a stranger, who is neither defendant’s servant nor agent
   nor the defendant has any control over him, the defendant will not be liable. Thus, in Box v. Jubh (1879)
   4 Ex. D. 76, the overflow from the defendant’s reservoir was caused by the blocking of a drain by
   stranger, the defendant was held not liable. But if the act of the stranger, is or can be foreseen by the
   defendant and the damage can be prevented, the defendant must, by due care prevent the damage.
   Failure on his part to avoid such damage will make him liable.
		Example
		A has a bull tied in his garden which is properly fenced. B, a passerby opens the fence and the bull
  is on the loose. Bull ends up hitting C, A will not be liable under law of tort since he had taken due
  care for the safe keep of the bull.
  (iv)    Statutory Authority
		 Sometimes, public bodies storing water, gas, electricity and the like are by statute, exempted from
   liability so long as they have taken reasonable care.
		 Thus, in Green v. Chelzea Water Works Co. (1894) 70 L.T. 547 the defendant company had a statutory
   duty to maintain continuous supply of water. A main belonging to the company burst without any fault
   on its part as a consequence of which plaintiff’s premises were flooded with water. It was held that the
   company was not liable as the company was engaged in performing a statutory duty.
		Example
		Sudden bursting of water lines after taking due care causes flooding in nearby areas. It will not
  impose a liability on the water authorities if they have taken due care to prevent such situations.
   (v)    Act of God
		 If an escape is caused, through natural causes and without human intervention circumstances which
   no human foresight can provide against and of which human prudence is not bound to recognize the
   possibility, there is then said to exist the defence of Act of God.
		Example
		The artificial lake of plaintiff overflowed due to excessive rainfall and caused damage to the nearby
  crops. Defendant cannot be held liable as heavy rainfall is an act of god.
  (vi)    Escape due to plaintiff’s own Default
		 Damage by escape due to the plaintiff’s own default was considered to be good defence in Rylands v.
   Fletcher itself. Also, if the plaintiff suffers damage by his own intrusion into the defendant’s property, he
   cannot complain for the damage so caused.
		Example: A dangerous chemical stored in the containers was kept in basement of a building. A, a
  thief went inside the building for committing theft. He arranged the containers one on the other for
  the purpose of reaching at one place. He fell and chemical in the containers spilled on him.
		 He cannot claim damages as this escape was due to his own default.

                                                                                                            167
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                    Law of Torts


 Applicability of the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher in cases of enterprises engaged in a hazardous or
 inherently dangerous industry
The Supreme Court has discussed the applicability of the rule of Rylands v. Fletcher in the case of M.C. Mehta
v. Union of India and Others (1987)1. Comp. L.J. p. 99 S.C., while determining the principles on which the liability
of an enterprise engaged in a hazardous or inherently dangerous industry depended if an accident occurred
in such industry.
  “We have to evolve new principle and lay down new norms which would adequately deal with the new problems
  which arise in a highly industrialized economy. We cannot allow our judicial thinking to be constricted by reference
  to the law as it prevails in England or for the matter of that, in any other foreign country”.
On the question of the nature of liability for a hazardous enterprise the court while noting that the above rule
as developed in England recognizes certain limitations and responsibilities recorded it’s final view as follows:
“We are of the view that an enterprise which is engaged in a hazardous or inherently dangerous industry
which poses a potential threat to the health and safety of the persons working in the factory and residing in the
surrounding areas, owes an absolute and non-delegable duty to the community to ensure that no harm results
to anyone on account of hazardous or inherently dangerous nature of the activity which it has undertaken.
The enterprise must be held to be under an obligation to provide that the hazardous or inherently dangerous
activity in which it is engaged, must be conducted with the highest standards of safety; and if any harm results
on account of such activity, the enterprise must be absolutely liable to compensate for such harm; and it should
be no answer to the enterprise to say that it had taken all reasonable care and that the harm occurred without
negligence on its part.”
Thus, while imposing absolute liability for manufacture of hazardous substances, the Supreme Court intended
that the requirement of non-natural use or the aspect of escape of a dangerous substance, commonly regarded
as essential for liability under Rylands v. Fletcher, need not be proved in India.

 CASE LAW
 M. C Mehta & Ors. v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 1086
 Commonly known as Oleum Gas Leak, this case law changed the face of applicability of the rule of
 strict liability in India. There was an escape of Oleum gas from Units of Shriram Food & Fertilizers
 Industries on 4th and 6th December, 1985 and applications were filed for award of compensation to
 the persons who had suffered harm on account of escape of oleum gas. Court held that an industry is
 required to make sure that no one is harmed when engaging in risky operations that could endanger
 the health and safety of adjacent workers and residents. As part of the social cost of conducting such
 risky activities on its property, this industry is required to carry out its operations in accordance with
 the highest standards of safety and must be fully accountable for compensating for any harm caused.

 (C) Vicarious Liability
Normally, the tortfeasor is liable for his tort. But in some cases a person may be held liable for the tort committed
by another. A master is vicariously liable for the tort of his servant, principal for the tort of his agent and partners
for the tort of a partner. This is known as vicarious liability in tort.
Principle of Liability
A person may be liable in respect of wrongful acts or omissions of another in ways as given under:
      1.   By ratification – having ratified through particular law, act or statute


168
Law of Torts                                                                                             LESSON 5

   2.    By relation – through standing of one person to another by the relation they share
    3.   By abetment – having abetted any tortious act committed by others.
Essential elements of Vicarious Liability
In case of a master servant relationship, master is liable for the act of servant if following requirements are met
with:
   a)    There must be an existing relationship between master and servant
   b)    Servant has committed some tortious act
    c)   This tortious act must be done during the course of employment
Types of vicarious liability
The common examples of such a liability are:
   (a)   Principal and Agent [Specific authority]
		 Qui facit per alium facit per se – he who acts through another is acting himself, so that the act of the
   agent is the act of the principal. When an agent commits a tort in the ordinary course of his duties as an
   agent, the principal is liable for the same. In Lloyd v. Grace, Smith & Co. (1912) A.C. 716, the managing
   clerk of a firm of solicitors, while acting in the ordinary course of business committed fraud, against a
   lady client by fraudulently inducing her to sign documents transferring her property to him. He had
   done so without the knowledge of his principal who was liable because the fraud was committed in the
   course of employment.
   (b)   Partners
		 For the tort committed by a partner in the ordinary course of the business of the firm, all the other
   partners are liable therefore to the same extent as the guilty partner. The liability of the partners is joint
   and several. In Hamlyn v. Houston & Co. (1903) 1 K.B. 81, one of the two partners bribed the plaintiff’s
   clerk and induced him to divulge secrets relating to his employer’s business. It was held that both the
   partners were liable for the tort committed by only one of them.
   (c)   Master and Servant [Authority by relation]
		 A master is liable for the tort committed by his servant while acting in the course of his employment. The
   servant, of course, is also liable; their liability is joint and several.
		 In such cases

          (1)   liability of a person is independent of his own wrongful intention or negligence

         (2)    liability is joint as well several

         (3) In case of vicarious liability, the liability arises because of the relationship between the principal
             and the wrongdoer but in case of absolute or strict liability the liability arises out of the wrong
             itself.

		 A master is liable not only for the acts which have been committed by the servant, but also for acts
   done by him which are not specifically authorized, in the course of his employment. The basis of the
   rule has been variously stated: on the maxim Respondeat Superior (Let the principal be liable) or on the
   maxim Qui facit per alium facit per se (he who does an act through another is deemed to do it himself).

		 The master is liable even though the servant acted against the express instructions, for the benefit of
   his master, so long as the servant acted in the course of employment.

                                                                                                               169
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Law of Torts

  (d)   Employer and Independent Contractor

        It is to be remembered that an employer is vicariously liable for the torts of his servants committed
        in the course of their employment, but he is not liable for the torts of those who are his independent
        contractors.

		 A servant is a person who is employed by another (the employer) to perform services in connection
   with the affairs of the employer, and over whom the employer has control in the performance of these
   services. An independent contractor is one who works for another but who is not controlled by that
   other in his conduct in the performance of that work. These definitions show that a person is a servant
   where the employer “retains the control of the actual performance” of the work.

		 Where Employer is Liable for the acts of Independent Contractor

		 The employer is not liable merely because an independent contractor commits a tort in the course of
   his employment; the employer is liable only if he himself is deemed to have committed a tort. This may
   happen in one of the following three ways:

           (i)   When employer authorizes him to commit a tort.

           (ii) In torts of strict liability

         (iii)   Negligence of independent contractor

		 Employers of independent contractors are liable for the “collateral negligence” of their contractors in
   the course of his employment. Where A employed B to fit casement windows into certain premises.
   B’s servant negligently put a tool on the still of the window on which he was working at the time. The
   wind blew the casement open and the tool was knocked off the still on to a passer by. The employer
   was held to be liable, because the harm was caused by the work on a highway and duty lies upon the
   employer to avoid harm.

		Where Employer is not Liable for the acts of an Independent Contractor

		      An employer is not liable for the tort of an independent contractor if he has taken care in the appointment
        of the contractor. In Philips v. Britania Hygienic Laundry Co. (1923), the owner of lorry was held not liable
        when a third-party’s vehicle was damaged, in consequence of the negligent repair of his lorry by a
        garage proprietor.

  (e)   Liability for the acts of Servants/Employees
		 An employer is liable whenever his servant commits a tort in the course of his employment. An act is
   deemed to be done in the course of employment if it is either:
           (i)   a wrongful act authorized by the employer, or
           (ii) a wrongful and unauthorized mode of doing some act authorized by the employer.
		 So for as the first alternative is concerned there is no difficulty in holding the master liable for the tort of
   his servant. A few examples, however, are necessary to explain the working of the rule in the second.
   These are as follows:
		In Century Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Northern Ireland Road Transport Board (1942) A.C. 509, the driver of a
  petrol lorry, while transferring petrol from the lorry to an underground tank at a garage, struck a match
  in order to light a cigarette and then threw it, still alight on the floor. An explosion and a fire ensued.
  The House of Lords held his employers liable for the damage caused, for he did the act in the course of

170
Law of Torts                                                                                                                  LESSON 5

          carrying out his task of delivering petrol; it was an unauthorized way of doing what he was employed
          to do.
		 Similarly, in Bayley v. Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Rly. Co. (1873) L.R. 7 C.P. 415, erroneously
   thinking that the plaintiff was in the wrong train, a porter of the defendants forcibly removed him. The
   defendants were held liable.

 CASE LAWS
  Dinbai R. Wadia and Ors. v. Farukh Mobedjna and anr. AIR 1958 Bom 218
  In this case Bombay High Court stated that a principal may be held liable for fraud or any other illegal or
  malafide activity committed by his agent well within his authority. Also, whether any particular act falls
  within the scope of his employment or not must necessarily depend upon the merits of each case.
  Lakshminarayan Ram Gopal and Sons v. Govt of Hyderabad, AIR 1954 SC 364
  In this case, Supreme Court stated that “A servant acts under the direct control and supervision of his master,
  and is bound to conform to all reasonable orders given him in the course of his work; an independent
  contractor, on the other hand, is entirely independent of any control or interference, and merely undertakes
  to produce a specified resulted employing his own means to produce that result. An ament, though bound to
  exercise his authority in accordance with all lawful instructions which may be given to him from time to time
  by his principal, is not subject in its exercise to the direct control or supervision of the principal. An agent, as
  such is not a servant, but a servant is generally for some purposes his master’s implied agent, the extent of
  the agency depending upon the duties or position of the servant”

 (D) Vicarious Liability of the State
    (a)   The Position in England
		 At Common Law the Crown could not be sued in tort, either for wrongs actually authorized by it or
   committed by its servants, in the course of their employment. With the passing of the Crown Proceeding
   Act, 1947, the Crown is liable for the torts committed by its servants just like a private individual. Thus,
   in England, the Crown is now vicariously liable for the torts of its servants.
   (b)    The Position in India
		 Unlike the Crown Proceeding Act, 1947 of England, we have no statutory provision with respect to the
   liability of the State in India.
		        When a case of Government liability in tort comes before the courts, the question is whether the particular
          Government activity, which gave rise to the tort, was the sovereign function or non-sovereign function. If
          it is a sovereign function it could claim immunity from the tortuous liability, otherwise not. Generally, the
          activities of commercial nature or those which can be carried out by the private individual are termed
          as non-sovereign functions.

 Role of the State in Law of Torts1
In any modern society, interactions between the State and the citizens are large in their number, frequent
in their periodicity and important from the point of view of their effect on the lives and fortunes of citizens.
Such interactions often raise legal problems, whose solution requires an application of various provisions and
doctrines. A large number of the problems so arising fall within the area of the law of torts. This is because,
where relief through a civil court is desired, the tort law figures much more frequently, than any other branch

1. A Consultation Paper on Liability of the State in Tort of National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution.

                                                                                                                                  171
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                   Law of Torts

of law. By definition, a tort is a civil wrong, (not being a breach of contract or a breach of trust or other wrong)
for which the remedy is unliquidated damages. It thus encompasses all wrongs for which a legal remedy is
considered appropriate. It is the vast reservoir from which jurisprudence can still draw its nourishing streams.
Given this importance of tort law, and given the vast role that the State performs in modern times, one would
reasonably expect that the legal principles relating to an important area of tort law, namely, liability of the State
in tort, would be easily ascertainable.

The law in India with respect to the liability of the State for the tortious acts of its servants has become entangled
with the nature and character of the role of the East India Company prior to 1858. It is therefore necessary to
trace the course of development of the law on this subject, as contained in article 300 of the Constitution.

Article 300(1) of the Constitution provides first, that the Government of India may sue or be sued by the name of
the Union of India and the Government of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State; secondly, that
the Government of India or the Government of a State may sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs
in the like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States
might have sued or be sued, “if this Constitution had not been enacted”, and thirdly, that the second mentioned
rule shall be subject to any provisions which may be made by an Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such
State, enacted by virtue of powers conferred by the Constitution.

So far as the Supreme Court is concerned, State of Rajasthan vs. Vidyawati, AIR 1962 SC 933 is the
first post- Constitution judgment on Liability of the State in Tort. That was a case where the driver of a
Government jeep, which was being used by the Collector of Udaipur, knocked down a person walking on
the footpath by the side of a public road. The injured person died three days later, in the hospital. The legal
representatives of the deceased sued the State of Rajasthan and the driver for compensation / damages for
the tortious act Committed by the driver. It was found by the court, as a fact, that the driver was rash and
negligent in driving the jeep and that the accident was the result of such driving on his part. The suit was
decreed by the trial court, and also by the High Court. The appeal against the High Court judgment was
dismissed by the Supreme Court.

The Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan vs. Vidyawati, AIR 1962 SC 933 which held as under:

“The State of Rajasthan has not shown that the Rajasthan Union, its predecessor, was not liable by any rule
of positive enactment or by Common Law. It is clear from what has been said above, that the Dominion of
India, or any constituent Province of the Dominion, would have been liable in view of the provisions aforesaid
of the Government of India Act, 1858. We have not been shown any provision of law, statutory or otherwise,
which would exonerate the Rajasthan Union form vicarious liability for the acts of its servants, analogous to the
Common Law of England. It was impossible, by reason of the maxim “The King can do no wrong”, to sue the
Crown for the tortious act of its servant. But it was realised in the United Kingdom, that that rule had become
outmoded in the context of modern developments in statecraft, and Parliament intervened by enacting the
Crown Proceedings Act, 1947, which came into force on January 1, 1948. Hence the very citadel of the absolute
rule of immunity of the sovereign has now been blown up. Section 2 (1) of the Act provides that the “Crown shall
be subject to all those liabilities, in tort, to which it would be subject, if it were a private person of full age and
capacity, in respect of torts committed by its servants or agents, subject to the other provisions of this Act….”

“Viewing the case from the point of view of first principles, there should be no difficulty in holding that the State
should be as much liable for tort in respect of tortious acts committed by its servant within the scope of his
employment and functioning as such, as any other employer. The immunity of the Crown in the United Kingdom
was based on the old feudalistic notions of justice, namely, that the King was incapable of doing a wrong,
and, therefore, of authorising or instigating one, and that he could not be sued in his own courts. In India, ever
since the time of the East India Company, the sovereign has been held liable to “be sued in tort or in contract,
and the Common law immunity never operated in India. Now that we have, by our Constitution, established


172
Law of Torts                                                                                               LESSON 5

a Republican form of Government, and one of the objectives is to establish a Socialistic State with its varied
industrial and other activities, employing a large army of servants, there is no justification, in principle, or in
public interest, that the State should not be held liable vicariously for tortious acts of its servant. This Court has
deliberately departed from the Common Law rule that a civil servant cannot maintain a suit against the Crown.
In the case of State of Bihar vs. Abdul Majid, (1954) SCR 786: (AIR 1954 SC 24 5), this Court has recognised
the right of a Government servant to sue the Government for recovery of arrears of salary. When the rule of
immunity in favour of the Crown, based on Common Law in the United Kingdom, has disappeared from the
land of its birth, there is no legal warrant for holding that it has any validity in this country, particularly after
the Constitution. As the cause in this case arose after the coming into effect of the Constitution, in our opinion,
it would be only recognising the old established rule, going back to more than 100 years at least, if we uphold
the vicarious liability of the State.

However, a different note was struck by the Supreme Court itself in Kasturi Lal vs. State of UP, AIR 1965 SC
1039. In that case, the plaintiff had been arrested by the police officers on a suspicion of possessing stolen
property. On a search of his person, a large quantity of gold was found and was seized under the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Ultimately, he was released, but the gold was not returned, as the Head
Constable in charge of the malkhana (wherein the said gold was stored) had absconded with the gold. The
plaintiff thereupon brought a suit against the State of UP for the return of the gold (or in the alternative) for
damages for the loss caused to him. It was found by the courts, that the concerned police officers had failed to
take the requisite care of the gold seized from the plaintiff, as provided by the UP Police Regulations. The trial
court decreed the suit, but the decree was reversed on appeal by the High Court. When the matter was taken
to the Supreme Court, the court found, on an appreciation of the relevant evidence, that the police officers were
negligent in dealing with the plaintiff’s property and also, that they had also not complied with the provisions of
the UP Police Regulations in that behalf. In spite of the said holding, the Supreme Court rejected the plaintiff’s
claim, on the ground that “the act of negligence was committed by the police officers while dealing with the
property of Ralia Ram, which they had seized in exercise of their statutory powers. The power to arrest a person,
to search him and to seize property found with him, are powers conferred on the specified officers by statute
and in the last analysis, they are powers which can be properly categorized as sovereign powers; and so, there
is no difficulty in holding that the act which gave rise to the present claim for damages has been committed
by the employee of the respondent during the course of its employment; but the employment in question
being of the category which can claim the special characteristic of sovereign power, the claim cannot be
sustained.”

Having thus rejected the claim, the Supreme Court made the following pertinent observations in Kasturi Lal vs.
State of UP (AIR 1965 SC 1039):

“Before we part with this appeal, however, we ought to add that it is time that the Legislatures in India seriously
consider whether they should not pass legislative enactments to regulate and control their claim from immunity
in cases like this, on the same lines as has been done in England by the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947.

Distinction between Sovereign and Non-Sovereign Functions

This distinction between sovereign and non-sovereign functions was considered at some length in N. Nagendra
Rao vs. State of AP (AIR 1994 SC 2663); (1994) 6 SCC 205. All the earlier Indian decisions on the subject were
referred to. The court enunciated the following legal principles, in its judgment:

“In the modern sense, the distinction between sovereign or non-sovereign power thus does not exist. It all
depends on the nature of the power and manner of its exercise. Legislative supremacy under the Constitution
arises out of constitutional provisions. The legislature is free to legislate on topics and subjects carved out for
it. Similarly, the executive is free to implement and administer the law. A law made by a legislature may be bad
or may be ultra vires, but, since it is an exercise of legislative power, a person affected by it may challenge its


                                                                                                                 173
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                     Law of Torts

validity but he cannot approach a court of law for negligence in making the law. Nor can the Government, in
exercise of its executive action, be sued for its decision on political or policy matters. It is in (the) public interest
that for acts performed by the State, either in its legislative or executive capacity, it should not be answerable in
torts. That would be illogical and impracticable. It would be in conflict with even modern notions of sovereignty”.

The court in the above case suggested the following tests –

“One of the tests to determine if the legislative or executive function is sovereign in nature is, whether the State
is answerable for such actions in courts of law. For instance, acts such as defence of the country, raising (the)
armed forces and maintaining it, making peace or war, foreign affairs, power to acquire and retain territory,
are functions which are indicative of external sovereignty and are political in nature. Therefore, they are not
amenable to jurisdiction of ordinary civil court. No suit under Civil Procedure Code would lie in respect of it. The
State is immune from being sued, as the jurisdiction of the courts in such matters is impliedly barred.”

The court proceeded further, as under:

“But there the immunity ends. No civilized system can permit an executive to play with the people of its county
and claim that it is entitled to act in any manner, as it is sovereign. The concept of public interest has changed
with structural change in the society. No legal or political system today can place the State above (the law) as
it is unjust and unfair for a citizen to be deprived of his property illegally by negligent act of officers of the State
without any remedy.

…Any watertight compartmentalization of the functions of the State a “sovereign and non-sovereign” or
“governmental and non-governmental” is not sound. It is contrary to modern jurisprudential thinking. The need
of the State to have extraordinary powers cannot be doubted. But with the conceptual change of statutory
power being statutory duty for (the) sake of society and the people, the claim of a common man or ordinary
citizen cannot be thrown out, merely because it was done by an officer of the State; duty of its officials and right
of the citizens are required to be reconciled, so that the rule of law in a Welfare State is not shaken”.

The court emphasised the element of Welfare State in these words:

“In a Welfare State, functions of the State are not only defence of the country or administration of justice or
maintaining law and order, but it extends to regulating and controlling the activities of people in almost every
sphere, educational, commercial, social, economic, political and even marital. The demarcating line between
sovereign and non-sovereign powers, for which no rational basis survives, has largely disappeared. Therefore,
barring functions such as administration of justice, maintenance of law and order and repression of crime etc.
Which are among the primary and inalienable functions of a constitutional Government, the State cannot claim
any immunity.

The Court linked together the State and the officers:

“The determination of vicarious liability of the State being linked with (the) negligence of its officers, if they can
be sued personally for which there is no dearth of authority and the law of misfeasance in discharge of public
duty having marched ahead, there is no rationale for the proposition that even if the officer is liable, the State
cannot be sued.”

In the case of Jay Laxmi Salt Words (P) Ltd vs. State Of Gujarat, 1994 SCC (4) 1, JT 1994 (3) 492 judgement
dated 4 May, 1994 the Supreme Court of India observed that injury and damage are two basic ingredients of
tort. Although these may be found in contract as well but the violations which may result in tortious liability
are breach of duty primarily fixed by the law while in contract they are fixed by the parties themselves. Further
in tort the duty is towards persons generally. In contract it is towards specific person or persons. An action for
tort is usually a claim for pecuniary compensation in respect of damages suffered as a result of the invasion of
a legally protected interest. But law of torts being a developing law its frontiers are incapable of being strictly

174
Law of Torts                                                                                              LESSON 5

barricaded. Liability in tort which in course of time has become known as ‘strict liability’, ‘absolute liability’,
‘fault liability’ have all gradually grown and with passage of time have become firmly entrenched. ‘Absolute
liability’ or “special use bringing with it increased dangers to others”(Rylands v. Fletcher’) and ‘fault liability’
are different forms which give rise to action in torts. The distance (sic difference) between ‘strict liability’
and ‘fault liability’ arises from presence and absence of mental element. A breach of legal duty wilfully, or
deliberately or even maliciously is negligence emanating from fault liability but injury or damage resulting
without any intention yet due to lack of foresight etc. is strict liability. Since duty is the primary yardstick to
determine the tortious liability its ambit keeps on widening on the touchstone of fairness, practicality of the
situation etc.

 CASE LAW
 Anita Bhandari and Ors. v. Union of India (2005) ACC 780
 In this case, the husband of the petitioner went to bank to deposit the cash and alongside cash box of the
 bank was also being carried inside, the security guard in a haste ended up firing the petitioner’s husband
 thereby killing him. The petitioner claimed that the bank was vicariously accountable for the incident since
 the security guard had committed the conduct while on the job, but the bank argued that it had not given
 the employee permission to fire. The bank was found to be responsible by the court because providing the
 guard with a gun amounted to giving him permission to shoot when he felt it was necessary, even though the
 guard had acted too vigorously in the performance of his duty.

 TORTS OR WRONGS TO PERSONAL SAFETY AND FREEDOM
An action for damages lies in the following kinds of wrongs which are styled as injuries to the person of an
individual:




                                                                                                                175
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Law of Torts

(a) Battery
Any direct application of force to the person of another individual without his consent or lawful justification is a
wrong of battery. To constitute a tort of battery, therefore, two things are necessary:
      (i)   use of force, however, trivial it may be without the plaintiff’s consent, and
   (ii)     without any lawful justification.
Even though the force used is very trivial and does not cause any harm, the wrong is committed. Thus, even to
touch a person in anger or without any lawful justification is battery.
  Example
  A incites a bull to spring upon Z, without Z’s consent. Here, if A intends to cause injury, fear or annoyance
  to Z, he uses criminal force to Z and has thereby committed the act of battery.
Defence
According to the decision of the case Coward v. Baddeley, touching a person with not more than reasonable
force is not battery.
This principle has also been implied in Indian decision in the case Sitaram v. Jaswant Singh 1951 NLJ 477, it was
held that an occupier is entitled to expel a trespasser and if necessary even forcibly remove from his premises.
But the force exercised should be reasonable and not greater than necessary, quite disproportionate to the evil
to be prevented.
(b) Assault
Assault is any act of the defendant which directly causes the plaintiff immediately to apprehend a contact with
his person. Thus, when the defendant by his act creates an apprehension in the mind of the plaintiff that he
is going to commit battery against him, the tort of assault is committed. The law of assault is substantially the
same as that of battery except that apprehension of contact, not the contact itself has to be established. Usually
when there is a battery, there will also be assault, but not for instance, when a person is hit from behind. To
point a loaded gun at the plaintiff, or to shake fist under his nose, or to curse him in a threatening manner, or to
aim a blow at him which is intercepted, or to surround him with a display of force is to assault him clearly if the
defendant by his act intends to commit a battery and the plaintiff apprehends it, is an assault.
  Example
  A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that A is
  about to strike Z. A has committed an assault.

(c) Bodily Harm                                                               Question: When the defendant by his
                                                                              act creates an apprehension in the
A wilful act (or statement) of defendant, calculated to cause physical
                                                                              mind of the plaintiff that he is going
harm to the plaintiff and in fact causing physical harm to him, is a tort.
                                                                              to commit battery against him. He
  Example                                                                     commits ……………………………..
  Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z’s horses, and thereby causes           Options: (A) Attempt to Battery
  them to quicken their pace. Here A has caused change of
                                                                              (B) Assault
  motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion.
  A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done this without             (C) Slander
  Z’s consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may
                                                                              (D) Defamation
  thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to
  Z with an intention to cause bodily harm.                                   Answer: (B)


176
Law of Torts                                                                                              LESSON 5

(d) False Imprisonment
False imprisonment consists in the imposition of a total restraint for some period, however short, upon the
liberty of another, without sufficient lawful justification. It means unauthorized restraint on a person’s body. What
happens in false imprisonment is that a person is confined within certain limits so that he cannot move about
and so his personal liberty is infringed. It is a serious violation of a person’s right and liberty whether being
confined within the four walls or by being prevented from leaving place where he is. If a man is restrained, by a
threat of force from leaving his own house or an open field there is false imprisonment.
   Example
   A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in, Z is thus prevented from proceeding in any direction
   beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines Z thereby making false imprisonment.
(e) Malicious Prosecution
Malicious prosecution consists in instigating judicial proceedings (usually criminal) against another, maliciously
and without reasonable and probable cause, which terminate in favour of that other and which results in damage
to his reputation, personal freedom or property.
The following are the essential elements of this tort:
    (i)    There must have been a prosecution of the plaintiff by the defendant.
   (ii)    There must have been want of reasonable and probable cause for that prosecution.
   (iii)   The defendant must have acted maliciously (i.e. with an improper motive and not to further the end of
           justice).
   (iv)    The plaintiff must have suffered damages as a result of the prosecution.
   (v)     The prosecution must have terminated in favour of the plaintiff.
To be actionable, the proceedings must have been instigated actually by the defendant. If he merely states the
fact as he believes them to a policeman or a magistrate he is not responsible for any proceedings which might
ensue as a result of action by such policeman or magistrate on his own initiative.
   Example
   A had a grudge against B. A falsely implicated B for theft. The prosecution was launched against the
   plaintiff on the basis of a False report made by the B.. The court subsequently acquitted A after finding
   that the allegation was false. After the acquittal A filed a suit for recovery of damages for his malicious
   prosecution.
   In this case an action for malicious prosecution may be initiated.

(f) Nervous Shock
This branch of law is comparatively of recent origin. It provides relief when a person may get physical injury
not by an impact, e.g., by stick, bullet or sword but merely by the nervous shock through what he has seen or
heard. Causing of nervous shock itself is not enough to make it an actionable tort, some injury or illness must
take place as a result of the emotional disturbance, fear or sorrow.
   Example
   A negligently drove the carriage onto the railway tracks while the train was on the verge of crossing the
   place and by this accident there was a lady received a nervous shock which leads to bad impact on her
   health. A would be liable for damages for the consequences of the nervous shock.


                                                                                                                177
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Law of Torts

(g) Defamation
Defamation is an attack on the reputation of a person. It means that something is said or done by a person
which affects the reputation of another. It is defined as follows:
  “Defamation is the publication of a statement which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right thinking
  members of society generally; or which tends to make them shun or avoid that person.”
Defamation may be classified into two heads: Libel and Slander. Libel is a representation made in some
permanent form, e.g. written words, pictures, caricatures, cinema films, effigy, statue and recorded words.
In a cinema films both the photographic part of it and the speech which is synchronized with it amount to
tort.
Slander is the publication of a defamatory statement in a transient form; statement of temporary nature such as
spoken words, or gestures.
Generally, the punishment for libel is more severe than for slander. Defamation is tort as well as a crime in India.
In India both libel and slander are treated as a crime. Section 356 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
recognizes both libel and slander as an offence. However, torts in criminal law are stricter than in law of tort.

  Example
  A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B’s watch.
  This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
  A newspaper publishes the photo of Mr X and Miss Y together stating their engagement has been
  announced. Mrs A, wife of X filed a suit for defamation against the newspaper company. She was entitled
  for compensation.

(h) Negligence
Negligence means inadvertence or carelessness. Negligence refers to the situation when a person might
be innocent but has failed to act in reasonable manner. Negligence has become an independent tort with
the changes in technology and regulatory environment. Negligence in treatment of patients is an important
example of Tort of Negligence. Negligence has been defined by Winfield “Negligence as a tort is the
breach of a legal duty to take care which results in damage, undesired by the defendant, to the plaintiff.
The Consumer Protection Act has also been developed and provides for the unliquidated damages in
cases of Negligence.
Following the ruling of the Supreme Court in the landmark judgement of Indian Medical Association v. V.P.
Shantha & Ors., services rendered by medical practitioners were brought under the ambit of Section 2(1)(o) of
the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 i.e. medical treatment was to be considered to be a service and accordingly,
medical practitioners could be liable for deficiency of service.
As per the decision of Poonam Verma vs. Ashwin Patel & Ors 1996 AIR 2111, 1996 SCC (4) 332, the definition of
negligence involves the following constituents:
   (1)   a legal duty to exercise due care;
   (2)   breach of the duty; and
   (3)   consequential damages.




178
Law of Torts                                                                                            LESSON 5

 CASE LAW
 Poonam Verma vs. Ashwin Patel & Ors 1996 AIR 2111, 1996 SCC (4) 332
 The court was of the opinion that Respondent No.1, having practised in Allopathy, without being qualified
 in that system, was guilty of Negligence per se and, therefore, the appeal against him has to be allowed
 in consonance with the maxim Sic Utere tuo ut alienum non loedas (a person is held liable at law for the
 consequences of his negligence)…
 The court also observed that if a person practices medicine without possessing either the requisite
 qualification or enrollment under the Act on any State Medical Register, he becomes liable to be punished
 with imprisonment or fine or both.
 This matter has earlier been raised before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.

 LIABILITY OF A CORPORATE ENTITY/COMPANY IN TORTS
Corporates contributes significantly in the growth and economic activities of any country. The quantum
of business companies are engaged in are comparably complex than the proprietors. Therefore, the
companies are exposed to the risk under Law of Torts. However, the companies are not natural persons
therefore, liability has to be fastened after considering the lifting of corporate veil. In general, the companies
are responsible for the wrongs committed by the employees. The liabilities of the companies are fastened
on the basis of principle in legal maxim “Qui facet alium facet per se” which means He who acts through
another, acts through himself.

 CASE LAW
 Union Carbide Corporation vs. Union of India 1987 AIR 1086, 1987 SCR (1) 819
 On the night intervening 2nd and 3rd of December 1984 there occurred at Bhopal in the State of Madhya
 Pradesh in India the worst and the most tragic industrial disaster known to mankind. There was a massive
 escape of a night noxious and abnormally dangerous gas called Methyl Isocyanate (hereinafter called
 ‘MIC’). Thousands of persons sustained serious, and permanent injuries including acute respiratory distress
 syndrome, ocular and gastro-intestinal injuries and pain, suffering and mental distress. Court upheld the No
 Fault Liability or Absolute Liability Rule. Court stated –
 “where an enterprise is engaged in a hazardous or inherently dangerous activity and harm results to anyone
 on account of an accident in the operation of such hazardous or inherently dangerous activity resulting, for
 example, in escape of toxic gas the enterprise is strictly and absolutely liable to compensate all those who
 are affected by the accident and such liability is not subject to any of the exceptions which operate vis-a-vis
 the tortious principle of strict liability under the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher”

 Consumer Protection Act and liabilities of torts
The Consumer Protection Act has widened the scope and provides more protection to the consumer as compared
to Old Act which can be seen from the definition of the term ‘Consumer’ and ‘Unfair Trade Practice’. The New Act
has introduced the new concept of unfair contracts which includes those contracts whose terms and conditions
are in favour of the manufacturer or service provider and are against the interest of the consumer. This concept
would help to keep check on the business including banks and e-commerce sites that take advantage of their
dominance in the market. The other significant addition that has taken place in 2019 is establishment of Central
Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA) to regulate, protect and enforce the interest of the consumer and matters
related to unfair trade practice.

                                                                                                              179
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Law of Torts

Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Government of India, in exercise of the powers
conferred has enacted the various rules including Consumer Protection (E-Commerce) Rules, 2020.

 CASE LAW

 Branch Manager, Indigo Airlines and Anr. v. Kalpana Rani Debbarma and ors
 The Complainants/respondents were the family members and were returning from Kolkata to Agartala
 through the Indigo Airlines. Boarding passes were issued to the complainants. The Airlines left all the
 complainants at Kolkata Airport without informing them despite all the Complainants being the Airport
 premises. A written complaint was lodged at Indigo Office at Kolkata Airport but the office staff as well
 as the Airport staff at their counter did not accept the Complaint Application and forcibly snatched away
 their boarding passes and further did not pay heed to their request for making alternate arrangements
 for their flight to Agartala. The Complainant Approached the District Forum and was awarded with the
 compensation. State forum also enhanced the compensation. Aggrieved by the decision, the Indigo
 Arline’s filed this Revision Petition contended that the Airport Manager has stated that there were many
 announcements at regular intervals and that the Indigo Airlines is not responsible if the passengers did
 not report at the gate on time.
 The NCDRC held that Indigo Airlines not only forcibly taking the boarding passes from the Complainants, no
 effort was made by the Airline to compensate them by arranging for their travel in the next scheduled flight
 to Agartala. It is not in dispute that the Complainants were put to lot of mental agony and inconvenience as
 they had to stay in a hotel for two days. The NCDRC dismissed the Revision Petitions with cost of Rs. 20,000/-
 to be paid to Complainants.

According to the decision in a case Bolitho v. City and Hackney Health Authority, the factors which have to be
assessed in medical negligence are:
      1.   Whether the medical practitioner acted as per a practice accepted by a competent medical practitioner.
   2.      If no, if the deviation from the norm can be justified as being reasonable
It must be noted that the liability of the medical practitioner is three-fold: liability under the Consumer Protection
Act, 1986 for payment of damages; civil liability for tort of negligence where the provisions of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 do not apply; or criminal proceedings under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
According to Statement and Objects for the law relating to consumer protection, the emergence of global supply
chains, rise in international trade and the rapid development of e-commerce have led to new delivery systems
for goods and services and have provided new options and opportunities for consumers. Equally, this has
rendered the consumer vulnerable to new forms of unfair trade and unethical business practices. Misleading
advertisements, tele-marketing, multi-level marketing, direct selling and e-commerce pose new challenges
to consumer protection and will require appropriate and swift executive interventions to prevent consumer
detriment. Therefore, it has become inevitable to amend the Act to address the myriad and constantly emerging
vulnerabilities of the consumers.
On analysis of the cases and object of the Consumer Protection Act, it can be said that the complaints under
the Consumer Protection are in the nature that may be covered under Law of Torts in absence of Law relating
to Consumer protections.




180
Law of Torts                                                                                               LESSON 5

 REMEDIES IN TORTS




 Judicial Remedies
Three types of judicial remedies are available to the plaintiff in an action for tort namely:
    (i)    Damages,
   (ii)    Injunction, and
   (iii)   Specific Restitution of Property.
(i) Damages
When a plaintiff’s right is violated by the defendant, the court will grant the plaintiff damages, which are
compensation for such infringement of the right for the loss they have suffered. Only those damages can be
recovered which are directly the result of the act of defendant. It is based on the legal maxim, In jure non remota
causa sed proxima spectator which means law considers the direct or immediate cause and not the remote one.
Damages are the primary judicial remedy served in torts.
(ii) Injunction
Injunction is an order of the Court redirecting commission, omission or amendments to an act. It orders a person
to do an act, to not to do an act or correct his wrongful act. It is done entirely upon the discretion of the Court.
It can be prohibitory, mandatory, interim or perpetual in nature. Rule 1 Order 39 of Civil Procedure Code 1908
provides for the Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted. Injunctions can also be granted under
Specific Relief Act, 1963.
(iii) Specific Restitution of Property
This is the third kind of judicial remedy in which a court may direct for in case of any breach of rights. Restitution
is the process of returning property to its rightful owner. A person is entitled to the restitution of his property
when it has been unfairly taken away from him. Wrongly dispossession of certain property invokes this remedy.
For example, in case of immovable property, plaintiff may bring an action for restitution under Section 6 of
Specific Relief Act, 1963.

                                                                                                                 181
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Law of Torts

 Extra Judicial Remedies
In certain cases it is lawful to redress one’s injuries by means of self help without recourse to the court. These
remedies are:
  (a)    Self Defence
		 It is lawful for any person to use reasonable forces to protect himself, or any other person against any
   unlawful use of force.
		Example
		X seeks a restraining order against F due to stalking, fearing injuries. This recourse is a part of self
  defence.
  (b)    Prevention of Trespass
		 An occupier of land or any person with his authority may use reasonable force to prevent trespassers
   entering or to eject them but the force should be reasonable for the purpose.
		Example
		A uses fence to avoid people from entering his personal garden. The fencing will be taken as
  reasonable force to prevent trespass.
   (c)   Re-entry on Land
		 A person wrongfully disposed of land may retake possession of land if he can do so in a peaceful and
   reasonable manner.
		Example
		X trespasses into B’s property, his home. B has the right to use reasonable force to remove him from
  his property and re-enter himself.
  (d)    Re-caption of Goods
		 It is neither a crime nor a tort for a person entitled to possession of a chattel to take it either peacefully
   or by the use of a reasonable force from one who has wrongly taken it or wrongfully detained it.
		Example
		 A wrongfully acquires the possession of B’s watch, B is entitled to use reasonable force to get it back
   from A. only reasonable force may be used.
  (e)    Abatement of Nuisance
		       The occupier of land may lawfully abate (i.e. terminate by his own act), any nuisance injuriously affecting
         it. Thus, he may cut overhanging branches as spreading
                                                                          Question: Which of the following is
         roots from his neighbour’s trees, but (i) upon giving notice;
                                                                          not an Extra Judicial Remedy of law
         (ii) by choosing the least mischievous method; (iii) avoiding
                                                                          of Torts.
         unnecessary damage.
                                                                          Options: (A) Abatement of Nuisance
         Example
                                                                          (B) Prevention of Trespass
         X and Y are neighbors. Branches of a tree growing
         in X’s garden enter B’s personal pathway from over               (C) Injunction
         the wall. After giving due notice to X, Y cuts the
                                                                          (D) Self Defence
         branches as they were causing him nuisance. Y is
         entitled to do so.                                               Answer: (C)


182
Law of Torts                                                                                              LESSON 5

   (f)    Distress Damage Feasant
		        An occupier may lawfully seize any cattle or any chattel which are unlawfully on his land doing damage
          there and detain them until compensation is paid for the damage. The right is known as that of distress
          damage feasant-to distrain things which are doing damage.
		Example
		 C’s cattle wrongfully move to D’s property and spoil his crops, the D is entitled to take possession of
   the cattle until he is compensated for the loss suffered by him.



                                                   LESSON ROUND-UP

   l Tort means wrong. But every wrong or wrongful act is not a tort. Tort is really a kind of civil wrong as
         opposed to criminal wrong. Wrongs, in law, are either public or private.
   l A tort consists of some act or omission done by the defendant (tortfeasor) whereby he has without just
         cause or excuse caused some harm to plaintiff. To constitute a tort, there must be: (i) a wrongful act or
         omission of the defendant; (ii) the wrongful act must result in causing legal damage to another; and (iii)
         the wrongful act must be of such a nature as to give rise to a legal remedy.
   l Tortious Liabilities may be of Four types (a) Liability against Civil Wrong(In general) (b) Strict or Absolute
         Liability, (c) Vicarious Liability and (d) Vicarious Liability of the State.
   l An action for damages lies in the following kinds of wrongs which are styled as injuries to the person of
         an individual:
               o    Battery
               o    Assault
               o    Bodily harm
               o    False imprisonment

               o    Malicious prosecution

               o    Nervous shock

               o    Defamation

               o    Negligence

   l Remedies in tort are of two type judicial remedies and extra judicial remedies. Three types of judicial
         remedies are available to the plaintiff in an action for torts are:

             (i)    Damages,

             (ii)   Injunction, and

            (iii)   Specific Restitution of Property.

   l Extra judicial remedies are:

             (i)    Self Defence,

             (ii)   Prevention of Trespass,


                                                                                                                183
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                    Law of Torts


           (iii)   Re-entry on Land,
           (iv)    Re-caption of Goods,
            (v)    Abatement of Nuisance and
           (vi)    Distress Damage Feasant
   l The liablities of the companies are fastened on the bais of the principle in the lega maxim “Qui Facet
       alium Fact Per Se”.


                                                    GLOSSARY

Right in rem: Right against the public.
Right in personem : Right against the individual.
Damnum sine injuria: Damages without legal injury.
Injuria sine damnum: Legal injury without damage.
Strict liability: No fault liability.
Vicarious liability: Liability for the act of other in a case of relationship of Master-Servant and alike.
Qui facit per alium facit per se : He who acts through another is acting himself, so that the act of the agent is
the act of the principal.
Respondeat Superior : Let the principal be liable.



                                                TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)

  1. What are the general conditions of liability for a tort?

  2. Distinguish between Damnum Sine Injuria and Injuria Sine Damnum.

  3. Discuss the types of tortuous liability.

  4. Explain the rule of Strict Liability or Absolute liability with the help of case Ryland v. Fletcher.
  5. Explain Vicarious Liability with the help of examples.

  6. State the conditions where employer is liable for the acts of Independent Contractor.

  7. Write a short note on:

           (a)     Battery

           (b)     Assault

           (c)     Malicious Prosecution

  8. P is an owner of the shop and Q is the employee. P asks Q to destroy certain article since they were
     found to be unfit for consumption. Q instead of destroying them, sold them off and as a result A fell
     gravely ill and sued P for the damages. Examine the liability of P along with cases laws.


184
Law of Torts                                                                                          LESSON 5

  9. XYZ Limited is a company engaged in the business of manufacturing of Sun glasses. It has stored 1000
     litres of transparent spirit which is dangerous, if consumed by humans. A with the intent to committing
     theft, entered into the property of XYZ Limited. After entering into the premises, he changed his mind
     and dropped the idea of theft and decided to go back. While leaving the premises, he saw the spirit and
     drank one glass out of it, misconceiving it with water. He had to hospitalize for 6 Months due to this. A
     intends to claim damages under Law of Torts.

 		 Advice ‘A’ the chance of his succeeding under Law of Torts in this case.

  10. An autonomous body was entrusted with the duty of constructions of dams. It constructed a Dam near
      the property of XYZ Limited. XYZ requested the autonomous body to change the location of the dam on
      ground of ancipated loss to its property due the dam. The request of the company was not acceded to.
      The overflow of the water caused a loss to the valuable property of the company. The company intends
      to claim damages.

 		 Advice the company in the light with the decided case ‘Jay Laxmi Salt Works (P) Ltd. v. State of
    Gujarat’.

  11. A disaster occurred in a cricket stadium. Security agency was held responsible for allowing large number
      of spectators. The scenes were boroacasted live on television. The viewers of the match on television
      brought the claims against the defendant for nervous shock resulting in psychiatric injury.

 		 Discuss the criteria laid down in the case Alcock & Ors. v. Chief Constable of South Yorkshire [1992] AC
    310 House of Lords for secondary victims.


                                        LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l W.V.H. Rogers, Winfield & Jolowicz on Tort (Sweet & Maxwell, 19th edn., 2016)

   l Avtar Singh (Rev.), P.S. Atchuthen Pillai Law of Torts (Eastern Book Company, 9th edn., 2022).

   l Law of Torts
                                                                                               Dr. R. K Bangia
   l Ramaswamy Iyer : The Law of Torts; N.M. Tripathi, Private Ltd., Bombay


                       OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.icsi.edu/cs-journal/

   l https://www.icsi.edu/students/student-company-secretary/




                                                                                                           185
EP-JI&GL   Law of Torts




186
Law relating to Civil Procedure
                                                                                                         Lesson
                                                                                                           LESSON 6
Law relating to Civil Procedure
                                                                                                            6
 KEY CONCEPTS
 n Judgement n Decree n Order n Adjudication n Decree-holder n Judgement- debtor n Acquiesce n Set-off
 n Counter-claim n Temporary Injunction n Interlocutory Orders n Commercial Courts



 Learning Objectives
 To understand:
          Basic definitions and concepts under Code of Civil Procedure
          Structure, Venue and Jurisdiction of Civil Courts
          The doctrine of Res Judicata and sub-judice
          The basics of Institution of Suits
          The stages of institution of civil suits
          The process of issue of summons
          The provisions relating to appeals, reference, review and revisions
          Procedure of institution of summary suits
          The applicability of Commercial Courts Act
          Pre institution mediation under Commercial Courts Act


 Lesson Outline
         Introduction                                              Important stages in Proceedings of a Suit
         Aim and scope of Civil Procedure Code, 1908               Delivery of Summons by Court
          [C.P.C.]                                                  Appeals
         Some important terms                                      Reference, Review and Revision
         Structure of Civil Courts                                 Suits by or Against a Corporation
         Stay of Suit (Doctrine of Res Sub Judice)                 Suits by or against Minors and Lunatics
         Res Judicata                                              Summary Procedure
         Jurisdiction of Courts and Venue of Suits                 Powers of Civil Courts and their Exercise by
         Place of Suing (Territorial)                               Tribunals
         Set-off, Counter-claim and Equitable Set-off              Commercial Courts Act, 2015
         Temporary Injunctions and Interlocutory Orders            Lesson Round-Up
          (Order XXXIX)                                             Glossary
         Detention, Preservation, Inspection etc. of Subject-      Test Yourself
          matter of Suit
                                                                    List of Further Readings and References
         Institution of Suit (Order IV)


                                                                                                                 187
EP-JI&GL                                                                              Law relating to Civil Procedure


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 “Civil Procedure” means, body of law concerned with the methods, procedures and practices used in civil
 litigation.
                                                                      - Black’s Law Dictionary 6th Edn.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l   Code of Civil Procedure, 1908

      l   Orders under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908

 INTRODUCTION
The Company Secretary and the Secretarial Staff of a Company need to be familiar with the essentials of the
basic procedural laws of the country. While the specific corporate, industrial, taxation, property and urban
land laws have direct relevance for the efficient performance of the duties and responsibilities of the Company
Secretary, the procedural law provides the parameters for the pursuance of legal action. It is therefore, necessary
to keep in view the requirement of the procedural law. Such law is often termed “adjective law”, in the handling
of corporate business, even in initial stages, which could have legal implications at some subsequent stage.
Such monitoring and guidance is required to be rendered by the Company Secretary and other Secretarial
Executives to the line management for safeguarding the interests of the company. It has been endeavoured in
this Chapter to summarise one of such aspects of Indian procedural laws which have to be referred to by the
Company Secretaries.
 AIM AND SCOPE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE CODE, 1908 [C.P.C.]
The Civil Procedure Code consolidates and amends the law relating to the procedure of the Courts of Civil
jurisdiction. The Code does not affect any special or local laws nor does it supersede any special jurisdiction
or power conferred or any special form of procedure prescribed by or under any other law for the time being in
force. The Code is the general law so that in case of conflict between the Code and the special law the latter
prevails over the former. Where the special law is silent on a particular matter the Code applies, but consistent
with the special enactment.
One of the defining characteristics of Indian judicial system is the time it takes to settle a dispute. While some
of it is because of huge pendency of cases and lack of
infrastructure, the procedural laws like Civil Procedure Code Question: Where a general statute and a
also have a role to play. With the current focus on Ease of specific statute relating to the same subject
Doing Business (EoDB) and ‘enforcement of contract’ being matter cannot be reconciled, which law shall
one of the sub-parameters for the determination of EoDB prevail?
rank, judicial delays has been one of the focus areas of
                                                                   Options: A. General Law B. the special or
judicial reforms. Keeping this in mind the Government came
                                                                   specific statute C. Both shall cease to
up with ‘The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
                                                                   operate
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015’
(Commercial Courts Act, 2015 for short). Section 16 of this Answer: B
new Act has amended CPC in its application to Commercial
Disputes which are covered under the Act.

188
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

 SCHEME OF THE CODE




 The Civil Procedure Code consists of two segments.
 158 Sections form the first segment and the rules
 and orders contained in Schedule I, form the second          Question: How many sections are in Code of
 segment. The object of the Code generally is to              Civil Procedure, 1908?
 create jurisdiction while the rules indicate the mode
                                                              Options: (A) 156 (B) 157 (C) 158 (D) 159
 in which the jurisdiction should be exercised. Thus the
 two parts should be read together, and in case of any        Answer: (C)
 conflict between the body and the rules, the former
 must prevail.

 SOME IMPORTANT TERMS
Cause of Action
“Cause of action” means every fact that it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to support his
right to the judgement of the Court. Under Order 2, Rule 2, of the Civil Procedure Code it means all the essential
facts constituting the rights and its infringement. It means every fact which will be necessary for the plaintiff to
prove, if traversed, in order to support his right to the judgement.

It may also be described as a bundle of essential facts which is necessary for the plaintiff to prove before he
can succeed and is the foundation of suit.

Section 20 of CPC introduces the concept of cause of action. A cause of action in respect of a suit is essentially
its raison d’etre – the factual circumstances which led to the dispute arising between the parties. Section 20(c)
provides jurisdiction to the court which is located in the local limits of where the cause of action, “wholly or
in part”, arises. The phrase “wholly or in part” is an important qualifier. The Supreme Court, in South East Asia
Shipping v. Nav Bharat Enterprises, has held that cause of action is essentially a bundle of facts which led to the
genesis of the dispute, and to the plaintiff obtaining a right in law to approach the court for legal redress. The
cause of action, therefore, necessarily includes an act of the defendant, in the absence of which the suit itself
could not possibly exist. Mentioning the cause of action in pleadings is prerequisite under the CPC, with Order
II Rule 2 and Order VII Rule 1.
Judgement, Decree and Order

Judgement

“Judgement” as defined in Section 2(9) of the Civil Procedure Code means the statement given by the Judge of
the grounds of a decree or order. Thus a judgement must set out the grounds and reasons for the Judge to have
arrived at the decision. In other words, a “judgement” is the decision of a Court of justice upon the respective


                                                                                                                189
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Civil Procedure

rights and claims of the parties to an action in a suit submitted to it for determination (State of Tamilnadu v. S.
Thangaval, AIR (1997) S.C. 2283).

Decree

“Decree” is defined in Section 2(2) of the Code as:

      (i)   the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court expressing it;

   (ii)     conclusively;

  (iii)     determines the rights of the parties;

  (iv)      with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy;

   (v)      in the suit and may be either preliminary (i.e., when further proceedings have to be taken before disposal
            of the suit) or final.
The decree shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint and the determination of any question within
section 144 (Application for restitution) of the Code.
But decree does not include:
   (a)      any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an Order, or
   (b)      any order of dismissal for default.
Essentials of a decree are:
There must be formal expression of adjudication.
There must be a conclusive determination of the rights of parties.
The determination must be with regard to matters in controversy.
The adjudication should have been given in the suit.
According to the explanation to the definition, a decree may be partly preliminary and partly final. A decree
comes into existence as soon as the judgement is pronounced and not on the date when it is sealed and signed.
(Order 20 Rule 7)
A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be completely disposed
of. The preliminary decree is not dependent on the final. On the other hand, final decree is dependent and
subordinate to the preliminary decree, and gives effect to it. The preliminary decree ascertains what is to be
done while the final decree states the result achieved by means of the preliminary decree. If the preliminary
decree is set aside the final decree is automatically superseded.

  Example
  In a matter of suit of possession of an agricultural land (immovable property), A approaches to the Court
  along with the evidence of title he claimed along with claim of mesne profit over the same, and the court
  may -
      1.    Pass a decree ascertaining the possession of the property.
   2.       Give a direction to conduct an enquiry regarding mesne profit.
  Passing of a decree deciding the possession will be final decree, whereas the part wherein the enquiry
  regarding the mesne profit is directed will be a preliminary decree.



190
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                             LESSON 6

Decree-holder
“Decree-holder” means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order capable of execution
has been made. [Section 2(3)]
Thus, a person who is not a party to the suit but in whose favour an order capable of execution is passed is a
decree-holder.
Judgement-debtor
“Judgement-debtor” means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order capable of
execution has been made. [Section 2(10)]
The definition does not include legal representative of a deceased judgement-debtor.

   Example
   Due to negligence of Y, person X suffers some injuries and approaches to the court to claim compensation
   against Y for the same. Court decides the case in favor of X providing him the compensation for the injuries
   inflicted to him due to Y’s negligence.
     l     X will be the decree-holder here
     l     Y will be the judgment debtor

Order
“Order” as set out in Section 2(14) of the Code means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court
which is not a decree.
Appeals from Order
According to Section 104 of the Code, no appeal lies against orders other than what is expressly provided in the
Code or any other law for the time being in force. Under the Code appealable orders are:
    (i)    an order under Section 35A, i.e., for compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims within
           pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court, but only for the limited ground that no order should have been
           made, or that such order should have been made for a lesser amount.
   (ii)    an order under Section 91 or Section 92 refusing leave to institute a suit under Section 91 (Public
           nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public) or Section 92 (alleged breach of trust created
           for public purposes of a charitable or religious nature).
   (iii)   an order under Section 95, i.e., compensation for obtaining arrest attachment or injunction on insufficient
           grounds.
   (iv)    an order under any of the provisions of the Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or detention in
           the civil prison of any person except where such arrest or detention is in execution of a decree.
any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by the rules. No appeal lies from any
order passed in appeal under this section.
In the case of other orders, no appeal lies except where a decree is appealed from, any error, defect or
irregularity in any order affecting the decision of the case which is to be set forth as a ground of objection in the
memorandum of appeal.
A decree, shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint but not any adjudication from which an

                                                                                                                  191
EP-JI&GL                                                                                Law relating to Civil Procedure

appeal lies or any order of dismissal for default. A
                                                                Question: Which of the given is not an essential
preliminary decree decides the rights of parties on
                                                                of Decree?
all or any of the matters in controversy in the suit but
does not completely dispose of the suit. A preliminary          Options: (A) Formal expression of adjudication
decree may be appealed against and does not lose                (B) Adjudication should have been given in a suit
its appellate character by reason of a final decree
having been passed, before the appeal is presented.             (C) It shall be made on the same day of
The Court may, on the application of any party to a             pronouncement of Judgement
suit, pass orders on different applications and any             (D) Conclusive determination of the suit of the
order which is not the final order in a suit is called          parties
an “interlocutory order”. An interlocutory order does
                                                                Answer: (C)
not dispose of the suit but is merely a direction to
procedure. It reserves some questions for further
determination.
The main difference between an order and a decree is that in an adjudication which is a decree appeal lies and
second appeal also lies on the grounds mentioned in Section 100 of CPC. However, no appeal lies from an order
unless it is expressly provided under Section 104 and Order 43 Rule 1. No second appeal in any case lies at all
even in case of appealable orders [Section 104(2)]. A decree conclusively determines the rights and liabilities
of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or
final but this is not the case in order.
A person in whose favour a decree has been passed not only includes a plaintiff but in cases like decree for
specific performance of an agreement executable by either party, also includes a defendant.


 CASE LAW
 Vidyacharan Shukla vs. Khubchand Baghel and Ors. (20.12.1963 - SC) : 1964 AIR 1099

 Court stated that “a decree is a formal expression of adjudication conclusively determining the rights of
 parties with regard to all or any of the controversies in a suit, whereas order is a formal expression of any
 decision of a civil court which is not a decree. Judgment is a statement given by the judge of his grounds in
 respect of a decree or order. Ordinarily judgment and order are engrossed in two separate documents. But
 the fact that both are engrossed in the same document does not deprive the statement of reasons and the
 formal expression of a decision of their character as judgment or order, as the case may be”

 STRUCTURE OF CIVIL COURTS
Section 3 of the Civil Procedure Code lays down that for the purposes of this Code, the District Court is
subordinate to the High Court and every Civil Court of a grade inferior, to that of a District and every Court of
Small Causes is subordinate to the High Court and District Court.

 STAY OF SUIT (DOCTRINE OF RES SUB JUDICE)
Section 10 provides that no Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is also
directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties or between parties
under whom they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, where such suit is pending in the same or
any other Court (in India) having jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court beyond the limits of India
established or continued by the Central Government and having like jurisdiction, or before the Supreme Court.


192
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                               LESSON 6

However, the pendency of a suit in a foreign court does not preclude the Courts in India from trying a suit
founded on the same cause of action.
To prevent Courts of concurrent jurisdiction from simultaneously trying two parallel suits in respect of same
matter in issue, Section 10 is enacted. The purpose is also to avoid conflict of decision. It is really intended to
give effect to the rule of res judicata. The institution of second suit is not barred by Section 10. It merely says that
the trial cannot be proceeded with.
A suit was instituted by the plaintiff company alleging infringement by the defendant company by using trade
name of medicine and selling the same in wrapper and carton of identical design with same colour combination
etc. as that of plaintiff company. A subsequent suit was instituted in different Court by the defendant company
against the plaintiff company with same allegation. The Court held that subsequent suit should be stayed as
simultaneous trial of the suits in different Courts might result in conflicting decisions as issue involved in two
suits was totally identical (M/s. Wings Pharmaceuticals (P) Ltd. and another v. M/s. Swan Pharmaceuticals and
others, AIR 1999 Pat. 96).
Even though if a case is not governed by the provisions of the Section and matters in issue may not be identical,
yet the courts have inherent powers to stay suit on principle analogous to Section 10.
Essential conditions for stay of suits:
    l    The matter must be two suits instituted at different times
    l    The matter in issue in the latter suit should be directly and substantially in issue in the earlier suit
    l    Such suit should be between the same parties
    l    Each earlier suit is still pending either in the same Court or in any other competent Court but not before
         a foreign Court
If these conditions exist, the later suit should be stayed till the disposal of earlier suit, the findings of which
operate as res judicata on the later suit.
For the applicability of Section 10, the two proceedings must be suits, e.g. suit for eviction of tenant in a rent
control statute cannot be sought to be stayed under Section 10 of Civil Procedure Code on the ground that
tenant has earlier filed a suit for specific performance against the landlord on the basis of agreement of sale of
disputed premises in favour of the tenant.
In such a case, it can not be said that the matter in earlier suit for specific performance is directly and substantially
in issue in later suit for eviction. The reason is that a suit for specific performance of contract has got nothing to
do with the question on regarding the relationship of landlord and tenant.
Regarding the inherent powers under Section 151, these would also not be used for staying the eviction suit as
the same would frustrate the very purpose of the legislation. Therefore, invoking the powers of the Court under
this Section, on the facts and circumstances of the case amounts to an abuse of the process of the Court and
there can be no doubt that such a course cannot be said to subserve the ends of the justice (N.P. Tripathi v.
Dayamanti Devi, AIR 1988 Pat. 123 ).

 CASE LAW
 In National Institute of MH & NS v. C.Parameshwara AIR 2005 SC 242, Supreme court stated- the
 fundamental test to attract section 10 is whether on final decision being reached in previous suit, such
 decision would operate as res judicata in subsequent suit.



                                                                                                                    193
EP-JI&GL                                                                               Law relating to Civil Procedure


  Question: Which of the following section of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 provides for Stay of Suits in
  which the matter in issue is also directly and substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between
  the same parties?
  Option: (A) Section 9
  (B) Section 10
  (C) Section 12
  (D) Section 15
  Answer: (B)


 RES JUDICATA
Section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code deals with the doctrine of Res Judicata. According to this provision of no
Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter has been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit
(i.e., suit previously decided) either between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of
them claim, litigating under the same title in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which
such issue has been subsequently raised an finally decided by such Court. It is a pragmatic principle accepted
and provided in law that there must be a limit or end to litigation on the same issues.
The doctrine underlines the general principle that no one shall be twice vexed for the same cause (S.B. Temple
v. V.V.B. Charyulu, (1971) 1 SCJ 215). The doctrine of res judicata prevails over the doctrine of lis pendens where
there is a conflict between the two.
It prevents two different decrees on the same subject. Section 11 says that once a res is judicata, it shall not
be adjudged again. The principle applies to suits in Section 11 of the Code; but even where Section 11 does not
apply, the principle of res judicata has been applied by Courts for the purpose of giving finality to litigation. For
the applicability of the principle of res judicata embodied in Section 11, the following requirements are necessary:
   (1)   The matter directly and substantially in issue in former suit shall also be directly and substantially in
         issue in later suit. The expression “directly and substantially in issue” means an issue alleged by one
         party and denied or admitted by the other either expressly or by necessary implications (Lonakutty v.
         Thomman, AIR 1976 SC 1645).
		 In the matter of taxation for levy of municipal taxes, there is no question of res judicata as each year’s
   assessment is final for that year and does not govern latter years (Municipal Corporation v. Madan
   Mohan, AIR 1976 43)
		       A suit for eviction on reasonable requirement was compromised and the tenant was allowed to continue
         as tenant for the subsequent suit for ejectment on the ground of reasonable requirement, it was found
         that some reasonable requirement had been present during the earlier suit. The second suit was not
         maintainable.
   (2)   The former suit has been decided – former suit means which is decided earlier.
   (3)   The said issue has been heard and finally decided.
		 The issue or the suit itself is heard and finally decided, then it operates as res judicata and not the
   reasons leading to the decision (Mysore State E. Board v. Bangalore W.C. & S. Mills, AIR 1963 SC 1128).
   However, no res judicata operates when the points could not have been raised in earlier suit. (See
   Prafulla Chandra v. Surat Roit AIR 1998 Ori. 41). But when a suit has been decided on merits, and the
   appeal is dismissed on a preliminary point, it amounts to the appeal being heard and finally decided


194
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

         and the decision operates as res judicata (Mukunda Jana v. Kanta Mandal, AIR 1979 NOC 116).
   (4)   Such former suit and the latter are between the same parties or litigation under the same title or persons
         claiming under parties above (Isher Singh v. Sarwan Singh, AIR 1965 SC 948).
In short, this principle applies where an issue which has been raised in a subsequent suit was directly and
substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties and was heard and decided finally. Findings
incidentally recorded do not operate as res judicata (Madhvi Amma Bhawani Amma v. Kunjikutty P.M. Pillai, AIR
2000 SC 2301).
Supreme Court in Gouri Naidu v. Thandrothu Bodemma and others, AIR 1997 SC 808, held that the law is well
settled that even if erroneous, an inter party judgement binds the parties if the court of competent jurisdiction
has decided the lis. Thus, a decision that a gift made by a coparceners is invalid under Hindu Law between
coparceners, binds the parties when the same question is in issue in a subsequent suit between the same
parties for partition.
A consent or compromise decree is not a decision by Court. It is an acceptance of something to which the
parties had agreed. The Court does not decide anything. The compromise decree merely has the seal of the
Court on the agreement of the parties. As such, the principle of res judicata does not generally apply to a
consent or compromise decree. But when the court on the facts proved comes to a conclusion that the parties
intended that the consent decree should have the effect of deciding the question finally, the principle of res
judicata may apply to it.
The rule of res sub judice relates to a matter which is pending judicial enquiry while res judicata relates to a
matter adjudicated upon or a matter on which judgement has been pronounced. Res sub judice bars the trial
of a suit in which the matter directly or substantially is pending adjudication in a previous suit, whereas rule of
res judicata bars the trial of a suit of an issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue has already
been adjudicated upon in a previous suit between the same parties under the same title. Res judicata arises out
of considerations of public policy viz., that there should be an end to litigation on the same matter. Res judicata
presumes conclusively the truth of the former decision and ousts the jurisdiction of the Court to try the case. It is
however essential that the matter directly and substantially in issue must be the same as in the former suit and
not matters collaterally or incidentally in issue.
An application for amendment of a decree is not a ‘suit’ and may be entertained. But if such an application is
heard and finally decided, then it will debar a subsequent application on general principles of law analogous
to res judicata. However, dismissal of a suit for default, where there has been no adjudication on the merits of
the application, will not operate as res judicata. Similarly an application for a review of judgment if refused does
not bar a subsequent suit for the same relief on the same grounds. In the case of conflicting decrees, the last
decree alone is the effective decree which can operate as res judicata.
According to Explanation to the Section, the expression ‘former’ suit has been set out as stated above. The
competence of a Court to decide an issue or suit is to be determined irrespective of any provisions as to a right
of appeal from the decision of such Court. It is stated in Explanation III that the matter must have been alleged
by one party and either denied or admitted expressly or impliedly by the other. Constructive res judicata is the
doctrine which has been provided for in Explanation IV. According to Explanation IV any matter which might or
ought to have been made a ground of defence or attach in such former suit shall be deemed to have been a
matter directly and substantially in issue in such (former) suit.
   Example
   P sues Q for arrears on rent. Q contends that there are no arrears and therefore this suit is baseless and
   false. P’s claim for arrears on rent here is therefore the matter directly and substantially in issue.



                                                                                                                195
EP-JI&GL                                                                              Law relating to Civil Procedure


                     Doctrine of Res Judicata is based on these grounds of public policy

  There should be an end       The parties to a suit should     The time of Court should        It is a rule of
  to litigation.               not be harassed to agitate       not be wasted over the          convenience
                               the same issues or matters       matters that ought to have      and not a rule
                               already decided between          been and should have            of      absolute
                               them                             been decided in the former      justice.
                                                                suit between the parties

Explanation V states that any relief claimed in the plaint but not expressly granted shall be deemed to have
been refused. By Explanation VI it is provided that in the case of a representation suit or class action all persons
interested in any public or private right claimed in common for themselves and others are to be deemed to claim
under the persons so litigating and res judicata shall apply to them.
Explanations VII and VIII have been added by the Amendment Act of 1976. Explanation VII specifically lays down
that the principles of res judicata apply to execution proceedings. The general summarized of res judicata have
been summarized in Explanation VIII. It provides that the decisions of a “Court of limited jurisdiction competent
to decide such issue” operates as res judicata in a subsequent suit though the former Court had no jurisdiction
to try the subsequent suit. The general principle of res judicata is wider in scope than Section 11 which is applied
when a case does not come within four corners of Section 11. However, when the case falls under Section 11 but
the conditions are not fulfilled, the general principles of res judicata cannot be resorted to. The conditions may
be summarized as follows:
Conditions of res judicata:




  Example
  District Court passed an order over a dispute. In this case, the matter cannot be reinstated in District Court
  again due to the principle of Res Judicata. However, it may be brought before Appellate Court as an
  appeal.



196
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                                      LESSON 6

Bar to further suit
Section 12 puts a bar to every suit where a plaintiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in respect
of any particular cause of action. Section comes into force only when a plaintiff is precluded by rules.

 JURISDICTION OF COURTS AND VENUE OF SUITS
Jurisdiction means the authority by which a Court has to decide matters that are brought before it for adjudication.
The limit of this authority is imposed by charter, statute or a commission. If no such limit is imposed or defined,
the jurisdiction is said to be unlimited.
A limitation on jurisdiction of a Civil Court may be of four kinds. These are as follows:-

   Jurisdiction over the             Place of suing or           Jurisdiction over persons         Pecuniary jurisdiction
      subject matter               territorial jurisdiction                                       depending on pecuniary
                                                                                                     value of the suit

 The jurisdiction to try certain   A territorial limit of        All persons of whatever        Section 6 of the Code of
 matters by certain Court is       jurisdiction for each         nationality are subject        Civil Procedure, 1908 deals
 limited by statute; Example:      court is fixed by the         to the jurisdiction of the     with Pecuniary jurisdiction
 a small cause court can try       Government. Thus, it          Civil Courts of the country    and lays down that save
 suits for money due under         can try matters falling       except a foreign State, its    in so far as is otherwise
 a promissory note or a suit       within the territorial        ruler or its representative    expressly provided Courts
 for price of work done.           limits of its jurisdiction.   except with the consent        shall only have jurisdiction
                                                                 of Central Government.         over suits the amount or
                                                                                                value of which does not
                                                                                                exceed         the pecuniary
                                                                                                limits of any of its ordinary
                                                                                                jurisdiction. There is no limit
                                                                                                on pecuniary jurisdiction
                                                                                                of High Courts and District
                                                                                                Courts.

Jurisdiction may be further classified into following categories depending upon their powers:

          Original Jurisdiction                      Appellate Jurisdiction                    Criminal and appellate
                                                                                                    Jurisdiction

     A Court tries and decides                  A Court hears appeals                   The Supreme Court, the
     suits filed before it.                     against decisions or decrees            High Courts and the District
                                                passed     by    sub-ordinate           Courts have both original
                                                Courts.                                 and appellate jurisdiction in
                                                                                        various matters.

Courts to try all civil suits unless barred : Section 9 of Civil Procedure Code states that the Courts shall
have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognisance is either expressly
or impliedly barred. The explanation appended to Section 9 provides that a suit in which the right to property
or to an office is contested is a suit of civil nature, notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the
decision on questions as to religious rites or ceremonies.
Civil Courts have jurisdiction to entertain a suit of civil nature unless barred by law. Every person has an inherent
right to bring a suit of a civil nature. Civil Court has jurisdiction to decide the question of its jurisdiction although


                                                                                                                           197
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Civil Procedure

as a result of the enquiry it may be found that it has no jurisdiction over the matter. Jurisdiction depends not on
the truth or falsehood of facts, but upon their nature. Jurisdiction is determinable at the commencement not at
the conclusion of the inquiry [Rex v. Boltan, (1841) 1 QB 66, 74].
A suit is expressly barred if a legislation expressly says so and it is impliedly barred if a statute creates new
right or liability and prescribes a particular tribunal or forum for its assertion. When a right is created by a statute
and a special tribunal or forum is provided for its assertion and enforcement, the ordinary Civil Court would
have no jurisdiction to entertain such disputes.

  Question: Which of the given is not a criteria for determining jurisdiction of the courts under Code of Civil
  Procedure, 1908?
  Options: (A) Subject Matter
  (B) Territorial Jurisdiction
  (C) Pecuniary Jurisdictions
  (D) Jurisdiction of Police station
  Answer: (D)

  Example
  Pecuniary jurisdictions of the Courts may be decided on the basis of amounts involved in each case. This
  may be understood with the help of below example.
  Suits amounting to –
      l   Rs. 1 Lakh – Rs. 3 Lakh may lie with Civil Judge in a particular state
      l   Rs. 3 Lakh – Rs. 2 crore may lie with District Court in a particular state
      l   Above Rs. 2 crore may lie with High Court in a certain state


 CASE LAW
 In A.R. Antulay vs. R.S. Nayak and Ors. (29.04.1988 - SC) : 1988 AIR 1531
 The issue was whether the a case triable by Special Judge as provided under Criminal Law Amendment
 Act, 1952 could be transferred to High Court or not. It was held that Court by its directions cannot confer
 jurisdiction to High Court of Bombay to try any case by itself for which it does not possess such jurisdiction.
 The power to create or enlarge jurisdiction is legislative in character, so also the power to confer a right of
 appeal or to take away a right of appeal. Parliament alone can do it by law and no Court, whether superior
 or inferior or both combined can enlarge the jurisdiction of a Court or divest a person of his rights of revision
 and appeal.

 PLACE OF SUING (TERRITORIAL)
Section 15 lays down that every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it.
According to Section 16, subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law, the following suits
(relating to property) shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is
situated:



198
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                                 LESSON 6

   (a)    for recovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits;
   (b)    for partition of immovable property;
   (c)    for foreclosure of sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage or charge upon immovable property;
   (d)    for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property;
   (e)    for compensation for wrong to immovable property;
   (f)    for the recovery of movable property actually distraint or attachment.
It has also been provided by a proviso that where relief could be obtained through personal obedience of the
defendant such suit to obtain relief for compensation or respecting immovable property can be instituted either
in a local Court within whose local limits of jurisdiction the property is situated or in the Court within whose local
limits of jurisdiction the defendant voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.
According to the Explanation, “property” means property situated in India.
Where immovable property is situated within the jurisdiction of different Courts: Where the jurisdiction for a suit
is to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to immovable property situated within the local limits of
jurisdiction of different Courts, the suit may be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the
property is situated provided the value of the entire claim is cognizable by such Court. (Section 17)
Where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts are uncertain: Where jurisdiction is alleged to be uncertain as within
the local limits of the jurisdiction of which of two or more Courts, any immovable property is situated, then any
of the said Courts may proceed to entertain the suit after having recorded a statement to the effect that it is
satisfied that there is ground for such alleged uncertainty. (Section 18)
Where wrong done to the person or to movable property: Where a suit is for compensation for wrong done
to the person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the jurisdiction of one
Court and the defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of
the jurisdiction of another Court, the suit may be instituted at the option of the plaintiff in either of the Courts.
(Section 19)
Other suits: Subject to the limitations provided by Sections 15, 16, 18 and 19, every suit shall be instituted in a
Court within local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant, or each of the defendants (where there are more
than one defendant) actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain or
where such defendants actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain,
provided either the leave of the Court is obtained or the defendant(s) who do not reside or carry on business or
personally work for gain at such place acquiesce in such institution or, where the cause of action, wholly or in
part, arises. (Section 20).
In the case of a body corporate or company it shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office
in India, or in case of any cause of action arising at any other place, if it has a subordinate office, at such place.
Where there might be two or more competent courts which could entertain a suit consequent upon a part of cause
of action having arisen therewith, if the parties to the contract agreed to vest jurisdiction in one such court to try the
dispute such an agreement would be valid. (Angile Insulations v. Davy Ashmore India Ltd., (1995) 3 SCALE 203).

 SET-OFF, COUNTER-CLAIM AND EQUITABLE SET-OFF

Set-off
Order VIII, Rule 6 deals with set-off which is a reciprocal acquittal of debts between the plaintiff and defendant.
It has the effect of extinguishing the plaintiff’s claim to the extent of the amount claimed by the defendant as a
counter claim.


                                                                                                                      199
EP-JI&GL                                                                                Law relating to Civil Procedure

Under Order VIII Rule 6 where in a suit for the recovery of money the defendant claims to set off against the
plaintiff’s demand any ascertained sum of money legally recoverable by him from the plaintiff not exceeding
the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court and where both parties fill the same character as in the plaintiff’s suit,
the defendant may, at the first hearing of the suit, but not afterwards unless permitted by the Court, present a
written statement containing the particulars of the debt sought to be set-off.

Effect of Set-off
Under clause (2) the written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross-suit so as to enable
the Court to pronounce a final judgement in respect both of the original claim and of the set-off, but this shall
not affect the lien, upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to him under the
decree.

Counter-claim
A defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right of pleading a set-off under Rule 6, set up by way of counter-
claim against the claim of the plaintiff, any right or claim in respect of a cause of action accruing to the defendant
against the plaintiff either before or after the filing of the suit but before the defendant has delivered his defence
or before the time limited for delivering his defence has expired, whether such counter-claim is in the nature of
claim for damages or not. Such counter-claim must be within the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court. (Order VIII,
Rule 6A)

Equitable set-off
Sometimes, the defendant is permitted to claim set-off in respect of an unascertained sum of money where the
claim arises out of the same transaction, or transactions which can be considered as one transaction, or where
there is knowledge on both sides of an existing debt due to one party and a credit by the other party found on
and trusting to such debt as a means of discharging it. Generally the suits emerge from cross-demands in the
same transaction and this doctrine is intended to save the defendant from having to take recourse to a separate
cross-suit.
In India distinction between legal and equitable set-off is recognised. Order VIII, Rule 6 contains provisions as
to legal set-off. Order VIII, Rule 6A recognises the counter-claim by the defendant. Still an equitable set-off can
be claimed independently of the Code.


 CASE LAW
 Jitendra Kumar Khan and Ors. vs. The Peerless General Finance and Investment Company Limited and Ors.
 (07.08.2013 - SC) : 2013 ALL SCR 3259

 The court stated that equitable set-off is different from legal set-off. Equitable set-off is based on principle of
 justice, equity and good conscience. It was stated:

 “that equitable set-off is different than the legal set-off; that it is independent of the provisions of the Code
 of Civil Procedure; that the mutual debts and credits or cross-demands must have arisen out of the same
 transaction or to be connected in the nature and circumstances; that such a plea is raised not as a matter of
 right; and that it is the discretion of the court to entertain and allow such a plea or not.”




200
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                             LESSON 6

 TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS (ORDER XXXIX)

Temporary injunction
The Court may grant temporary injunction to restrain any such act (as set out below) or make such other order
for the purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation or sale or removal or disposition
of the property or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any
property in dispute in the suit; where it is proved by affidavit or otherwise:
    a)        that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by any party
              to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
    b)        the defendant threatens, or intends to remove or dispose of his property with a view to defrauding his
              creditors, or
    c)        that the defendant threatens to dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in
              relation to any property in dispute in the suit.
It would be necessary for the plaintiff to satisfy the Court that substantial and irreparable harm or injury would
be suffered by him if such temporary injunction (till the disposal of the suit) is not granted and that such loss or
damage or harm cannot be compensated by damages.

Interlocutory orders
Power to order interim sale
The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit order the sale, by any person named in such order, and
in such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any movable property, being the subject-matter of such suit,
or attached before judgement in such suit, which is subject to speedy and natural decay, or which for any other
just and sufficient cause it may be desirable to be sold at once. (Rule 6)

 CASE LAW
 Dalpat Kumar and Ors. vs. Prahlad Singh and Ors. (16.12.1991 - SC) : AIR 1993 SC 276 Court held that three
 main requirements are to be satisfied while granting temporary injunction-
         1.    There should be Prima facie case
     2.        If injunction not granted, it would lead to irreparable loss and,
      3.       Balance of convenience
 It was stated by the Court that :
    “satisfaction that there is a prima facie case by itself is not sufficient to grant injunction. The Court further
    has to satisfy that non-interference by the Court would result in “irreparable injury” to the party seeking
    relief and that there is no other remedy available to the party except one to grant injunction and he needs
    protection from the consequences of apprehended injury or dispossession. Irreparable injury. The third
    condition also is that “the balance of convenience” must be in favor of granting injunction.


   Example
   X file a suit to recover possession of a movable property against Y. During the hearing, X alleged that Y
   may dispose of the property to his benefit. Court may pass interlocutory order to deposit the same in safe
   custody as he may deem fit.


                                                                                                                  201
EP-JI&GL                                                                              Law relating to Civil Procedure

 DETENTION, PRESERVATION, INSPECTION ETC. OF SUBJECT-MATTER OF SUIT
The Court may, on application of any party to a suit, and on such terms as it thinks fit:
   (a)   make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection of any property which is the subject-matter
         of such suit or as to which any question may arise therein;
   (b)   for all or any of the purposes as in (a) above, authorise any person to enter upon or into any land or
         building in the possession of any other party to such suit; and
   (c)   for all or any of the purposes as in (a) above authorise any samples to be taken, or any observation
         to be made or experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or expedient for the purpose of
         obtaining full information or evidence. (Rule 7)
Application for such order to be after notice –
   (1)   An application by the plaintiff for an order under Rule 6 or Rule 7 may be made at any time after
         institution of the suit.
   (2)   An application by the defendant for such an order may be made at any time after appearance.
   (3)   Before making an order under Rule 6 or Rule 7 on an application made for the purpose, the Court shall,
         except where it appears that the object of making such order would be defeated by the delay, direct
         notice thereof to be given to the opposite party.

Deposit of money etc. in the Court
Where the subject-matter of a suit is money or some other thing capable of delivery, and any party thereto
admits that he holds such money or other thing as a trustee for another party, or that it belongs or is due to
another party, the Court may order the same to be deposited in Court or delivered to such last-named party,
with or without security subject to further direction of the Court. [Rule (10)]
In any suit for restraining the defendant from committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind, whether
compensation is claimed or not, the plaintiff may, at any time after the commencement of the suit, and either
before or after judgement, apply to the court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from committing
the breach of contract or injury complained of, or any breach of contract or injury of a like nature arising out of
the same contract or relating to the same property or right. The Court may grant an injunction on such terms
including keeping of an account and furnishing security etc. as it may think fit.
The grant of a temporary injunction is a matter of discretion of Courts. Such injunction may be granted if the
Court finds that there is a substantial question to be investigated and that matter should be preserved in status
until final disposal of that question. In granting injunction, the Court has to see the balance of convenience
and inconvenience of both sides. If the object of granting a temporary injunction is liable to be defeated by the
delay, the Court while passing an order granting interim or temporary injunction, has a notice served on the
defendant to show cause why the order granting the interim injunction should not be confirmed. On hearing
the objection of the defendant to such injunction, the Court either confirms the interim injunction or cancels the
order of injunction.

 INSTITUTION OF SUIT (ORDER IV)
Suit ordinarily is a civil action started by presenting a plaint in duplicate to the Court containing concise
statement of the material facts, on which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence. In every plaint the
facts must be proved by an affidavit.




202
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                             LESSON 6

The main essentials of the suit are –




The plaint consists of a heading and title, the body of plaint and the relief(s) claimed. Every suit shall
be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it, as to be determined with regard to the
subject matter being either immovable or movable property or to the place of abode or of business or the
defendant. A suit for a tort may be brought either where the wrong was committed or where the defendant
resides or carries on business. A suit for a breach of contract may be instituted in a Court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant or each of the defendants (where there are more than one) at
the time of commencement of the suit actually or voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain, or where any of the defendants so resides or works for gain or carries on business provided
the leave of the Court is given or that the other defendants acquiesce in such situation. A suit for breach
of contract may also be instituted where the cause of action arises that is, where the contract was made
or where the breach was committed. A suit for recovery of immovable property can be instituted in a Court
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property or any property of it is situate. Claim for recovery
of any immovable property could be for:
   (a)   mesne profits or arrears of rent;
   (b)   damages for breach of contract under which the property or any part thereof is held; and
   (c)   claims in which the relief sought is based on the same cause of action.
Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of or intentionally relinquishes any portion of his claim, he shall not
afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or relinquished.
Regarding other suits, they shall be instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction:
   (a)   the defendant or each of the defendants if there are more than one at the time of the commencement
         of the suit actually or voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain; or
   (b)   any of the defendants, where there are more than one at the time of the commencement of the suit,
         actually or voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such
         case either the leave of the Court is given or the defendants who do not reside or carry on business, or
         personally work for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
   (c)   the cause of action wholly or in part arises.
‘Necessary party’ and ‘Proper party’
 A “necessary party” is one whose presence is indispensable for proceeding with the suit and for final decision
thereof, on the other hand “proper party” is one in whose absence an effective order can be passed, but whose
presence is required for complete and final decision of the suit.
In case of Hardeva v. Ismail, AIR 1970 Raj 167 two tests have been mentioned for determining the question
whether a particular party is a necessary party to a proceeding:
   (1)   there must be a right to some relief against such party in respect of the matter involved in the proceeding
         in question; and
   (2)   it should not be possible to pass an effective decree in absence of such a party.


                                                                                                                203
EP-JI&GL                                                                               Law relating to Civil Procedure

Order I, rule 8 provides that there are numerous persons having the same interest in one suit, one or more or
such persons may with the permission of court sue on behalf of or for the benefit of all persons so interested.
There is essential distinction between ‘Necessary Party’ and ‘Proper Party’. A ‘Necessary Party’ is one whose
presence is indispensable or against whom relief is sought and without whom no effective order can be passed.
A ‘Proper Party is one in whose absence an effective order can be passed but whose presence is necessary for
complete and final decision on question involved in proceedings.
Order I, rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 reads: No suit shall be defeated by reason of the mis-joinder
or non-joinder of parties, and the Court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards
the rights and interests of the parties actually before it:
Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party.
Therefore, general rule is that no suit can be decided without necessary parties to it. However, rule 10 of Order
I of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, provides for substitution or addition of parties to suit on either of the
following two grounds:
      (i)   He ought to have been joined as plaintiff or defendant and is not so joined; or
   (ii)     without his presence, the question/issue involved in the suit cannot be completely decided.
Mis-joinder or non-joinder of parties (Order I, rule 9)
Order I, rule 9 says: “No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or non-joinder of parties, and the
court in every suit may deal with the matter in controversy so far as the rights and interests of the parties
actually before it:
Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party.
So, where a person, who is necessary or proper party to a suit has not been joined as a party to the suit, it is
a case of non-joinder. Conversely, if two or more persons are joined as plaintiffs or defendants in one suit in
contravention of Order I, rules 1 and 3 respectively and they are neither necessary party nor proper party, it is
a case of mis-joinder of the parties.
Order I, rule 13, provides that all the objections on the ground of non-joinder or mis-joinder of parties shall
be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or before such
settlement, unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken shall
be deemed to have been waived.
Non-joinder (meaning) - Where a person who is a necessary party to a suit has not been joined as a party to the
suit, it is a case of non-joinder. A suit should not be dismissed on the ground of non-joinder.
But if the decree cannot be effective without the absent parties, the suit is liable to be dismissed. In case where
the joinder of a person as a party is only a matter of convenience, the absent party may be added or the suit
may be tried without him.
Mis-joinder - Where there are more plaintiffs than one and they are joined together is one suit, but the right
to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions alleged to
exist in such persons does not arise out of the same act, or transaction and if separate suits were brought, no
common question of law or fact would arise, it is case of mis-joinder of plaintiff. Misjoinder of defendants takes
place in reverse position.
In case of B.P. Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1985 Supp (1) SCC 432: AIR 1986 SC 210: 1985 (51) FLR 501: 1985
Lab IC 1555: (1985) 2 SCALE 256: (1985) Supp 2 SCR 573, it was held by the Supreme Court that, where the
affected persons had not been joined as parties to the petition, and some of them only were joined, the interests


204
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

of the persons who were not joined as parties were identical with those persons who were before the court and
were sufficiently and well represented, and therefore, the petition was not liable to be dismissed on that ground
alone.
“Cause of action” means every fact which, if traversed, would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order
to support his right to the judgement of the Court. Thus, cause of action is a bundle of essential facts which the
plaintiff has to prove in order to sustain his action. The cause of action must be antecedent to the institution of
the suit. It consists of two factors (a) a right, and (b) an infringement for which relief is claimed.
Every breach of contract gives rise to a cause of action and a suit may be instituted to secure the proper relief
in the place –
   (a)   where the contract was made, or
   (b)   where the breach has occurred, or
   (c)   the place where money is payable.
The place of breach is the place where the contract had to be performed or completed.
Where the place of payment is not specified, it is to be ascertained with reference to the intention of the parties
and the circumstances of each case.
Misjoinder of Causes of Action – If the plaintiffs are not jointly interested in all the causes of action there is
misjoinder of causes of action.
All objections regarding misjoinder of parties or of cause of action should be taken at the first hearing of the suit
and before the settlement of causes unless the ground for objections had subsequently arisen.
   Example: There is a property dispute between X and Y over a piece of land which is in possession of Y.
   X filled a suit against Y and also made Z(a reputed businessman) the brother of Y as party to the suit. This
   is misjoinder of parties.
   X filled a suit against Y not for the property in issue but referred to a property that was never in possession
   of Y. This is misjoinder of cause of action.

 IMPORTANT STAGES IN PROCEEDINGS OF A SUIT




                                                                                                                205
EP-JI&GL                                                                            Law relating to Civil Procedure




  Question: Which of the given Order of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 provides the provision relating to
  Institution of Suit?
  Option: (A) II (B) IV (C) IX (D) X
  Answer: (B)

 DELIVERY OF SUMMONS BY COURT
When the suit has been duly instituted, the Court issues an order (known as summons) to the defendant to
appear and answer the claim and to file the written statement of his defence if any within a period of 30 days
from the date of service of summons. No summons is to be issued when the defendant has appeared at the
presentation of plaint and admitted the plaintiff’s claim.
The defendant may appear in person or by a duly instructed pleader or by a pleader accompanied by some
person to be able to answer all material questions relating to the suit.
Every summons must be signed by the judge or an authorised officer of the Court and sealed with the seal of
the Court and be accompanied by a copy of the plaint. (Order 5)
If the requirement of personal appearance of the defendant or plaintiff is felt by the Court, then it has to make
an order for such appearance. The summons must contain a direction that it is for the settlement of issues only
or for the final disposal of the suit. Every summons must be accompanied by a copy of the plaint. Where no
date is fixed for the appearance of the defendant, the Court has no power to dismiss the suit in default. The
summons must also state that the defendant is to produce all documents in his possession or power upon which
he intends to rely in support of his case.
The ordinary mode of service of summons, i.e., direct service is by delivery or tendering a copy of it signed by
the judge or competent officer of the Court to the person summoned either personally or to his agent or any
adult male or female member of his family, against signature obtained in acknowledgement of the services.



206
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

Order 5, Rule 9 substituted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2002 provides that –
   (1)   Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of the Court in which the suit is instituted, or has
         an agent resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered to accept the service of the summons, the
         summons shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be delivered or sent either to the proper officer, who
         may be an officer of a Court other than that in which the suit is instituted, to be served by him or one of
         his subordinates or to such courier services as are approved by the Court.
   (2)   The services of summons may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post
         acknowledgement due, addressed to the defendant or his agent empowered to accept the service or
         by speed post or by such courier services as are approved by the High Court or by the Court referred to
         in sub-rule (1) or by any other means to transmission of documents (including fax message or electronic
         mail service) provided by the rules made by the High Court.
		 Provided that the service of summons under this sub-rule shall be made at the expenses of the plaintiff.
   (3)   Where the defendant resides outside the jurisdiction of the Court in which the suit is instituted, and the
         Court directs that the service of summons on that defendant may be made by such mode of service
         of summons as is referred to in sub-rule (3) (except by registered post acknowledgement due), the
         provisions of rule 21 shall not apply.
   (4)   When an acknowledgement or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the defendant or his agent
         is received by the Court or postal article containing the summons is received back by the Court with an
         endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the
         courier service to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused to take delivery of the postal
         article containing the summons or had refused to accept the summons by any other means specified in
         sub-rule (3) when tendered or transmitted to him, the Court issuing the summons shall declare that the
         summons had been duly served on the defendant;
Provided that where the summons was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by registered post
acknowledgement due, the declaration referred to in this sub-rule shall be made notwithstanding the fact that
the acknowledgement having been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has not been received by the Court
within thirty days from the date of issue of summons.
Where the Court is satisfied that there is reason to believe that the person summoned is keeping out of the
way for the purpose of avoiding service or that for any other reason the summons cannot be served in the
ordinary way the Court shall order the service of the summons to be served by affixing a copy thereof in some
conspicuous place in the Court house and also upon some conspicuous part of the house in which the person
summoned is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain, or in such other
manner as the Court thinks fit. (O.5, R.20, ‘substituted service’)
Where defendant resides in another province, a summons may be sent for service in another state to such court
and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State.
The above provisions shall apply also to summons to witnesses.
In the case of a defendant who is a public officer, servant of railways or local authority, the Court may, if more
convenient, send the summons to the head of the office in which he is employed. In the case of a suit being
instituted against a corporation, the summons may be served (a) on the secretary or on any director, or other
principal officer of the corporation or (b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the corporation at the
registered office or if there is no registered office, then at the place where the corporation carries on business.
(O.29, R.2)
Where persons are to be sued as partners in the name of their firm, the summons shall be served either (a) upon


                                                                                                                207
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Civil Procedure

one or more of the partners or (b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is carried on within
India or upon any person having the control or management of the partnership business. Where a partnership
has been dissolved the summons shall be served upon every person whom it is sought to make liable.

Defence
The defendant has to file a written statement of his defence within a period of thirty days from the date of service
of summons. If he fails to file the written statement within the stipulated time period he is allowed to file the
same on such other day as may be specified by the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing. The time period
for filing the written statement should not exceed 90 days. Provision though negatively worded is procedural.
It does not deal with power of Court or provide consequences of non-extension of time. The provision can
therefore be read as directory. (Shaikh Salim Haji Abdul Khayumsab v. Kumar & Ors, AIR 2006 SC 398.)
In the case of disputes covered under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 if the defendant fails to file the written
statement within a period of 30 days, he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as
may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the
Court deems fit, but within 120 days from the date of service of summons and on expiry of the said period, the
defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the written statement
to be taken on record.
Where the defendant bases his defence upon a document or relies upon any document in his possession in
support of his defence or claim for set-off or counter claim, he has to enter such document in a list and produce
it in Court while presenting his written statement and deliver the document and a copy thereof to be filed within
the written statement.
Any document which ought to be produced in the Court but is not so produced, such document shall not be
received in evidence at the time of hearing of the suit without the leave of the Court (O.8, R.1 and 1A). However
this rule does not apply to documents produced for the cross-examination of the plaintiff witnesses or handed
over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.
Besides, particulars of set-off must be given in the written statement. A plea of set-off is set up when the
defendant pleads liability of the plaintiff to pay to him, in defence in a suit by the plaintiff for recovery of money.
Any right of counter claim must be stated. In the written statement new facts must be specifically pleaded. The
defendant must deal specifically with each allegation of fact of which he does not admit the truth. An evasive
denial is not permissible and all allegations of facts not denied specifically or by necessary implication shall
be taken to be.

Appearance of parties and consequence of non-appearance
If both the parties do not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the
suit be dismissed (O.9, R. 3 and 4). If the defendant is absent in spite of service of summons and the plaintiff
appears, the Court may proceed ex-parte.
In case the defendant is not served with summons, the Court shall order a second summon to be issued. If the
summons is served on the defendant without sufficient time to appear, the Court may postpone the hearing to
a further date. If the summon was not served on the defendant in sufficient time due to the plaintiff’s default,
the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay costs of adjournment. Where the hearing of the suit is adjourned ex-
parte and the defendant appears at or before such hearing and assigns a good cause for his previous non-
appearance, the defendant may be heard in answer to the suit on such terms as to costs or otherwise.
The defendant is not precluded from taking part in the proceedings even though he may not be allowed to file
a written statement. If the plaintiff is absent and the defendant is present at the hearing of the suit, the Court
shall make an order for the dismissal of the suit, unless the defendant admits the claim of the plaintiff or a part

208
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                              LESSON 6

thereof in which case the Court shall pass a decree in favour of the plaintiff in accordance with the admission of
the defendant and shall dismiss the suit to the extent of the remainder (O.9, R.8).
In any case in which a decree is passed ex-parte against a defendant he may apply for setting aside the decree
on the ground that the summons was not duly served on him or that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from
appearing when the suit was called on for hearing and the Court shall set aside the decree on such terms as to costs
payment into Court or otherwise as it deems proper and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit (O.9, R.13).
A defendant has four remedies available if an ex-parte decree is passed against him:
    (i)    He may file an appeal against the ex-parte decree under Section 96 of the C.P.C.
   (ii)    He may file an application for review of the judgement. (O.47, R.1)
   (iii)   He may apply for setting aside the ex-parte decree.
   (iv)    A suit can also be filed to set aside an ex-parte decree obtained by fraud but no suit shall lie for non-
           service of summons.
It is open to a party at the trial of a suit to use in evidence any one or more of the answers or any part of the
answer of the opposite party to interrogatories without putting in the others or the whole of such answers. But
the court may direct that any connected answer should also be put in.
   Example
   Suit between A (plaintiff) and B (respondent) was initiated. Court decided in favor of A on account of non-
   appearance by B. Court here passed an ex-parte decree. B can apply for setting aside ex-parte order
   stating sufficient cause.

Discovery and interrogatories and production of documents
“Discovery” means finding out material facts and documents from an adversary in order to know and ascertain
the nature of the case or in order to support his own case or in order to narrow the points at issue or to avoid
proving admitted facts. Discovery may be of two kinds – (a) by interrogatories (b) by documents.
The objects of discovery are to:
   (a)     ascertain the nature of the case of the adversary or material facts for the adversary’s case.
   (b)     obtain admissions of the adversary for supporting the party’s own case or indirectly by impeaching or
           destroying the adversary’s case.
   (c)     narrow the points at issue.
   (d)     avoid expense and effort in proving admitted facts.

Discovery by interrogations
Any party to a suit, by leave of the Court, may deliver interrogatories in writing for the examination of the
opposite parties. But interrogatories will not be allowed for the following purposes:
    (i)    for obtaining discovery of facts which relates exclusively to the evidence of the adversary’s case or title.
   (ii)    to interrogate any confidential communications between the adversary and his counsel.
   (iii)   to obtain disclosures injurious to public interests.
   (iv)    Interrogatories that are of a ‘fishing’ nature, i.e., which do not relate to some definite and existing state
           of circumstances but are resorted to in a speculative manner to discover something which may help a
           party making the interrogatories.


                                                                                                                   209
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Law relating to Civil Procedure

Discovery by documents
All documents relating to the matters in issue in the possession or power of any adversary can be inspected
by means of discovery by documents. Any party may apply to the Court for an order directing any other
party to the suit to make discovery on oath the documents which are or which have been in his possession or
powers relating to any matter in question. The Court may on hearing the application either refuse or adjourn
it, if it is satisfied that such discovery is not necessary at all or not necessary at the stage. Or if it thinks fit in its
discretion, it may make order for discovery limited to certain classes of documents.
Every party to a suit may give notice to the other party at or before the settlement of issues to produce for his
inspection any document referred to in the pleadings or affidavits of the other party. If the other party refuses
to comply with this order he shall not be allowed to put any such document in evidence (O.11, R.15), unless he
satisfies the Court that such document relates only to his own title, he being a defendant to the suit or any other
ground accepted by the Court. Documents not referred to in the pleadings or affidavits may be inspected by a
party if the Court allows (O.11, R.18).
A party may refuse to produce the document for inspection on the following grounds:
      (i)   where it discloses a party’s evidence;
   (ii)     when it enjoys a legal professional privilege;
   (iii)    when it is injurious to public interest;
   (iv)     denial of possession of document.
If a party denies by an affidavit the possession of any document, the party claiming discovery cannot cross-
examine upon it, nor adduce evidence to contradict it, because in all questions of discovery the oath of the party
making the discovery is conclusive [Kedarnath v. Vishwanath, (1924) 46 All. 417].

Admission by parties
“Admission” means that one party accepts the case of the other party in whole or in part to be true. Admission
may be either in pleadings or by answers to interrogatories, by agreement of the parties or admission by notice.

Issues
Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by one party and denied by the other. Issues
may be either of fact or of law.
It is incumbent on the Court at the first hearing of the suit after reading the plaint and the written statement and
after ascertaining and examination of the parties if necessary regarding the material propositions of law and
facts, to frame the issues thereon for decision of the case. Where the Court is of the opinion that the suit can
be disposed off on issues of law only, it shall try those issues first and postpone the framing of the other issues
until after that issue has been determined and may deal with the suit in accordance with the decision of that
issue.
Issues are to be framed on material proportions of fact or law which are to be gathered from the following –
      (i)   Allegations made in the plaint and written statement,
   (ii)     Allegations made by the parties or persons present on their behalf or their pleaders on oath,
   (iii)    Allegations in answer to interrogatories,
   (iv)     Contents of documents produced by the parties,
   (v)      Statements made by parties or their representatives when examined,
   (vi)     From examination of a witness or any documents ordered to be produced.


210
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                            LESSON 6

Hearing of the suit
The plaintiff has the right to begin unless the defendant admits the fact alleged by the plaintiff and contends
that either in point of law or on some additional facts alleged by the defendant, the plaintiff is not entitled to any
part of the relief sought by him and in such a case the defendant has a right to begin (O.18, R.1). Where there are
several issues, the burden of proving some of which lies on the other party, the party beginning has an option to
produce his evidence on those issues or reserve it by way of an answer to the evidence produced by the other
party, and in the latter case, the party beginning may produce evidence on those issues after the other party
has produced all his evidence. Care must be taken that no part of the evidence should be produced on those
issues for which the plaintiff reserves a right to produce evidence after the defence has closed his evidence,
otherwise the plaintiff shall lose his right of reserving evidence (O.18, R.3).

Affidavit
An affidavit is a written statement of the deponent on oath duly affirmed before any Court or Magistrate or
any Oath Commissioner appointed by the Court or before the Notary Public. An affidavit can be used in the
following cases:
    (i)    the Court may at any time of its own motion or on application of any party order that any fact may be
           proved by affidavits (Section 30).
   (ii)    the Court may at any time order that the affidavit of any witness may be read at the hearing unless
           either party bona fide desires to cross-examine him and he can be produced (O.19, R.1).
   (iii)   upon application by a party, evidence of a witness may be given on affidavit, but the court may at
           the instance of either party, order the deponent to attend the court for cross-examination unless he is
           exempted from personal appearance. Affidavits are confined to such facts as the deponent is able of
           his own knowledge to prove except on interlocutory applications. (O.19, R.2&3).

Judgement
The Court after the case has been heard shall pronounce judgement in an open court either at once or on some
future day as may be fixed by the court for that purpose of which due notice shall be given to the parties or their
pleaders (Order XX, Rule 1). The proper object of a judgement is to support by the most cogent reasons that
suggest themselves final conclusion at which the judge has conscientiously arrived.
If the judgement is not pronounced at once every endeavour shall be made by the Court to pronounce the
judgement within a period of 30 days from the date on which the hearing of the case was concluded. However,
if it is not practicable to do so on the ground of exceptional and extra ordinary circumstances of the case,
the Court must fix a future day which should not be a day beyond sixty days for the pronouncement of the
judgement giving due notice of the day so fixed to the concerned parties. In Kanhaiyalal v. Anup Kumar, AIR
2003 SC 689, where the High Court pronounced the judgment after two years and six months, the judgment
was set aside by the Supreme Court observing that it would not be proper for a Court to sit tied over the matter
for such a long period.
Following the decision of the Supreme Court in the above mentioned case, the Gujarat High Court in Ramkishan
Guru Mandir v. Ramavtar Bansraj, AIR 2006 Guj. 34, set aside the judgment which was passed after two and a
half years after conclusion of arguments holding that where a judgment was delivered after two years or more,
public at large would have reasons to say bad about the Court and the judges.
The judgement must be dated and signed by the judge. Once the judgement is signed it cannot afterwards be
altered or added to except as provided under Section 152 or on review.
It is a substantial objection to a judgement that it does not dispose of the question as it was presented by the
parties [Reghunatha v. Sri Brozo Kishoro, (1876) 3 I.A., 154].


                                                                                                                  211
EP-JI&GL                                                                               Law relating to Civil Procedure

If a judgement in unintelligible, the appellate court may set it aside and remand the case to the lower court for
the recording of judgement according to law after hearing afresh the arguments of the pleaders (Harbhagwan
Ahmad, AIR 1922 Lah. 12)
Decree
On judgement a decree follows. Every endeavour must be made to ensure that decree is drawn up expeditiously
and in any case within a period of 15 days from the date on which the judgement is pronounced. It should
contain the:
      (i)   number of the suit(s);
   (ii)     names and descriptions of the parties and their registered addresses;
  (iii)     particulars of the claim;
  (iv)      relief granted or other determination of the suit;
   (v)      amount of cost incurred and by whom is to be paid.
Execution
Execution is the enforcement of decrees or orders of the Court. A decree may be executed either by the Court
which passed it or by the Court to which it is sent for execution. (Section 36. For details refer Order 21)

 APPEALS
Right of appeal is not a natural or inherent right attached to litigation. Such a right is given by the statute or by
rules having the force of statute (Rangoon Botatoung Company v. The Collector, Rangoon, 39 I.A. 197).
There are four kinds of appeals provided under the Civil Procedure Code:




Appeals from original decrees
These appeals may be preferred in the Court superior to the Court passing the decree. An appeal may lie
from an original decree passed ex parte. Where the decree has been passed with the consent of parties, no
appeal lies. The appeal from original decree lies on a question of law. No appeal lies in any suit of the nature
cognizable by Courts of small causes when the amount or value of the subject matter of the original suit does
not exceed ten thousand rupees.

Second appeal
As per Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code, an appeal lies to the High Court from every decree passed in
appeal by any subordinate Court if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of
law. Under this Section, an appeal may lie from an appellate decree passed ex parte.
The memorandum of appeal must precisely state the substantial question of law involved in the appeal. If the
High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved, such question shall be formulated by it and

212
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                              LESSON 6

the appeal is to be heard on the question so formulated. The respondent is allowed to argue that the case does
not involve such question. The High Court is empowered to hear the appeal on any other substantial question
of law not formulated by it if it is satisfied that the case involves such question.
As a general rule the second appeal is on questions of law alone (Section 100). The Privy Council in Durga
Choudharain v. Jawaher Singh, (1891) 18 Cal. 23 P.C., observed that there is no jurisdiction to entertain a second
appeal on the ground of an erroneous finding of fact, however gross or inexcusable the error may seem to be.
Where there is no error or defect in procedure, the finding of the first appellate Court upon a question of fact is
final, if that Court had before it evidence proper for its consideration in support of the finding.

Appeal from orders
These appeals would lie only from the following orders on grounds of defect or irregularity in law –
    (i)    an order under Section 35A of the Code allowing special costs, and order under Section 91 or Section
           92 refusing leave to institute a suit of the nature referred to in Section 91 or Section 92,
   (ii)    an order under Section 95 for compensation for obtaining attachment or injunction on insufficient
           ground,
   (iii)   an order under the Code imposing a fine or directing the detention or arrest of any person except in
           execution of a decree.
   (iv)    appealable orders as set out under Order 43, R.1. However no appeal shall lie from following orders –
            a)   any order specified in clause (a) and
            b)   from any order passed in appeal under Section 100.

Appeals to the Supreme Court
These appeals would lie in the following cases:
    (i)    from any decree or order of Civil Court when the case is certified by the Court deciding it to be fit for
           appeal to the Supreme Court or when special leave is granted under Section 112 by the Supreme Court
           itself,
   (ii)    from any judgement, decree or final order passed on appeal by a High Court or by any other court of
           final appellate jurisdiction,
   (iii)   from any judgement, decree or final orders passed by a High Court in exercise of original civil jurisdiction.
The general rule is that the parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence whether
oral or documentary. But the appellate court has a discretion to allow additional evidence in the following
circumstances:
    (i)    When the lower court has refused to admit evidence which ought to have been admitted.
   (ii)    When the appellate court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be examined to
           enable it to pronounce judgement.
   (iii)   for any other substantial cause.
but in all such cases the appellate court shall record its reasons for admission of additional evidence.
The essential factors to be stated in an appellate judgement are (a) the points for determination, (b) the decision
thereon, (c) the reasons for the decision, and (d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief
to which the appellant is entitled (O.41, R.31).
The judgement shall be signed and dated by the judge or judges concurring therein.


                                                                                                                   213
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Civil Procedure

 REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION

Reference to High Court
Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, at any time before judgement a court in which a suit has been
instituted may state a case and refer the same for opinion of the High Court and the High Court may make such
order thereon as it thinks fit. (Section 113. Also refer to Rule 1 of Order 46).
  Example
  In a particular matter, the District court intends to state a case foe opinion of High Court. It may refer the
  same for the opinion under Section 113 of CPC.

Review
The right of review has been conferred by Section 114 and Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code. It provides that any
person considering himself aggrieved by a decree or order may apply for a review of judgement to the
court which passed the decree or made the order on any of the grounds as mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1,
namely –
      (i)   discovery by the applicant of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
            diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree
            was passed or order made, or
   (ii)     on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record, or
  (iii)     for any other sufficient reason, and
The Court may make such order thereon as it thinks fit
  Example
  X, aggrieved by the order against him passed by District Court. He may file a review application in the
  same court for the review of that particular order.

Revision
Section 115 deals with revision. The High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided by any
Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court appears-
      (i)   to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
   (ii)     to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or
  (iii)     to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, The High Court may
            make such order as it thinks fit.

Provided that the High Court shall not vary or                 Question: Which of the following courts have the
reverse any order made or any order deciding an                power of revision under Code of Civil Procedure,
issue in the course of a suit or proceeding except             1908?
where the order, if it had been made in favour of              Options: (A) District Court
the party applying for revision would have finally
disposed off the suit or other proceedings.                    (B) High Court

The High Court shall not vary or reverse any decree            (C) Executive Magistrate
or order against which an appeal lies either to the            (D) Judicial Magistrate of First Class
High Court or any Court subordinate thereto.
                                                               Answer: (B)

214
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

A revision shall not operate as a stay of suit or other proceeding before the Court except where such suit or
proceeding is stayed by the High Court.
   Example
   On discovering that District Court erred in making a decision by exercising wrongful jurisdiction for which
   no further appeal lies, High Court may order revision of such decree.

 SUITS BY OR AGAINST A CORPORATION

Signature or verification of pleading
In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading may be signed and verified on behalf of the corporation, by
the secretary or by any director or other principal officer of the corporation who is able to depose to the facts
of the case. (O.29, R.1)
Service of summons
Subject to any provision regulating service of process, where the suit is against a corporation, the summons
may be served:

    (a)   on the secretary or any director or other        Question: Which of the following officer is not
          principal officer of the corporation, or         recognized to sign and verify any pleading on behalf
                                                           of the corporation?
    (b)   by leaving it or sending it by post addressed
          to the corporation at the registered office or   Options: (A) Secretary
          if there is no registered office then at the     (B) Principal Officer
          place where the corporation carries on           (C) Director
          business. (O.29, R. 2)
                                                           (D) Senior Manager
                                                           Answer: (D)

Power of the Court to require personal attendance
The Court may at any stage of the suit, require the personal appearance of the secretary or any director, or
other principal officer of the corporation who may be able to answer material questions relating to the suit.
(O.29, R.3)

 SUITS BY OR AGAINST MINORS AND LUNATICS
A minor is a person (i) who has not completed the age of 18 years and (ii) for whose person or property a
guardian has been appointed by a Court, or whose property is under a Court of Wards, the age of majority is
completed at the age of 21 years.
A suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a person who in such suit shall be called the next friend of the
minor. The next friend should be a person who is of sound mind and has attained majority. However, the interest
of such person is not adverse to that of the minor and that he is not in the case of a next friend, a defendant for
the suit. (O.32, Rules 1 and 4).
Where the suit is instituted without a next friend, the defendant may apply to have the plaint taken off the file,
with costs to be paid by the pleader or other person by whom it was presented. (O.32, R.2).
Where the defendant is a minor, the Court, on being satisfied of the fact of his minority, shall appoint a proper
person to be guardian for the suit for such minor [O.32, R.3(1)]. An order for the appointment of a guardian for the
suit may be obtained upon application in the name and on behalf of the minor or by the plaintiff [O.32, R.3(2)].


                                                                                                                215
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Civil Procedure

A person appointed as guardian for the suit for a minor shall, unless his appointment is terminated by retirement,
removal or death, continues as such throughout all proceeding arising out of the suit including proceedings in
any appellate or revisional court and any proceedings in the execution of a decree [O.32, R.3(5)]

When minor attains majority
When the minor plaintiff attains majority he may elect to proceed with the suit or application or elect to abandon
it. If he elects the former course, he shall apply for an order discharging the next friend and for leave to proceed
in his own name and the title of the suit will be corrected. If he elects to abandon the suit or application, he shall,
if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant apply for an order to dismiss the suit on repayment of the costs incurred by
the defendant or opposite party etc. (For details see Rules 12 and 13 - Order 32)\

Suits by or against persons of unsound mind
Order 32, Rule 15 states that all the provisions of rule 1 to 14, applicable to minors except for rule 2A shall be applicable
to a person of unsound mind or lunatics. If a person before or during the pendency of the suit are found to be of
unsound mind. It shall also be applicable to persons who, though not so adjudged, are found by the Court on enquiry
to be incapable, by reason of any mental infirmity, of protecting their interest when suing or being sued.


 CASE LAW
 In Ram Chandra Arya vs. Man Singh and Ors. (08.12.1967 - SC) : 1968 AIR 954
 The Court held that a decree passed against a minor or lunatic without appointed legal guardian is void and
 not voidable. It was stated that
       “if a decree is passed against a minor without appointment of a guardian, the decree is a nullity and is void
       and not merely voidable. This principle becomes applicable to the case of a lunatic in view of Rule. 15 of
       Order. 32 of the Code of Civil Procedure, so that the decree obtained against Ram Chandra was a decree
       which had to be treated as without jurisdiction and void. In these circumstances, the sale held in execution
       of that decree must also be held to be void”

 SUMMARY PROCEEDINGS/PROCEDURE
Order 37 provides for a summary procedure in respect of certain suits. A procedure by way of summary suit
applies to suits upon bill of exchange, hundis or promissory notes, or to suits in which the plaintiff seeks only
to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the defendant, with or without interest, arising,--
      (i)   on a written contract; or
   (ii)     on an enactment, where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature of a
            debt other than a penalty; or
   (iii)    on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated demand only.
            The object is to prevent unreasonable obstruction by a defendant.
The rules for summary procedure are applicable to the following Courts:
    (1)     High Courts, City Civil Courts and Small Courts;
   (2)      Other Courts: In such Courts, the High Courts may restrict the operation of Order 37 by issuing a
            notification in the Official Gazette.
The debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the defendant should arise on a written contract or on an
enactment or on a guarantee.
In the case of Navinchandra Babulal Bhavsar vs Bachubhai Dhanabhai Shah, AIR 1969 Guj 124, (1968) GLR

216
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                            LESSON 6

409, the Gujarat High Court has observed that the relevant provisions prima facie show that the object of the
summary procedure is that in a large commercial town certain types of litigation concerning the commercial
community should be expeditiously handled and brought to an end, including the realisation of the decretal
amount, if a decree is passed. This is intended to give impetus to commerce and industry and thereby benefit
the place as a whole by inspiring confidence in the large commercial population of the town that their causes
in respect of monetary claims of liquidated amounts would be justly and expeditiously disposed of and their
claims will not hang on for years blocking their money and transactions for long periods with a comparatively
greater disadvantage to them than in litigation of other types.
Institution of summary suits
Such suit may be instituted by presenting a plaint containing the following essentials:
   (1)   a specific averment to the effect that the suit is filed under this order;
   (2)   that no relief which does not fall within the ambit of this rule has been claimed;
   (3)   the inscription immediately below the number of the suit in the title of the suit that the suit is being
         established under Order 37 of the CPC.
Order 37, Rule 1, sub rule 2 provides that subject to the provisions of sub-rule 1, the Order applies to the following
classes of suits, namely:—
    a)   suits upon bills of exchange, hundies and promissory notes;
    b)   in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the
         defendant, with or without interest, arising,—
          (i) on a written contract, or
          (ii)   on an enactment, where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature
                 of a debt other than a penalty; or
         (iii)   on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated demand
                 only.

Leave to defend
Order 37 Rule 3 prescribes the mode of service of summons etc. and leave to defend. The defendant is not
entitled to defend the suit unless he enters an appearance within 10 days from the service of summons. Such
leave to defend may be granted unconditional or upon such terms as the Court or the Judge may think fit.
However, such leave shall not be granted where:
   (1)   the Court is satisfied that the facts disclosed by the defendant do not indicate that he has a substantial
         defence or that the defences are frivolous or vexacious, and
   (2)   the part of the amount claimed by the plaintiff and admitted by the defendant to be due from him is
         deposited by him in the Court.
At the hearing of such summons for judgement, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgement provided the defendant
has not applied for leave to defend or if such application has been made and is refused or where the defendant
is permitted to defend but he fails to give the required security within the prescribed time or to carry out such
other precautions as may have been directed by the Court.
After decree, the Court may, under special circumstances set-aside the decree and if necessary stay or set-
aside execution, and may give leave to the defendant to appear and to defend the suit. (Rule 4 order 37)
The summary suit must be brought within one year from the date on which the debt becomes due and payable,
whereas the period of limitation for suits for ordinary cases under negotiable instrument is three years.

                                                                                                                 217
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Civil Procedure


 CASE LAW
 Uma Shankar Kamal Narain and Ors. vs. M.D. Overseas Ltd. (2007) 4 SCC 133
 This appeal was filed against the order passed by the Delhi High Court granting conditional leave to the
 appellants to defend in a summary suit. The appellants filed an application for leave to defend in the same
 suit. Learned Single Judge of the High Court found that the grounds taken in the application for leave to
 defend were sham and moonshine. The appellants were directed to deposit the amount of Rs. 39,30,856/- to
 the registry of the division bench of High Court. Conditional leave to defend was granted to the appellants.
 Respondent wanted liberty to withdraw the amount on deposit. High Court refused to accede to the prayer.
 The position of law was noted and highlighted relating to summary suits by the Supreme Court as under:
      (a)   If the defendant satisfied the Court that he has a good defence to the claim on merits, the defendant
            is entitled to unconditional leave to defend.
      (b)   If the defendant raises a triable issue indicating that he has a fair or bona fide or reasonable defence,
            although not a possibly good defence, the defendant is entitled to unconditional leave to defend.
      (c)   If the defendant discloses such facts as may be deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend, that is, if
            the affidavit discloses that at the trial he may be able to establish a defence to the plaintiff’s claim,
            the Court may impose conditions at the time of granting leave to defend the conditions being as to
            time of trial or made of trial but not as to payment into Court or furnishing security.
      (d)   If the defendant has no defence, or if the defence is sham or illusory or practically moonshine, the
            defendant is not entitled to leave defend.
      (e)   If the defendant has no defence or the defence is illusory or sham or practically moonshine, the
            Court may show mercy to the defendant by enabling him to try to prove a defence but at the same
            time protect the plaintiff imposing the condition that the amount claimed should be paid into Court
            or otherwise secured.
 Supreme Court directed to deposit a sum of Rs. 20,00,000/- within a period of three months in the registry
 of the High Court.
 Southern Sales and Services and Ors vs. Sauermilch Design and Handels GMBH: 1982 AIR 1518
 According to the ratio decidendi of this case “Deposit of amount admitted in the court is an essential for
 granting Unconditional leave to defend a suit”


 CASE LAW
 B.L. Kashyap and Sons Ltd. vs. JMS Steels and Power Corporation and Ors. (18.01.2022 - SC) : (2022) 3
 SCC 294
 Supreme Court held that leave to defend should only be granted in exceptional cases. The leave to defend
 shall be denied only on the grounds that there is no fair or reasonable defence. It was stated that:
 “application seeking leave to defend, it would not be a correct approach to proceed as if denying the leave
 is the Rule or that the leave to defend is to be granted only in exceptional cases or only in cases where
 the defence would appear to be a meritorious one. Even in the case of raising of triable issues, with the
 Defendant indicating his having a fair or reasonable defence, he is ordinarily entitled to unconditional leave
 to defend unless there be any strong reason to deny the leave”



218
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                            LESSON 6

 Summary Judgment
One of the significant amendments which has been brought into the CPC by the Commercial Courts Act, 2015
is the insertion of Order 13A for summary judgment. Order 13A of the the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 provides
that disputes which are recognized as commercial dispute under the Act, can be disposed off by the commercial
court established under the Act without a full-fledged trial. Previously, suits which had more or less a clear
outcome based on merits would still have to go through the entire procedure enumerated under the CPC before
the case could be disposed.
The technicalities led to inordinate delays for the parties concerned and also clogged the entire docket. The
amendment is on similar lines to summary suits provided in the CPC with the primary difference that application
for summary judgment can be in respect of any relief in a commercial dispute while summary suits relate to
such relief relating to liquidated demand or fixed sum of debt.
Under mechanism as provided under Order XIII-A, the application for summary judgment can be made by either
party after the service of summons to the defendant and before the framing of issues. Upon consideration and
satisfaction of the Court, a summary judgment may be given that (a) the plaintiff/defendant has no real prospect
of succeeding on the claim/defence, as the case may be; and (b) there is no other compelling reason as to why
the claim should not be disposed of before the recording of oral evidence.

 Saving of inherent powers of Court.
Section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code says ‘Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect
the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent
abuse of the process of the Court.’
Though it does not confer any specific power to the Courts, it is one of the most used sections of the Code in
litigations. Any situation that is not covered under the Code can be brought under this Section. The scope of
Section 151 CPC has been explained by the Supreme Court in the case K.K. Velusamy v. N. Palanisamy (2011) 11
SCC 275 as follows:
   (a)   Section 151 CPC is not a substantive provision which creates or confers any power or jurisdiction on
         courts. It merely recognises the discretionary power inherent in every court as a necessary corollary
         for rendering justice in accordance with law, to do what is “right” and undo what is “wrong”, that is, to
         do all things necessary to secure the ends of justice and prevent abuse of its process.
   (b)   As the provisions of the Code are not exhaustive, Section 151 recognises and confirms that if the Code
         does not expressly or impliedly cover any particular procedural aspect, the inherent power can be
         used to deal with such situation or aspect, if the ends of justice warrant it. The breadth of such power is
         coextensive with the need to exercise such power on the facts and circumstances.
   (c)   A court has no power to do that which is prohibited by law or the Code, by purported exercise of its
         inherent powers. If the Code contains provisions dealing with a particular topic or aspect, and such
         provisions either expressly or by necessary implication exhaust the scope of the power of the court or
         the jurisdiction that may be exercised in relation to that matter, the inherent power cannot be invoked in
         order to cut across the powers conferred by the Code or in a manner inconsistent with such provisions.
         In other words the court cannot make use of the special provisions of Section 151 of the Code, where the
         remedy or procedure is provided in the Code.
   (d)   The inherent powers of the court being complementary to the powers specifically conferred, a court
         is free to exercise them for the purposes mentioned in Section 151 of the Code when the matter is not
         covered by any specific provision in the Code and the exercise of those powers would not in any way be
         in conflict with what has been expressly provided in the Code or be against the intention of the legislature.
   (e)   While exercising the inherent power, the court will be doubly cautious, as there is no legislative guidance


                                                                                                                 219
EP-JI&GL                                                                              Law relating to Civil Procedure

           to deal with the procedural situation and the exercise of power depends upon the discretion and wisdom
           of the court, and in the facts and circumstances of the case. The absence of an express provision in the
           Code and the recognition and saving of the inherent power of a court, should not however be treated
           as a carte blanche to grant any relief.
   (f)     The power under Section 151 will have to be used with circumspection and care, only where it is
           absolutely necessary, when there is no provision in the Code governing the matter, when the bona fides
           of the applicant cannot be doubted, when such exercise is to meet the ends of justice and to prevent
           abuse of process of court.

 POWERS OF CIVIL COURTS AND THEIR EXERCISE BY TRIBUNALS
Tribunals are quasi-judicial authorities established by law. Generally, they are established for speedy disposal
of cases and possesses expertise on certain subject matters. These tribunals are empowered with certain
powers of Civil Procedure in order to effectively discharge the functions assigned to them.

 Example
 National Company Law Tribunal and National Company Law Tribunal has, for the purposes of discharging
 their functions under the Companies Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, the same
 powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of
 the following matters, namely:—
  (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
  (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
  (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
  (d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, requisitioning any
      public record or document or a copy of such record or document from any office;
  (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
  (f) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte;
  (g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it ex parte;
      and
  (h) any other matter which may be prescribed.

Few major enactments empowering the tribunals with the power of civil court are:
      1.   The Companies Act, 2013
   2.      The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
   3.      Income-tax Act, 1961
   4.      The Information Technology Act, 2000
   5.      The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002
The respective tribunal may exercise these powers of the Civil Court to discharge the functions assigned to them
under respective statute. However, the tribunals should exercise due care while using these powers ensuring
the powers used are for the purpose of achieving the object of legislation delegating the powers.




220
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                              LESSON 6

 CASE LAWS
 Padam Sen and Ors. vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh (27.09.1960 - SC) : 1961 AIR 218
 The Court held that inherent powers of court are not defined anywhere, it shall be freely exercised at the
 discretion of the Court, as it may deem fit, but it shall not be in conflict or against the intention of legislature.
 It was stated that:
    “The inherent powers of the Court are in addition to the powers specifically conferred on the Court by the
    Code. They are complementary to those powers and therefore it must be held that the Court is free to
    exercise them for the purposes mentioned in s. 151 of the Code when the exercise of those powers is not
    in any way in conflict with what has been expressly provided in the Code or against the intentions of the
    Legislature.”
 Yashpal Jain v. Sushila Devi & Others decided by Supreme Court on 20th October, 2023
 In this case, in the preface of the Judgement, Hon’ble Supreme Court has stated that:
 Even after 41 years, the parties to this lis are still groping in the dark and litigating as to who should be
 brought on record as legal representative of the sole plaintiff. This is a classic case and a mirror to the fact
 that litigant public may become disillusioned with judicial processes due to inordinate delay in the legal
 proceedings, not reaching its logical end, and moving at a snail’s pace due to dilatory tactics adopted by
 one or the other party.
 Further in this case, the Supreme Court has issued the following 12 directions for Speedy Trial of Civil Cases:
      i.    All courts at district and taluka levels shall ensure proper execution of the summons and in a time
            bound manner as prescribed under Order V Rule (2) of CPC and same shall be monitored by Principal
            District Judges and after collating the statistics they shall forward the same to be placed before the
            committee constituted by the High Court for its consideration and monitoring.
      ii.   All courts at District and Taluka level shall ensure that written statement is filed within the prescribed
            limit namely as prescribed under Order VIII Rule 1 and preferably within 30 days and to assign
            reasons in writing as to why the time limit is being extended beyond 30 days as indicated under
            proviso to sub-Rule (1) of Order VIII of CPC.
     iii.   All courts at Districts and Talukas shall ensure after the pleadings are complete, the parties should
            be called upon to appear on the day fixed as indicated in Order X and record the admissions and
            denials and the court shall direct the parties to the suit to opt for either mode of the settlement
            outside the court as specified in sub-Section (1) of Section 89 and at the option of the parties shall
            fix the date of appearance before such forum or authority and in the event of the parties opting to
            any one of the modes of settlement directions be issued to appear on the date, time and venue
            fixed and the parties shall so appear before such authority/forum without any further notice at such
            designated place and time and it shall also be made clear in the reference order that trial is fixed
            beyond the period of two months making it clear that in the event of ADR not being fruitful, the trial
            would commence on the next day so fixed and would proceed on day-to-day basis.
     iv.    In the event of the party’s failure to opt for ADR namely resolution of dispute as prescribed under
            Section 89(1) the court should frame the issues for its determination within one week preferably, in
            the open court.




                                                                                                                   221
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Civil Procedure


        v.    Fixing of the date of trial shall be in consultation with the learned advocates appearing for the
              parties to enable them to adjust their calendar. Once the date of trial is fixed, the trial should proceed
              accordingly to the extent possible, on day-to-day basis.
       vi.    Learned trial judges of District and Taluka Courts shall as far as possible maintain the diary for
              ensuring that only such number of cases as can be handled on any given day for trial and complete
              the recording of evidence so as to avoid overcrowding of the cases and as a sequence of it would
              result in adjournment being sought and thereby preventing any inconvenience being caused to the
              stakeholders.
      vii.    The counsels representing the parties may be enlightened of the provisions of Order XI and Order
              XII so as to narrow down the scope of dispute and it would be also the onerous responsibility of the
              Bar Associations and Bar Councils to have periodical refresher courses and preferably by virtual
              mode.
      viii.   The trial courts shall scrupulously, meticulously and without fail comply with the provisions of
              Rule 1 of Order XVII and once the trial has commenced it shall be proceeded from day to day as
              contemplated under the proviso to Rule (2).
       ix.    The courts shall give meaningful effect to the provisions for payment of cost for ensuring that
              no adjournment is sought for procrastination of the litigation and the opposite party is suitably
              compensated in the event of such adjournment is being granted.
        x.    At conclusion of trial the oral arguments shall be heard immediately and continuously and judgment
              be pronounced within the period stipulated under Order XX of CPC.
       xi.    The statistics relating to the cases pending in each court beyond 5 years shall be forwarded by
              every presiding officer to the Principal District Judge once in a month who (Principal District Judge/
              District Judge) shall collate the same and forward it to the review committee constituted by the
              respective High Courts for enabling it to take further steps.
      xii.    The Committee so constituted by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the respective States shall meet at
              least once in two months and direct such corrective measures to be taken by concerned court as
              deemed fit and shall also monitor the old cases (preferably which are pending for more than 05
              years) constantly.

 COMMERCIAL COURTS ACT, 2015

 Introduction
The Government of India introduced the ‘The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate
Division of High Courts Act, 2015’ (Commercial Courts Act, 2015 for short) to reduce the burden on judiciary with
respect to commercial disputes. This not only unburdened the judiciary but also enable prospective foreign
investors to gain more trust over their investments in Indian market.
Its main emphasis is on Commercial disputes which are special in nature since they affect the economy of a
nation, directly or indirectly. To expedite the process of disposal of cases of large economic value or commercial
cases, the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (the Act) was introduced. It is an Act to provide for the constitution of
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division in the High Courts for adjudicating
commercial disputes of specified value and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The Commercial Courts Act, 2015 came into force on 23rd October, 2015. It enables speedy redressal of cases
holding large economic value.

222
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                           LESSON 6

 Commercial Courts
According to Section 3 of the Act, the State Government may with the consultation of respective High Court
constitute the constitute Commercial Courts at District level, as it may deem necessary for the purpose of
exercising the jurisdiction and powers conferred on those Courts under this Act.
State Government, after consultation with the High Court may-
    1.   specify pecuniary value which shall not be less than three lakh rupees or such higher value. [Section
         3(1A)]
    2.   extend, alter, and reduce the jurisdiction of such court within local limits. [Section 3(2)]
    3.   appoint one or more persons having experience in dealing with commercial disputes to be the Judge
         or Judges, of such Courts.

 Jurisdiction
According to Section 6 of the Act, the Commercial Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits and applications
relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value arising out of the entire territory of the State over which it
has been vested territorial jurisdiction by State Government with the assistance of concerned High Court.
According to Section 7 of the Act, all suits and applications relating to commercial disputes of a Specified Value
filed in a High Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial
Division of that High Court.
According to Section 10 of the Act, in case of matters of international commercial arbitration pertaining to
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 the matters shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division
where such Commercial Division has been constituted in such High Court. In matters of arbitration other than
international commercial arbitration under Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that have been filed on the
original side of the High Court, matters shall be heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division where such
Commercial Division has been constituted in such High Court.

 Determination of Specified Value
The Specified Value of the subject-matter of the commercial dispute in a suit, appeal or application shall be
determined by –
    l    In case of recovery of money – the value should include interest accrued so far, upto the date of filing
         of application or suit.
    l    In case of Movable Property or right in it – the value shall be computed taking into account market
         value of the movable property as on the date of filing of the suit or application.
    l    In case of immovable Property or right in it - the value shall be computed taking into account market
         value of the immovable property as on the date of filing of the suit or application.
    l    In case of other intangible right - the value shall be computed taking into account estimated market
         value of such right by plaintiff as on the date of filing of the suit or application.

 Pre-Institution Mediation and Settlement
The very purpose of this Act was to resolve the commercial disputes without bringing them to the court of
law through mediation. Prior to approaching a commercial court for dispute commercial in nature, the Act
requires that parties attempt to settle their issues through mediation. The Central Government may, authorise
the Authorities constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 for the purposes of pre-institution

                                                                                                                223
EP-JI&GL                                                                              Law relating to Civil Procedure

mediation.

Time Period
The process of pre-litigation mediation shall be completed within a period of three months from the date of
application made. It can be extended for a further period of two months with the consent of the parties.

Award/Settlement
The award or settlement of pre-litigation mediation shall be in writing and signed by the parties to the dispute
and the mediator. The award shall have the same status and effect as of an arbitral award under section 30(4)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.

 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court shall within sixty days of such judgment
may file an appeal -
      l   If he is aggrieved by the judgment of Commercial court below District Judge, he may appeal to the
          Commercial Appellate Court.
      l   If he is aggrieved by the judgment of Commercial court at District Judge or Commercial Division of a
          High Court, he may appeal to the Commercial Appellate Division of that High Court
All the appeals filed shall be disposed of within a period of six month from the date of filing.

 Amendments to the Provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
Section 16 of the Act provides that the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure 1908 shall in their application to
any suit in respect of a commercial dispute of specified value stands amended in manner provided under the
schedule. The following provisions have been amended by the Schedule in their application-
      l   Section 26 – Institution of Suits
      l   Section 35-A- Compensatory Costs
      l   Section 35- Costs
      l   Order 5 – Issuance and Service of Summons
      l   Order 6, 7 and 8 – Pleadings
      l   Order 11- Discovery and Inspection of Documents
      l   Order 18 – Examination of Witness
      l   Order 20 – Judgment and Decree, etc.
Certain provisions were also inserted to enable the fast track process of Commercial Courts.


 CASE LAWS
 1. Daimler Financial Services India Pvt. Limited vs. Vikash Kumar and Ors. (24.06.2020 - JHRHC) : W.P.
 (C). No. 3941 of 2019
 The petitioner is a non-banking finance company. The opposite parties obtained loan which they failed to
 repay and the matter was then referred to sole arbitrator. On being dissatisfied with the arbitral award they
 approached to Commercial Court, Dhanbad. The Commercial Court dismissed the petition on grounds of
 having no pecuniary jurisdiction. The court stated,


224
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                         LESSON 6

    “The learned Court below observed that the said Court below is at present having pecuniary jurisdiction
    of one crore rupees or such higher value as may be notified by the Central Government as there is no
    notification of the State in compliance of Section 3(1-A) of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 as amended
    by the amendment Act of 28 of 2018, and came to a conclusion that the Court below has no jurisdiction to
    decide the execution petition and dismissed the same for being non-maintainable.”
 2. Telangana State Tourism Development Corporation Limited vs. A.A. Avocations Pvt. Ltd. (09.06.2022 -
 TLHC) : 2022 SCC OnLine TS 1266
 The court held that if the specified value of commercial suit is one crore and above it shall be referred to
 Commercial Courts Act under Section 9 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996.
    “On a cumulative reading of Section 2(1)(C)(vii), Section 101 and Section 122, it is apparent that if a
    dispute arising out of an agreement concerning immovable property which is exclusively used in trade
    or commerce and whose ‘specified value’ is more than one crore, then, it is a ‘commercial dispute’ and
    only the commercial Court has jurisdiction to deal with application filed under Section 9 of the Act,
    1996.”
 3. The Court cited T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal, (1977) 4 SCC 467 to reiterate that the answer to an
 irresponsible suit or litigation would be a vigilant judge and comment that “an onerous responsibility rests
 on the shoulders of the presiding officer of every court, who should be cautious and vigilant against such
 indolent acts and persons who attempt to thwart quick dispensation of justice. A response is expected from
 all parties involved, with a special emphasis on the presiding officer. The presiding officer must exercise due
 diligence to ensure that proceedings are conducted efficiently and without unnecessary delays.” The Court
 also suggested members of the Bar to be circumspect in seeking adjournments, particularly regarding old
 matters or those pending for decades....
 The Court issued following directions towards curbing judicial delay: All courts at district and taluka levels
 to ensure proper and time bound execution of the summons as per Order V Rule (2) of CPC; Principal District
 Judges to monitor the same, collate the statistics and forward them to committee constituted by High Court
 for consideration and monitoring. All courts at district and taluka levels to ensure filing of written statement
 within the time prescribed under Order VIII Rule 1, preferably within 30 days, assign reasons in case of
 extending the limit beyond 30 days as per Order VIII sub-Rule (1) of CPC. All courts at district and taluka
 levels to ensure that after completion of pleadings, parties are called upon to appear on the day fixed as
 per Order X, and record admissions/denials; to direct parties to either opt for mode of settlement outside the
 Court as per Section 89(1) and fix date for appearance before appropriate forum/authority and make it clear
 in the reference order the date fixed in case of failure of ADR. In case of parties not opting for ADR as per
 Section 89(1), the Court to frame issues for its determination within 1 week, preferably in open court. Fix date
 of trial in consultation with advocates appearing for the parties, enabling them to adjust their calendar, and
 proceed with trial on a day-to-day basis to the possible extent. Trial Judges of district and taluka courts to
 maintain diary to ensure that only such number of cases are handled on a given day for trial and complete
 recording of evidence to avoid overcrowding of cases which as a sequence would result in adjournment
 sought and preventing inconvenience to stakeholders. Counsels representing parties to be enlightened of
 provisions under Order XI and XII to narrow down the scope of dispute, also the onerous responsibility of
 the Bar Associations and Bar Councils to have periodical refresher courses, preferably in virtual mode. Trial
 Courts to comply with Order XVII Rule 1 scrupulously, meticulously and without fail, and once commenced,
 trial to be proceeded with on a day-to-day basis as per Rule 2. Courts to give meaningful effect to effect
 to provisions for payment of cost to ensure no adjournment is sought for procrastination of litigation, and
 opposite party gets suitably compensated in case of adjournment so granted. On conclusion of trial, oral
 arguments to be heard immediately and continuously, and judgment to be pronounced within the period


                                                                                                              225
EP-JI&GL                                                                                Law relating to Civil Procedure


 stipulated under Order XX of CPC. Every presiding officer to forward statistics related to cases pending
 before each Court beyond 5 years to the Principal District Judge once in a month, who has to collate the
 data and forward it to review committee constituted by High Courts, enabling it to take further steps.
 4. The Supreme Court in Eldeco Housing and Industries Limited v. Ashok Vidyarthi and Others (Special
 Leave Petition (C) No. 19465 of 2021) ruled that when invoking Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the CPC, the court
 cannot consider any evidence. The court also ruled that the issues of merit between the parties are not
 within the court’s purview at that stage.
 5. In Civil Appeal No. 2308-2309 of 2016 (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 8536-8537 of 2008) Vijay Prakash Jarath
 v. Tej Prakash Jarathit was ruled that the cause of action in respect of which a counter claim can be filed,
 should accrue before the defendant has delivered his defence, namely, before the defendant has filed a
 written statement.
 6. In Civil Appeal No. 3190 of 2016 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 6662 of 2016) Raghavendra Swamy Mutt v.
 Uttaradi Mutt, it was stated that Appeal under Section 100 CPC is required to be admitted only on substantial
 question/questions of law. It cannot be formal admission like an appeal under Section 96 CPC. That is the
 fundamental imperative. It is peremptory in character, and that makes the principle absolutely cardinal.
 7. In Civil Appeal No. 4543 of 2016 (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 538 of 2014) Rishabh Chand Jain & Another
 v. Ginesh Chandra Jain, it was stated that the impugned order dismissing the suit on the ground of Res
 Judicata does not cease to be a decree on account of a procedural irregularity of non-framing an issue. The
 court ought to treat the decree as if the same has been passed after framing the issue and on adjudication
 thereof, in such circumstances. What is to be seen is the effect and not the process. Even if there is a
 procedural irregularity in the process of passing such order, if the order passed is a decree under law, no
 revision lies under Section 115 of the Code in view of the specific bar under sub-Section (2) thereof. It is only
 appealable under section 96 read with Order XLI of the Code.




                                                   LESSON ROUND-UP

   l The Civil Procedure Code consists of two parts. 158 Sections form the first part and the rules and orders
      contained in Schedule I form the second part. The object of the Code generally is to create jurisdiction
      while the rules indicate the mode in which the jurisdiction should be exercised.
   l The Code defines important terms that have been used thereunder and deals with different types of
      courts and their jurisdiction. Jurisdiction means the authority by which a Court has to decide matters
      that are brought before it for adjudication.
   l Under the Code of Civil Procedure, a civil court has jurisdiction to try a suit if two conditions are fulfilled:

           (i)    the suit must be of a civil nature; and
           (ii)   the cognizance of such suit should not have been barred. Jurisdiction of a court may be of four
                  kinds:
                  (a)   jurisdiction over the subject matter;
                  (b)   local or territorial jurisdiction;
                  (c)   original and appellate jurisdiction;
                  (d)   pecuniary jurisdiction depending on pecuniary value of the suit.



226
Law relating to Civil Procedure                                                                               LESSON 6

    l The Code embodies the doctrine of res-judicata that is, baror restraint on repetition of litigation of the
        same issues between the same parties. It enacts that since a matter is finally decided by a competent
        court, no party can be permitted to reopen it in a subsequent litigation. It is a pragmatic principle
        accepted and provided in law that there must be a limit or end to litigation on the same issues. In the
        absence of such a rule there would be no end to litigation and the parties would be put to constant
        trouble, harassment and expenses.
    l The grant of a temporary injunction is a matter of discretion of Courts. Such injunction may be granted
        if the Court finds that there is a substantial question to be investigated and that matter should be
        preserved in status until final disposal of that question.
    l The Code also provides for making certain interlocutory orders. The court has power to order sale of
        any moveable property which is the subject-matter of the suit or attached before judgement in such
        suit which is subject to speedy and natural decay or for any just and sufficient cause desirable to be
        sold at once.
    l Suit ordinarily is a civil action started by presenting a plaint in duplicate to the Court containing concise
        statement of the material facts, on which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence. In every
        plaint the facts must be proved by an affidavit.
    l The main essentials of the suit are: (i) the opposing parties; (ii) the cause of action; (iii) the subject matter
        of the suit, and (iv) the relief(s) claimed.
    l Every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try it. The Code specifies
        the categories of suits that shall be instituted in the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
        the property is situated. This is subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any law. The
        various stages in proceedings of a suit have been elaborately laid down under the Code.
    l Commercial Courts were established for speedy adjudication of commercial disputes of specified
        value and matters pertaining to large economic interest.


                                                       GLOSSARY

 Misjoinder of Parties: Where more than one persons joined in one suit as plaintiffs or defendants in whom
 or against whom any right to relief does not arise or against whom separate suits are brought, no common
 question of law or fact would arise, it is a case of ‘misjoinder of parties’.

 Reference: A court in which a suit has been instituted may state a case and refer the same for opinion of the
 High Court

 Review: It provides that any person considering himself aggrieved by a decree or order may apply for a
 review of judgement to the court which passed the decree or made the order on any of the grounds as
 mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1

 Revision: In revision, the High Court may call for the record of any case which has been decided by any
 Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto.

 Cause of Action: “Cause of action” means every fact that it would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in
 order to support his right to the judgement of the Court.

 Territorial jurisdiction: A territorial limit of jurisdiction for each court is fixed by the Government.



                                                                                                                    227
EP-JI&GL                                                                            Law relating to Civil Procedure


 Pecuniary jurisdiction: Section 6 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 deals with Pecuniary jurisdiction and lays
 down that save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided Courts shall only have jurisdiction over suits the
 amount or value of which does not exceed the pecuniary limits of any of its ordinary jurisdiction.
 Original Jurisdiction: A Court tries and decides suits filed before it.
 Appellate Jurisdiction: A Court hears appeals against decisions or decrees passed by sub-ordinate Courts.
 Doctrine of Res judicata: No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter has been directly and
 substantially in issue in a former suit either between the same parties, or between parties under whom they
 or any of them claim, litigating under the same title in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the
 suit in which such issue has been subsequently raised an finally decided by such Court.
 Specified Value: In relation to a commercial dispute, it means the value of the subject-matter in respect of a
 suit which shall not be less than three lakh rupees.


                                                 TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
      1. Discuss Jurisdiction of Civil Courts.
  2. Define the terms:
              (i)   Order
             (ii)   Judgement
            (iii)   Decree
            (iv)    Revision
             (v)    Appeal
            (vi)    Reference
            (vii)   Review.
  3. What is res judicata and stay of suits?
  4. Briefly discuss the provisions relating to inherent powers of the Court.
  5. Explain in brief Summary Procedure.
  6. Explain the important stages in proceeding of a suit
   7.     Write a short note on Commercial Court Act, 2015.
  8.      Discuss the provision related to pre mediation under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.


                                           LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l Bare Act of Civil Procedure Code, 1908

   l Civil Procedure Code, 1908; Allahabad Law Agency, Allahabad, M.P. Tandon

   l AIR Manual of CPC



                              OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2191/1/A1908-05.pdf


228
Laws relating to Crime and                                                                     Lesson
its Procedure                                                                                     7
 KEY CONCEPTS
n Criminal Intention n Search n Abetting n Mens Rea n Actus Reus n Congnizable Offence n Non-Congnizable
Offence n Criminal conspiracy n Misappropriation n Criminal breach of Trust n Accusation n Defamation
n Grievous hurt n Attempt n Accomplishment n Presumption of Innocence n Burden of Proof n Mutiny n Personation



 Learning Objectives
 To understand:
        Ingredients of Crime and law dealing with the menace of Crime
        Structure of judicial system dealing with criminal cases
        The provisions relating to Bail
        Provisions relating to Compounding of Offences
        Offences relating to the property
        Criminal Breach of Trust
        Offences relating to documents and property marks
        Defamation
        Difference between fine and penalty



 Lesson Outline
        Introduction                                          Bail
        The Stages of Crime                                   Limitation for Taking Cognizance of Certain
        Type of Punishments                                    Offences
        Difference between Fine and Penalty                   Offences against Property
        The Fundamental Elements of Crime                     Criminal misappropriation of property
                                                                (Section 314 and Section 315)
        Cognizable Offence and Non-cognizable
         Offence                                               Criminal breach of trust
        Classes of Criminal Courts                            Fraudulent deeds and dispositions of
                                                                property
        Power of Courts
                                                               Offences Relating to Documents and
        Inherent Powers of the Court                           Property Marks
        Arrest of Persons                                     Defamation
        Summons and Warrants                                  General Exceptions
        Proclamation and Attachment                           Lesson Round-Up
        Summons to Produce                                    Glossary
        Search Warrant                                        Test Yourself
        Summary Trials                                        List of Further Readings and References
        Compounding of Offences


                                                                                                          229
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l   The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
      l   The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023

 INTRODUCTION

 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is a modern day legislation which has replaced the colonial Indian Penal
Code of 1860 which was retained as the main penal law of the country even after India became independent
in 1947. Enforced from 1st July 2024, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 2023 represents a transformative
update to India’s criminal laws, replacing the colonial-era Indian Penal Code (IPC) of 1860. By introducing
modernized definitions and addressing new forms of crime, such as cyber offenses and organized crime,
the BNS 2023 aims to make India’s legal system more aligned with contemporary social and technological
realities. It incorporates provisions for community service as punishment, refines terrorism and sedition laws,
and eliminates obsolete offenses, reflecting India’s commitment to justice and human rights. The BNS 2023 is a
crucial step in enhancing the accessibility, relevance, and efficiency of the Indian criminal justice system, while
upholding the constitutional rights of all citizens.
The Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) was a colonial legislation which was retained as the main penal law of the
country even after India became independent in 1947. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 which came into
force on 1st July 2024 and applies to the whole of India replaced the colonial IPC.
Crime is a social phenomenon. It is a wrong committed by an individual in a society. It arises first when a state
is organized, people set up rules, the breaking of which is an act called crime. Law regulates the social interest,
arbitrates conflicting claims and demands. The security of persons and property which is an essential function
for the State is achieved through the instrumentality of criminal law. Crime being a relative conception is an act
defined by State as a crime. The concept of crime changes from time to time and as per the society.
For determination of crime there is no fixed rule. Crime is what the law says it is. The difference between a
criminal offence and a civil wrong is that while the former is considered a wrong against the society because
of their grave nature, a civil wrong is a wrong done to an individual. It is believed that serious crimes threaten
the very existence of an orderly society, and therefore, if such a crime is committed, it is committed against the
whole society.
It should be kept in mind that what is criminal, illegal or unlawful may still be a socially acceptable practice. It
is also likely that all that a society considers as reprehensible is not criminal in the eyes of law. The divergence
of criminal law, however, with the moral and cultural standards of society cannot be too great because
governments in framing and amending criminal laws cannot be ignorant of societal standards.
In India, the base of the crime and punitive provision has been laid down in Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. In
BNS the definition of crime has not been attempted or defined but according to section 2(24) the word ‘Offence’
‘means a thing made punishable by BNS’. The word offence and crime are interchangeable. The BNS doesn’t
uses the word ‘crime’. Instead it uses the term ‘Offence’ as defined under section 2(24).
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 is the substantive law of crimes. It defines acts which constitute an offence
and lays down punishment for the same. It lays down certain principles of criminal law. The procedural law

230
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                    LESSON 7

through which the BNS is implemented is the Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023(BNSS). BNS consists of
20 chapters and 358 sections.

 Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita(BNSS) is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal
Procedure. BNSS was introduced to replace the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 as part of India’s efforts to
modernize and streamline its criminal justice system in alignment with contemporary needs and societal
expectations. The shift reflects an intent to enhance the efficiency of criminal procedures, ensure victim-centric
justice, and integrate technological advancements into the investigative and judicial processes. By addressing
delays, redundancies, and complexities in the earlier framework, the BNSS incorporates provisions to expedite
trials, strengthen digital evidence mechanisms, and improve transparency. Furthermore, it emphasizes
safeguarding the rights of individuals, ensuring fairness, and reducing procedural bottlenecks, thereby making
the legal system more accessible and effective for citizens while maintaining the principles of justice and
equity.
Company Secretaries and the secretarial profession would have relatively less to do with the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 than with other procedural laws, except for safeguarding against incurring of liability
for criminal offences by Directors, Secretary, Manager or other Principal Officer under different corporate and
industrial laws. Nevertheless, it is necessary that company secretaries and other secretarial staff should be
familiar with some of the relevant features of the Code. It is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating
to the procedure to be followed in apprehending the criminals, investigating the criminal cases and their trial
before the Criminal Courts. It is an adjective law but also contains provisions of substantive nature (e.g. Chapters
VIII, IX, X and XI). Its object is to provide a machinery for determining the guilt of and imposing punishment on
offenders under the substantive criminal law, for example, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS). The two Codes
are to be read together. The Code also provides machinery for punishment of offences under some other Acts.

 Jurisdiction of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
The geographical area or the subjects to which a law applies is defined as the jurisdiction of that law.
Ordinarily, laws made by a country are applicable within its own boundaries because a country cannot have
legal machinery to enforce its laws in other sovereign countries. Thus, for most of the laws, the territorial
jurisdiction of a law is the international boundary of that country. Countries, however, also make laws that apply
to territories outside of their own country. This is called the extra-territorial jurisdiction.
Under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, criminal courts in India exercise jurisdiction either because a crime is
committed by any person (national, or foreigner) within the Indian territory or because a crime though committed
outside India, the person committing the crime is liable to be tried for it under any Indian law. The former is
known as intra-territorial jurisdiction and the latter as known as extra-territorial jurisdiction.
Intra-territorial jurisdiction: Where a crime under any provision of BNS is committed within the territory of India,
the BNS applies and the courts can try and punish irrespective of the fact that the person who had committed
the crime is an Indian national or foreigner. This is called ‘intra-territorial jurisdiction’ because the submission to
the jurisdiction of the court is by virtue of the crime being committed within the Indian territory. Section 1(4) and
1(5) of BNS deals with extra-territorial jurisdiction of the courts. This section declares the jurisdictional scope
of operation of the BNS to offences committed within India and beyond India. The emphasis on ‘any person’
makes it very clear that in terms of considering the guilt for any act or omission, the law shall be applied equally
without any discrimination on the ground of caste, creed, nationality, rank, status or privilege. BNS applies to
any offence committed:
    1.   Within the territory of India as defined in Article 1 of the Constitution of India.
   2.    Any place without and beyond India;
    3.   Any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;

                                                                                                                  231
EP-JI&GL                                                                          Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

    4.     Any person in any place without and beyond India committing an offence targeting a computer resource
           located in India.
It should be noted that it is not a defence that a foreigner/non-Indian citizen did not know that he was committing
a wrong, the act itself not being an offence in his own country. In this regard the Supreme Court in Mobarik Ali
Ahmed v. State of Bombay, 1957 AIR SC 857, held that it is obvious that for an Indian law to operate and be
effective in the territory where it operates, i.e., the territory of India, it is not necessary that the laws should either
be published or be made known outside the country in order to bring foreigners under its ambit. It would be
apparent that the test to find out effective publication would be publication in India, not outside India so as to
bring it to the notice of everyone who intends to pass through India.
Exemption from intra-territorial jurisdiction of BNS:-
      1.   Article 361(2) of the Constitution of India protects criminal proceedings against the President or Governor
           of a state in any court, during the time they hold office.
    2.     In accordance with well-recognized principles of international law, foreign sovereigns are exempt from
           criminal proceedings in India.
    3.     This immunity is also enjoyed by the ambassadors and diplomats of foreign countries who have official
           status in India.
Section 3 of the IPC replaced with Section 1(4) of the BNS:
BNS: Section 1 (4)
      -    Any person liable, by any law for the time being in force in India, to be tried for an offence committed
           beyond India shall be dealt with according to the provisions of BNS for any act committed beyond India
           in the same manner as if such act had been committed within India.
Section 4 of the IPC replaced with Section 1(5) of the BNS:
BNS: Section 1 (5)
The provisions of BNS shall also apply to any offence committed by –
   (a)     any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India;
   (b)     any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be;
   (c)     any person in any place without and beyond India committing an offence targeting a computer resource
           located in India.
In this section, the word “offence” includes every act committed outside India which, if committed in India, would
be punishable under BNS.
Illustration: A, who is a citizen of India, commits a murder in any place without and beyond India. He can be
tried and convicted of murder in any place in India in which he may be found.
Changes between Section 3 of the IPC and Section 1(4) of the BNS:
      -    Section is included as a subsection in BNS sans heading.
      -    “Indian laws” is replaced with “law” and “for the time being in force in India” is inserted.
Changes between Section 4 of the IPC and Section 1(5) of the BNS:
      -    Section is included as a subsection in BNS sans heading.
      -    In the illustration, “Uganda” has been replaced with “any place outside India.”


232
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

 THE STAGES OF CRIME
The commission of a crime consists of some significant stages. If a person commits a crime voluntarily, it involves
four important stages, viz.




 1. Criminal Intention
Criminal intention is the first stage in the commission of offence. Intention is the conscious exercise of mental
faculties of a person to do an act for the purpose of accomplishing or satisfying a purpose. Law does not as a
rule punish individuals for their evil thoughts or criminal intentions. The criminal court does not punish a man for
mere guilty intention because it is very difficult for the prosecution to prove the guilty intention of a man.
Intention means doing any act with one’s will, desire, voluntariness, malafides and for some purpose. In the
BNS, all these varied expressions find place in the various sections of BNS. Intention can also be imputed under
the law. For example, if a man drives in a rash and reckless manner resulting in an accident causing death of a
person, the reckless driver cannot plead innocence by stating that he never intended to cause the death of the
person. It may be true in the strict sense of the term. But a reckless driver should know that reckless driving is
likely to result in harm and can even cause death of the persons on the road, So, by virtue of definition of the
word ‘voluntarily’ in BNS, a reckless driver who causes death of a person can be presumed or deemed to have
intended to cause the death of the person.

 2. Preparation
Preparation means to arrange necessary measures for commission of intended criminal act. Preparation itself is
not punishable as it is difficult to prove that necessary preparations were made for commission of the offence.
But in certain exceptional cases mere preparation is also punishable.
Under the BNS, mere preparation to commit a few offences is punishable as they are considered to be grave
offences. Some of them are as follows:
    (i)    Preparation to wage war against the Government (section 190).
   (ii)    Preparation for counterfeiting of coins or Government Stamps (sections 178 and181).
   (iii)   Possessing counterfeit coins, false weights or measurements and forged documents (section 180 and
           339).
  (iv)     Making preparation to commit dacoity (section 310 (4).

 3. Attempt
Attempt, which is the third stage in the commission of a crime, is punishable. Attempt has been called as a
preliminary crime. Though, section 62 of the BNS does not give any definition of ‘attempt’ but simply provides
for punishment for attempting to commit an offence. Attempt means the direct movement towards commission
of a crime after necessary preparations have been made. When a person wants to commit a crime, he firstly
forms an intention, then makes some preparation and finally does something for achieving the object; if he

                                                                                                                233
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

succeeds in his object he is guilty of completed offence otherwise only for making an attempt. It should be
noted that whether an act amounts to an attempt to commit a particular offence is a question of fact depending
on the nature of crime and steps necessary to take in order to commit it. The act constituting the attempt must
be proximate to the intended result. Under the BNS, the sections on attempt can be divided into four broad
categories:
      (i)   Those sections in which the commission of an offence and the attempt to commit are dealt within the
            same section, the extent of the punishment being the same for both the offence as well as the attempt.
            The examples of this category are those offences against the State such as waging or attempting to
            wage war against the Government of India, assaulting or attempting to assault the President or Governor
            with intent to compel or restrain the exercise of lawful power, sedition, a public servant accepting or
            attempting to accept gratification, using or attempting to use evidence knowing it to be false, dacoity
            etc.
   (ii)     Those offences in which the attempt to commit specific offences are dealt side by side with the offences
            themselves, but separately, and separate punishments have been provided for the attempt other than
            that provided for the offences which have been completed. The examples of this category are attempt
            to commit an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life including robbery, murder etc.
  (iii)     Attempt to commit suicide to compel or restrain from applying or restrain of lawful power specifically
            provided as an offence under section 226 of the BNS.
  (iv)      The fourth category relates to the attempt to commit offences for which no specific punishment has been
            provided in the BNS. Such attempts are covered under section 62. This section of BNS provides that
            whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by BNS with imprisonment for life or imprisonment,
            or cause such an offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards commission of
            the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by BNS for the punishment of such attempt, be
            punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to
            one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment
            provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.

 4. Commission of Crime or Accomplishment
The last stage in the commission of crime is its accomplishment. If the accused succeeds in his attempt, the
result is the commission of crime and he will be guilty of the offence. If his attempt is unsuccessful, he will be
guilty for an attempt only. If the offence is complete, the offender will be tried and punished under the specific
provisions of the BNS.

 TYPE OF PUNISHMENTS

                                                 Types of Punishments

  Death           Imprisonment      Imprisonment, which is of two          Forfeiture of       Fine      Community
                     for life       descriptions, namely:                   property                      Service
                                      (1) Rigorous, that is, with hard
                                                  labour;
                                                (2) Simple;

      1.    Death: A death sentence is the harshest of punishments provided in the BNS, which involves the judicial
            killing or taking the life of the accused as a form of punishment. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in various
            cases has ruled that death sentence ought to be imposed only in the ‘rarest of rare cases’. This doctrine

234
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

        was propounded by the Supreme Court in the case of Bacchan Singh v. State of Punjab (AIR 1980 SC
        898). The BNS provides for capital punishment for the following offences:
         (a)     Murder
         (b)     Dacoity with Murder.
         (c)     Waging War against the Government of India.
         (d)     Abetting mutiny actually committed.
         (e)     Giving or fabricating false evidence upon which an innocent person suffers death
          (f) Abetment of a suicide by a minor or insane person;
         (g)     Attempted murder by a life convict.
		 The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) has increased the number of offenses punishable by death. Some
   of the offenses that are now punishable by death under the BNS include:
           1.    Murder
		 The punishment for murder is death or life imprisonment, and the offender may also be liable to a
   fine.
          2.     Mob lynching
		 The punishment for murder or grievous hurt by five or more people on specified grounds is a
   minimum of seven years imprisonment to life imprisonment or death.
          3.     Terrorism
		 The punishment for attempting or committing terrorism is death or life imprisonment and a fine of
   Rs 10 lakh if it results in death.
          4.     Organized crime
		 The punishment for attempting or committing organized crime is death or life imprisonment and a
   fine of Rs 10 lakh if it results in death.
		 In either of the cases, when the court decides that death penalty is the appropriate sentence to be
   imposed in the light of the gravity of matter and consequences of the offence committed and the
   absence of mitigating factors, then the court has to give special reasons as to why the court came
   to this conclusion.
   2.   Life Imprisonment: Imprisonment for life meant rigorous imprisonment, that is, till the last breath of the
        convict.
   3.   Imprisonment: Imprisonment which is of two descriptions namely –
          (i) Rigorous Imprisonment, that is hard labour;
          (ii)   Simple Imprisonment
   4.   Forfeiture of property: Forfeiture is the divestiture of specific property without compensation in
        consequence of some default or act forbidden by law. The Courts may order for forfeiture of property
        of the accused in certain occasions. The courts are empowered to forfeit property of the guilty under
        section 154 and 155 of the BNS.
   5.   Fine: Fine is forfeiture of money by way of penalty. It should be imposed individually and not collectively.
        When court sentences an accused for a punishment, which includes a fine amount, it can specify that in

                                                                                                                235
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

            the event the convict does not pay the fine amount, he would have to suffer imprisonment for a further
            period as indicated by the court, which is generally referred to as default sentence.
   6.       Community Service as Punishment: The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 2023 includes community
            service as a form of punishment for minor offenses:
Purpose
The BNS aims to create a more balanced and rehabilitative criminal justice system by focusing on restorative
justice. The goal is to promote rehabilitation and reduce the burden on the prison system. Community service
has been used widely in America to punish petty offences, for example in cases of vandalism, petty theft, etc.
Examples of offenses under BNS
Community service can be an option for offenses like petty thefts, public nuisance, false defamation complaints,
and drunken misconduct in public.
How it works
Courts can choose community service over incarceration or fines. For example, offenders involved in thefts of
property valued under Rs 5,000 can avoid traditional punishments by returning the stolen goods and performing
community service.
Community service for offences under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 2023:
       I.   Involvement of public servants in illegal trade (Sec 202 BNS)
      II.   Non-appearance in response to a proclamation (Sec 209 BNS)
   III.     Attempt to commit suicide to influence legal authority (Sec 226 BNS)
   IV.      First conviction of petty theft involving property valued below Rs.5,000 and the property must have
            been recovered. (Sec 303 BNS)
   V.       Public misconduct by a drunken person (Sec 355 BNS)
  VI.       Defamation (Sec 356 BNS)

 Difference between Fine and Penalty
Fine
According to merriam-webster dictionary fine “a sum imposed as punishment for an offense”.
Penalty
According to merriam-webster dictionary, “the suffering or the sum to be forfeited to which a person agrees to
be subjected in case of non fulfillment of stipulations.”
Analysis
An inference may be drawn from the definitions above that punishments are against offences and penalties are
against non-compliances.
According to section 2(38) of the General Clauses Act, 1897, offence shall mean any act or omission made
punishable by any law for the time being in Force.
According to Merriam-webster dictionary, the meaning of Non-compliances is failure or refusal to comply with
something (such as a rule or regulation) : a state of not being in compliance.
Accordingly, we can analyse that the mention of fine and penalty in a particular provision may depend upon
the nature of provision i.e. Criminal or Civil.


236
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                 LESSON 7

 Example
 According to section 12(8) of the Companies Act, 2013, if any default is made in complying with the
 requirements of section 12, the company and every officer who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of
 one thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues but not exceeding one lakh rupees.
 In this provision, we may note that here the default is in nature of non-compliance there the provision creates
 the liability of penalty.
 According to section 16(3) of the Companies Act, 2013, if a company makes default in complying with any
 direction given under section 16(1), the company shall be punishable with fine of one thousand rupees for
 every day during which the default continues and every officer who is in default shall be punishable with fine
 which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
 In this provision, we may note that here the default is in nature of offence and the provision provides for fine
 as a punishment.

Further, it may be noted that in the Companies Act, 2013, where monetary penalty is provided for any default,
generally no punishment by way of imprisonment is provided. But, Fine and imprisonment are mostly provided
together. Two such examples may be referred as under:
Section 8(11) of Companies Act, 2013
“If a company makes any default in complying with any of the requirements laid down in this section, the
company shall, without prejudice to any other action under the provisions of this section, be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend to one crore rupees and the directors
and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than twentyfive thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both”
Section 26(9) of the Companies Act, 2013
“If a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this section, the company shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees and every
person who is knowingly a party to the issue of such prospectus shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which
may extend to three lakh rupees, or with both.”
The same may also be analysed from SEBI Act, 1992, where imprisonment and fine and kept together for
imposition but liability of penalties are provided for non-compliances.

 THE FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF CRIME
The basic function of criminal law is to punish the offender and to deter the incidence of crime in the society. A
criminal act must contain the following elements:

                                               Elements of Crime

            Human Being                             Mens rea                              Actus reus

    1.   Human Being – The first requirement for commission of crime is that the act must be committed by
         a human being. The human being must be under legal obligation to act in particular manner and
         be physically and mentally fit for conviction in case he has not acted in accordance with the legal
         obligation. Only a human being under legal obligation and capable of being punished can be the
         proper subject of criminal law.

                                                                                                               237
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

   2.      Mens rea – The basic principle of criminal liability is embodied in the legal maxim ‘actus non facit
           reum, nisi mens sit rea’. It means ‘the act alone does not amount to guilt; the act must be accompanied
           by a guilty mind’. The intention and the act must both concur to constitute the crime. Mens rea is
           defined as the mental element necessary to constitute criminal liability. It is the attitude of mind which
           accompanies and directs the conduct which results in the ‘actus reus’. The act is judged not from the
           mind of the wrong-doer, but the mind of the wrong-doer is judged from the act. ‘Mens rea’ is judged from
           the external conduct of the wrong doer by applying objective standards.
Types of mens rea:
       -   Intention
       -   Negligence
       -   Recklessness
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Girja Nath v. State said that mens rea is a loose term of elastic signification and covers
a wide range of mental status and conditions the existence of which give criminal hue to actus reus. Intention,
Negligence and recklessness are the important forms of mens rea.
   (i)     Intention: Intention is defined as ‘the purpose or design with which an act is done’. Intention indicates
           the position of mind, condition of someone at particular time of commission of offence and also will of
           the accused to see effects of his unlawful conduct. Criminal intention does not mean only the specific
           intention but it includes the generic intention as well. For example: A poisons the food which B was
           supposed to eat with the intention of killing B. C eats that food instead of B and is killed. A is liable for
           killing C although A never intended it.
   (ii)    Negligence: Negligence is the second form of mens rea. Negligence is not taking care, where there
           is a duty to take care. Negligence or carelessness indicates a state of mind where there is absence
           of a desire to cause a particular consequence. The standard of care established by law is that of a
           reasonable man in identical circumstances. What amounts to reasonable care differs from thing to thing
           depending situation of each case. In criminal law, the negligent conduct amounts to means rea.
  (iii)    Recklessness: Recklessness occurs when the actor does not desire the consequence, but foresees
           the possibility and consciously takes the risk. It is a total disregard for the consequences of one’s own
           actions. Recklessness is a form of mens rea.
The word ‘mens rea’ as such is not used in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, but the idea underlying in it is
seen in the entire BNS. Generally, in the BNS, every offence is defined with precision embodying the necessary
mens rea in express words.
The mens rea or evil intent of the wrong-doer is indicated by the use of such words as- intentionally, voluntarily,
fraudulently, dishonestly, maliciously, knowingly etc.

 Exception of mens rea
      1.   Statutory Imposition: Where a statute imposes liability, the presence or absence of a guilty mind is
           irrelevant. The classical view of that ‘no mens rea, no crime’ has long been eroded and several laws
           in India and abroad, especially regarding economic crimes and departmental penalties, have created
           severe punishment even where the offences have been defined to exclude mens rea. Many laws
           passed in the interest of public safety and social welfare imposes absolute liability. This is so in matters
           concerning public health, food, drugs, etc. There is absolute liability (mens rea is not essential) in the
           licensing of shops, hotels, restaurants and chemists establishments. The same is true of cases under
           the Motor Vehicles Act and the Arms Act, offences against the State like waging of war, sedition etc.


238
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

   2.   Difficulty in proving mens rea: Where it is difficult to prove mens rea and penalties are petty fines. In
        such petty cases, speedy disposal of cases is necessary and the proving of mens rea is not easy. An
        accused may be fined even without any proof of mens rea.
   3.   Interest of Public Safety: In the interest of public safety, strict liability is imposed and whether a person
        causes public nuisance with a guilty mind or without guilty mind, he is punished.
   4.   Offence without knowledge: If a person violates a law even without the knowledge of the existence of
        the law, it can still be said that he has committed an act which is prohibited by law. In such cases, the
        fact that he was not aware of the law and hence did not intend to violate it is no defense and he would
        be liable as if he was aware of the law. This follows from the maxim ‘Ignorantia juris non excusat’ which
        means ignorance of the law is no excuse.

 Corporate Body and Mens Rea
With the proliferation in juristic persons and a growth in their activities which increasingly touch upon the
daily lives of ordinary people, criminal law has evolved to bring such persons within its ambit. For example,
according to section 2(26) of the BNS, the word ‘person’ includes any Company or Association, or body of
persons, whether incorporated or not. Thus companies are covered under the provisions of the BNS. Virtually
in all jurisdictions across the world governed by the rule of law, companies can no longer claim immunity from
criminal prosecution on the ground that they are incapable of possessing the necessary mens rea for the
commission of criminal offences. The criminal intent of the ‘alter ego’ of the company/ body corporate, i.e., the
person or group of persons that guide the business of the company, is imputed to the company.
In State of Maharashtra v. M/s Syndicate Transport, AIR 1964 Bom 195, it was held that the question whether
a corporate body should or should not be liable for criminal action resulting from the acts of some individual
must depend on the nature of offence disclosed by the allegations in the complaint or in the charge sheet, the
relative position of the officer or agent vis-à-vis the corporate body and other relevant facts and circumstances
which could show that the corporate body, as such, meant or intended to commit that act.
3. Actus Reus (act or omission): The third essential element of crime is actus reus. A human being and an evil
intent are not enough to constitute a crime for one cannot know the intentions of a man. Actus reus means overt
act or unlawful commission done in carrying out a plan with the guilty intention. Actus reus is defined as a result
of voluntary human conduct which law prohibits. It is the doing of some act by the person to be held liable. An
‘act’ is a willed movement of body.
A man may be held fully liable even when he has taken no part in the actual commission of the crime. For
example, if a number of people conspire to murder a person and only one of them actually shoots the person,
every conspirator would be held liable for it. A person will also be held fully responsible if he has made use of
an innocent agent to commit a crime.

 COGNIZABLE OFFENCE AND NON-COGNIZABLE OFFENCE
According to section 2(1)(g) of BNSS, “cognizable offence” means an offence for which, and “cognizable case”
means a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for
the time being in force, arrest without warrant.
However, according to section 2(1)(o), “non-cognizable offence” means an offence for which, and “non-cognizable
case” means a case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant.
(Note: It may be observed from the First Schedule that non-cognizable offences are usually bailable while
cognizable offences are generally non-bailable).



                                                                                                                239
EP-JI&GL                                                                   Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

 CLASSES OF CRIMINAL COURTS
Following are the different classes of criminal courts:




Besides this, the Courts may also be constituted under any other law. The Supreme Court is also vested with
powers to deal with some criminal matters. Article 134 confers appellate jurisdiction on the Supreme Court in
regard to criminal matters from a High Court in certain cases.

 Changes introduced by BNSS
Section 6 of BNSS (Section 6 of CrPC): Words “in any Metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrates” are excluded.

 POWER OF COURTS
Chapter III of BNSS deals with the power of Courts. One of such power is to try offences. Offences are divided
into two categories:
   (a)   those under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita; and
   (b)   those under any other law.
According to Section 21, any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be tried by the High
Court or the Court of Session or any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be
triable, whereas any offence under any other law shall be tried by the Court mentioned in that law and if not
mentioned, it may be tried by the High Court or any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First
Schedule to be triable.
This section is a general section and is subject to the other provisions of BNSS.

 Power of the Court to pass sentences
  (a)    Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass
		 According to section 22 of BNSS, a High Court may pass any sentence authorised by law. A Sessions
   Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law; but any sentence of
   death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court.
  (b)    Sentences which Magistrates may pass
		       Section 23 lays down the quantum of sentence which different categories of Magistrates are empowered
         to impose. The powers of individual categories of Magistrates to pass the sentence are as under:
           (i) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass any sentence authorised by law except a
               sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years.


240
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

          (ii)   The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
                 exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, or of both, or of community
                 service.
         (iii)   The Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
                 exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees, or of both, or of community
                 service.
		 Explanation. – “Community service” shall mean the work which the Court may order a convict to
   perform as a form of punishment that benefits the community, for which he shall not be entitled to any
   remuneration.
		Changes introduced by BNSS
		 Section 23 of BNSS (Section 29 of CrPC): Change in amount of fine: ten thousand is replaced by fifty
   thousand, and five thousand is replaced by ten thousand. The explanation of Section 23 defines
   “community service.” Sub-section 29(4) CrPC is excluded.
   (c)   Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine
		 According to section 24, the Court of a Magistrate may award such term of imprisonment in default of
   payment of fine as is authorised by law:
		 Provided that the term –
         (a)     is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate under section 23;
         (b)     shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive sentence, exceed
                 one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as punishment
                 for the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in default of payment of the fine.
		 The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive sentence of
   imprisonment for the maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 23.
   (d)   Sentences in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial
		 Section 25 relates to the quantum of punishment which the Court is authorised to impose where the
   accused is convicted of two or more offences at one trial. Under this section, the Court may, subject to the
   provisions of section 9 (Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences) of the BNS, sentence
   to the several punishments prescribed which such Court is competent to inflict. Such punishments when
   consisting of imprisonment to commence the one after the expiration of the other in such order as the
   Court may direct, unless the Court directs that such punishments shall run concurrently.
		 For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive sentences passed
   against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.
		 Changes introduced by BNSS
		       Section 25 of BNSS (Section 31 of CrPC): Sub section (1) is reframed but the essence is same. In subsection
         (2) (a) fourteen years is replaced by twenty years.

 INHERENT POWERS OF THE COURT
Section 528 of the BNSS is one of the most important section of BNSS. It states that nothing in BNSS shall be
deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to
give effect to any order under BNSS, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice.

                                                                                                                241
EP-JI&GL                                                                             Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

The powers of the High Court under section 528 of BNSS are partly administrative and partly judicial. Inherent
powers under section 528 include powers to quash FIR, investigation or any criminal proceedings pending
before the High Court or any Courts subordinate to it and are of wide magnitude and ramification. Court can
always take note of any miscarriage of justice and prevent the same by exercising its powers under section
528 of BNSS. These powers are neither limited nor curtailed by any other provisions of BNSS. However, such
inherent powers are to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
The Supreme Court in Madhu Limaye v. State of Maharashtra, 1978 AIR 47, has held that the following principles
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction of the High Court:
      1.   Power is not to be resorted to, if there is a specific provision in the Code for redress of grievances of
           aggrieved party.
   2.      It should be exercised very sparingly to prevent abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure
           ends of justice.
   3.      It should not be exercised as against the express bar of the law engrafted in any other provision of the
           code.
It is well settled that the inherent powers can be exercised only when no other remedy is available to the litigant
and not where a specific remedy is provided by the statute. If an effective alternative remedy is available, the
High Court will not exercise its powers under this section, especially when the applicant may not have availed
of that remedy.

 ARREST OF PERSON
The word “arrest” when used in its ordinary and natural sense means the apprehension or restrain or the
deprivation of one’s personal liberty to go where he pleases. The word “arrest” consists of taking into custody
of another person under authority empowered by law, for the purpose of holding or detaining him to answer a
criminal charge and preventing the commission of a criminal offence. ection 35 enumerates different categories
of cases in which a police officer may arrest a person without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant.
Any police officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person –
   (a)     who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; or
   (b)     against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a
           reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment
           for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether with or
           without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely: –
            (i)    the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or suspicion
                   that such person has committed the said offence;
            (ii)   the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary –
                   (a)   to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
                   (b)   for proper investigation of the offence; or
                   (c)   to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or tampering
                         with such evidence in any manner; or
                   (d)   to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person
                         acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
                         Court or to the police officer; or


242
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                   LESSON 7

                (e)   as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot be
                      ensured, and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing:
		 Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required
   under the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the
   arrest; or
   (c)    against whom credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable offence
          punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether with or
          without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of that
          information that such person has committed the said offence; or
   (d)    who has been proclaimed as an offender either under BNSS or by order of the State Government; or
   (e)    in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen property and
          who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such thing; or
    (f)   who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to
          escape, from lawful custody; or
   (g)    who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or
   (h)    who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
          information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been concerned in,
          any act committed at any place out of India which, if committed in India, would have been punishable
          as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be
          apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
    (i)   who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-section (5) of section 394
          of BNSS relating to notification of address of previously convicted offender; or
    (j)   for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from another police officer,
          provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for
          which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested
          without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition.
Changes introduced by BNSS:
Section 35 of BNSS (Section 41 of CrPC): A new subsection 7 is added: “No arrest shall be made without prior
permission of an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police in case of an offence which is
punishable for imprisonment of less than three years and such person is infirm or is above sixty years of age.”

 Certain measures to be followed in the exercise of power under Section 35
Section 35(3) says that the police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under
section 35(1) issue a notice directing the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable
offence, to appear before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice.
Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the terms of the
notice. Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in respect
of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that
he ought to be arrested.
However, where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to identify
himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a competent Court in this
behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.

                                                                                                                 243
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

 Procedure of Arrest
Section 36 provides the provisions relating to procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest
Every police officer while making an arrest shall –
   (a)   bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will facilitate easy identification;
   (b)   prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be –
           (i)    attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the person arrested or a
                  respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made;
           (ii)   countersigned by the person arrested; and
   (c)   inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member of his family, that he has
         a right to have a relative or a friend or any other person named by him to be informed of his arrest.
According to Section 38 when any person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to
meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.
Even the above measures while exercising the power to arrest is not always followed. The Supreme Court in
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar, (2014) 8 SCC 273, observed that: “the need for caution in exercising the drastic
power of arrest has been emphasized time and again by Courts but has not yielded desired result. Power to
arrest greatly contributes to its arrogance so also the failure of the Magistracy to check it. Not only this, the
power of arrest is one of the lucrative sources of police corruption. The attitude to arrest first and then proceed
with the rest is despicable. It has become a handy tool to the police officers who lack sensitivity or act with
oblique motive”.
The Supreme Court in the above matter has directed that accused should not be arrested in routine manner and
all the pre-conditions must be satisfied. The above judgement applies to crimes punishable with upto 7 years
of imprisonment.

 Arrest on refusal to give name and residence
According to section 39, when any person who, in the presence of a police officer, has committed or has been
accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses on demand of such officer to give his name and
residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested
by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained.
When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be released on a bond or
bail bond, to appear before a Magistrate if so required. However, if such person is not resident in India, the bail
bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties resident in India.
If the true name and residence of such person is not ascertained within twenty-four hours from the time of arrest
or if he fails to execute the bond or bail bond, or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall forthwith
be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction.

 Arrest by private person
According to section 40, any private person may arrest or cause to be arrested any person who in his presence
commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay,
but within six hours from such arrest, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so arrested to a
police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in custody to the
nearest police station.



244
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

Changes introduced by BNSS

Section 40 of BNSS (Section 43 of CrPC): In subsection (1), without unnecessary delay is further specified by “but
within six hours from such arrest.” In subsection (2), “re-arrest” is replaced by “take him in custody”

Arrest by Magistrate

According to section 41, when any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether Executive or
Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the offender, and may
thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to custody.

Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his presence, within
his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the time and in the circumstances to
issue a warrant.

Arrest how made

According to section 43, in making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall actually
touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or
action.

However, where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission
to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances otherwise require
or unless the police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman for making
her arrest.

If any person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or
other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.

The police officer may, keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence, use handcuff while making the
arrest of a person or while producing such person before the court who is a habitual or repeat offender, or who
escaped from custody, or who has committed offence of organised crime, terrorist act, drug related crime, or
illegal possession of arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of coins and currency-
notes, human trafficking, sexual offence against children, or offence against the State.

Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence punishable
with death or with imprisonment for life.

Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where
such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the
prior permission of the Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed or
the arrest is to be made.

Changes introduced by BNSS

Section 43 of BNSS (Section 46 of CrPC): A new subsection (3) is added regarding the handcuff of a habitual or
repeat offender or accused who has committed certain offences mentioned in the sub-section, etc.

Section 44 is an enabling provision and is to be used by the police officer with regard to exigencies of a situation
and provides for the provisions relating to search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. Section 45
authorises a police officer to pursue the offender whom he is authorised to arrest without warrant into any place
in India for the purpose of effecting his arrest.


                                                                                                                245
EP-JI&GL                                                                         Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

According to section 78, the police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest shall (subject to the
provisions of section 73 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the person arrested before the Court
before which he is required by law to produce such person. However, such delay shall not, in any case, exceed
twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s
Court.

Article 22(2) of the Constitution of India also provides the provision for producing the arrested person before the
Magistrate within 24 hours.

When a person is arrested under a warrant, Section 78 becomes applicable, and when he is arrested without a
warrant, he can be kept into custody for a period not exceeding 24 hours, and before the expiry of that period
he is to be produced before the nearest Magistrate, who can under Section 187 order his detention.

The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under section 187 may, irrespective of whether he has
or has no jurisdiction to try the case, after taking into consideration whether such person has not been released
on bail or his bail has been cancelled, authorise, from time to time, the detention of the accused in such custody
as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole, or in parts, at any time during
the initial forty days or sixty days out of detention period of sixty days or ninety days, as the case may be, as
provided in section 187(3), and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, and considers further
detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a Magistrate having such jurisdiction.

According to section 59, officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District Magistrate, or, if he so
directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without warrant, within the limits of
their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise.

According to section 60, no person who has been arrested by a police officer shall be discharged except on his
bond, or bail bond, or under the special order of a Magistrate.

According to section 61, if a person in lawful custody escapes or is rescued, the person from whose custody he
escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest him in any place in India. The provisions of section
44 shall apply to arrests under this section although the person making any such arrest is not acting under a
warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest.

According to section 62, no arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions of BNSS or any other
law for the time being in force providing for arrest.

 SUMMONS AND WARRANTS
The general processes to compel appearance are:

   (1)      Summons

   (2)      Warrants

 Summons
According to section 63, every summons issued by a Court under BNSS shall be, –

      (i)   in writing, in duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High
            Court may, from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court; or

   (ii)     in an encrypted or any other form of electronic communication and shall bear the image of the seal of
            the Court or digital signature.


246
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                               LESSON 7

Further as per section 64, every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to such rules as the
State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other public servant. However,
by virtue of section 66, where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise of due diligence, be found, the
summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult member of his family residing
with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a
receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate.

Changes introduced by BNSS

Section 66 of BNSS (Section 64 of CrPC): The word “male” is excluded to make the provision gender neutral.

 Service of summons on corporate bodies, firms, and societies
Section 65 of BNSS provides the provisions relating to Service of summons on corporate bodies, firms,
and societies. Service of a summons on a company or corporation may be effected by serving it on the
Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation, or by letter sent by registered
post addressed to the Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the company or corporation in India,
in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary
course of post.

In this section, “company” means a body corporate and “corporation” means an incorporated company or
other body corporate registered under the Companies Act, 2013 or a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860.

Service of a summons on a firm or other association of individuals may be effected by serving it on any partner
of such firm or association, or by letter sent by registered post addressed to such partner, in which case the
service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course of post.

Changes introduced by BNSS

Section 65 of BNSS (Section 63 of CrPC): In subsection (1), Director and Manager is added. New subsection (2)
regarding service of summons on any partner of a firm or other association of individuals.

 Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided/Substituted Service of Summons
According to section 67, if service cannot by the exercise of due diligence be effected as provided in section
64, section 65 or section 66, the serving officer shall affix one of the duplicates of the summons to some
conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person summoned ordinarily resides; and thereupon
the Court, after making such inquiries as it thinks fit, may either declare that the summons has been duly served
or order fresh service in such manner as it considers proper.

According to section 68, where the person summoned is in the active service of the Government, the Court
issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in which such person is
employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by section
64, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section. Such
signature shall be evidence of due service

As per section 69, when a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be served at any place outside
its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a Magistrate within whose local
jurisdiction the person summoned resides, or is, to be there served.




                                                                                                             247
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

 Service of summons on witness
Section 71 provides the provisions relating to service of summons on witnesses. Notwithstanding anything
contained in the preceding sections of this Chapter, a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to
and simultaneously with the issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by electronic
communication or by registered post addressed to the witness at the place where he ordinarily resides or
carries on business or personally works for gain.

When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an endorsement purporting to be made
by a postal employee that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons has been received or on the
proof of delivery of summons under section 70(3) by electronic communication to the satisfaction of the Court,
the Court issuing summons may deem that the summons has been duly served.

 PROCLAMATION AND ATTACHMENT
Where a warrant remains unexecuted, the Code of Procedure Code, 1973 provides for two remedies:




Section 84 provides that if any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking evidence or not) that any person
against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing himself so that such warrant
cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to appear at a specified place
and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such proclamation.
Section 85 also provides that the Court issuing a proclamation under section 84 may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order the attachment of any property,
movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person. However, where at the time of the issue
of the proclamation the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the
proclamation is to be issued, –
   (a)   is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property; or
   (b)   is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local jurisdiction of the Court, it may
         order the attachment of property simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation.
The object of attaching property is not to punish him but to compel his appearance.

 SUMMONS TO PRODUCE
Sometimes it is necessary that a person should produce a document or other thing which may be in his possession
or power for the purposes of any investigation or inquiry under the BNSS 2023. This can be compelled to be
produced by issuing summons (Sections 94 and 95) or a warrant (Sections 96 to 101).




248
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

 SEARCH WARRANT




But such warrant shall not be issued for searching a document, parcel or other thing in the custody of the postal
or telegraph authority, by a Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate, nor would
such warrant be issued so as to affect Sections 129 and 130 of the BSA 2023 or the Bankers’ Book Evidence
Act, 1891.

 Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc.
According to section 97, if a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, upon
information and after such inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe that any place is used for the
deposit or sale of stolen property, or for the deposit, sale or production of any objectionable article to which this
section applies, or that any such objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise
any police officer above the rank of a constable –
   (a)   to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place;
   (b)   to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant;
   (c)   to take possession of any property or article therein found which he reasonably suspects to be stolen
         property or objectionable article to which this section applies;
   (d)   to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until the
         offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of it in some place of safety;
   (e)   to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in such place who appears to
         have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property or article knowing or having
         reasonable cause to suspect it to be stolen property or, as the case may be, objectionable article to
         which this section applies.


                                                                                                                249
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

The objectionable articles to which section 97 applies are –
   (a)      counterfeit coin;
   (b)      pieces of metal made in contravention of the Coinage Act, 2011, or brought into India in contravention
            of any notification for the time being in force issued under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962;
   (c)      counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps;
   (d)      forged documents;
   (e)      false seals;
   (f)      obscene objects referred to in section 294 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
   (g)      instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) to (f).

 Search for persons wrongfully confined
In terms of Section 100, any District Magistrate, Sub-Divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class who
has reasons to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances that the confinement amounts to
an offence, he may issue a search warrant for the search of the person so confined. The person if found shall
be immediately produced before the Magistrate for making such orders as in the circumstances of the case he
thinks proper.

 Recording of search and seizure through audio-video electronic means
According to section 105, the process of conducting search of a place or taking possession of any property,
article or thing under Chapter VII or under section 185, including preparation of the list of all things seized in
the course of such search and seizure and signing of such list by witnesses, shall be recorded through any
audio-video electronic means preferably mobile phone and the police officer shall without delay forward such
recording to the District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class.

 SUMMARY TRIALS
Summary trial is a speedy trial by dispensing with formalities or delay in proceedings. By summary cases
is meant a case which can be tried and disposed of at once. Generally, it will apply to such offences not
punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.
Section 283 (1) of the BNSS sets out the provisions for summary trials. It states:
Notwithstanding anything contained in BNSS –
   (a)      any Chief Judicial Magistrate;
   (b)      Magistrate of the first class,
shall try in a summary way all or any of the following offences: –
      (i)   theft, under sub-section (2) of section 303, section 305 or section 306 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
            2023 where the value of the property stolen does not exceed twenty thousand rupees;
   (ii)     receiving or retaining stolen property, under sub-section (2) of section 317 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
            Sanhita, 2023, where the value of the property does not exceed twenty thousand rupees;
  (iii)     assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property under sub-section (5) of section 317 of the
            Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, where the value of such property does not exceed twenty thousand
            rupees;


250
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                 LESSON 7

  (iv)    offences under sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 331 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
   (v)    insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 352, and criminal intimidation, under
          sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 351 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
  (vi)    abetment of any of the foregoing offences;
  (vii)   an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence;
 (viii)   any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the
          Cattle-trespass Act, 1871.
The Magistrate may, after giving the accused a reasonable opportunity of being heard, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, try in a summary way all or any of the offences not punishable with death or imprisonment
for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years. However, no appeal shall lie against the decision of a
Magistrate to try a case in a summary way under section 283(2).
When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it is
undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and
proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by BNSS.
According to section 285, in trials under Chapter XXII, the procedure specified in BNSS for the trial of summons-
case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned. No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding
three months shall be passed in the case of any conviction under Chapter XXII.
Further according to section 287, in every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead guilty,
the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief statement of the
reasons for the finding.

 COMPOUNDING OF OFFENCES
Section 359 of the BNSS enumerates the provisions related to compounding of offences. Compounding means
settlement of offence committed by a person. The settlement must be with the consent of the court of law.
There may be the times when parties to a suit do not want to continue further proceedings in the court and
they want to settle it out of the court amicably, then the compounding comes into picture. In such case, future
proceedings do not take place in the court.

 Compoundable offence and who can compound
Few examples: The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 specified in
the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third
column of that Table:

                Offence                    Section of the Bharatiya Nyaya      Person by whom offence may
                                              Sanhita, 2023 applicable               be compounded

  Voluntarily causing hurt.                115(2)                             The person to whom the hurt is
                                                                              caused.

  Wrongfully     restraining        or     126(2), 127(2)                     The person        restrained   or
  confining any person.                                                       confined.




                                                                                                              251
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


               Offence                  Section of the Bharatiya Nyaya         Person by whom offence may
                                           Sanhita, 2023 applicable                  be compounded

  Assault or use of criminal force.     131, 133, 136                         The person assaulted or to whom
                                                                              criminal force is used.

  Theft.                                303(2)                                The owner of the property stolen.

Few examples: The offences punishable under the sections of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)
specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the Court before which
any prosecution for such offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of
that Table:

               Offence                  Section of the Bharatiya Nyaya         Person by whom offence may
                                              Sanhita applicable                     be compounded

  Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.    117(2)                                The person to whom hurt is
                                                                              caused.

  Assault or criminal force in          135                                   The person assaulted or to whom
  attempting wrongfully to confine                                            the force was used.
  a person.

  Theft, by clerk or servant of         306                                   The owner of the property stolen.
  property in possession of master.

  Criminal breach of trust.             316(2)                                The owner of the property in
                                                                              respect of which breach of trust
                                                                              has been committed.

 Bail
According to section 478, when any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence is arrested
or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought before a Court,
and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding before such
Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail.
However, such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is unable to
furnish surety, instead of taking bail bond from such person, discharge him on his executing a bond for his
appearance as hereinafter provided.
Where a person is unable to give bail bond within a week of the date of his arrest, it shall be a sufficient ground
for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes above said.
Further nothing in section 478 shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 135(3) or section 492.
Notwithstanding anything in section 478(1), where a person has failed to comply with the conditions of the bond
or bail bond as regards the time and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to release him on bail, when
on a subsequent occasion in the same case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such
refusal shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond or
bail bond to pay the penalty thereof under section 491.


252
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                    LESSON 7

 Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest (Anticipatory Bails)
According to section 482, when any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of
having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction
under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released
on bail.
When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under section 482(1), it may include such
conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit, including –
    (i)    a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and
           when required;
   (ii)    a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to
           any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
           Court or to any police officer;
   (iii)   a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court;
  (iv)     such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of section 480, as if the bail were granted
           under that section.
If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station on such accusation,
and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, he shall
be released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be
issued in the first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction
of the Court under section 482(1).
Nothing in section 482 shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of having
committed an offence under section 65 and section 70(2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Under section 493, when any surety to a bail bond under BNSS becomes insolvent or dies, or when any bond
is forfeited under the provisions of section 491, the Court by whose order such bond was taken, or a Magistrate
of the first class may order the person from whom such security was demanded to furnish fresh security in
accordance with the directions of the original order, and if such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate
may proceed as if there had been a default in complying with such original order.

 LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES
In general, there is no limitation of time in filing complaints under BNSS but delay may hurdle the investigation.
Further, the Limitation Act, 1963 provides the period of limitation for appeal and revision applications. Therefore,
chapter XXXVIII has been introduced in BNSS prescribing limitation period for taking cognizance of certain
offences. (Sections 513 to 519).
According to section 514, except as otherwise provided in BNSS, no Court shall take cognizance of an offence
of the category specified below, after the expiry of the period of limitation.
The period of limitation shall be –
   (a)     six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only;
   (b)     one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year;
   (c)     three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not
           exceeding three years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences which may be tried together,

                                                                                                                  253
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

shall be determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more severe punishment or, as
the case may be, the most severe punishment.
For the purpose of computing the period of limitation, the relevant date shall be the date of filing complaint
under section 223 or the date of recording of information under section 173.

 Commencement of the period of limitation
According to section 515, the period of limitation, in relation to an offender, shall commence, –
   (a)   on the date of the offence; or
   (b)   where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to any
         police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or to any
         police officer, whichever is earlier; or
   (c)   where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on which the identity of the
         offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer making investigation
         into the offence, whichever is earlier.
In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed shall be excluded.

 Exclusion of time in certain cases
Section 516 provides provisions for exclusion of time in certain cases. These are as under:
   (a)   the period during which another prosecution was diligently prosecuted (the prosecution should relate
         to the same facts and is prosecuted in good faith);
   (b)   the period of the continuance of the stay order or injunction (from the date of grant to the date of
         withdrawal) granted against the institution of prosecution;
   (c)   where notice of prosecution has been given, the period of notice;
   (d)   where previous sanction or consent for the institution of any prosecution is necessary, the period
         required for obtaining such consent or sanction including the date of application for obtaining the
         sanction and the date of the receipt of the order;
   (e)   the period during which the offender is absent from India or from territory outside India under Central
         Govt. Administration; and
   (f)   period when the offender is absconding or concealing himself. (Section 516)
If limitation expires on a day when the Court is closed, cognizance can be taken on the day the Court re-opens.
(Section 517)

 Continuing Offences
Continuing offence means an offence which is committed for a very long period. It is neither clearly defined in
the Bhaartiya Nyaya Sanhita or Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita Whether the offence is continuing one or
not, it clearly depends on its nature.
The offence which is happening and continuing again and again comes in the category of continuing offence.
In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment during which the
offence continues. (Section 518)




254
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                        LESSON 7

  CASE LAWS

 In Udai Shankar Awasthi v. State of U.P. (2013), the Supreme Court observed that the expression, ‘continuing
 offence’ has not been defined in the Cr.P.C. because it is one of those expressions which does not have a
 fixed connotation, and therefore, the formula of universal application cannot be formulated in this respect.

 In Gokak Patel Volkart Ltd. v. Dundayya Gurushiddaiah Hiremath (1991) the Supreme Court held that the
 question whether a particular offence is a ‘continuing offence’ or not must, therefore, necessarily depend
 upon the language of the statute which creates that offence, the nature of the offence and the purpose
 intended to be achieved by constituting the particular act as an offence.

 In Balakrishna Savalram Pujari Waghmare & Ors. v. Shree Dnyaneshwar Maharaj Sansthan & Ors., AIR
 1959 SC 798, the Court observed that a continuing offence is an act which creates a continuing source of
 injury, and renders the doer of the act responsible and liable for the continuation of the said injury. In case
 a wrongful act causes an injury which is complete, there is no continuing wrong even though the damage
 resulting from the said act may continue. If the wrongful act is of such character that the injury caused by it
 itself continues, then the said act constitutes a continuing wrong. The distinction between the two wrongs
 therefore depends, upon the effect of the injury.

 In State of Bihar v. Deokaran Nenshi & Anr., AIR 1973 SC 908, “A continuing offence is one which is
 susceptible of continuance and is distinguishable from the one which is committed once and for all. It is
 one of those offences which arises out of a failure to obey or comply with a rule or its requirement and
 which involves a penalty, the liability for which continues until the rule or its requirement is obeyed or
 complied with. On every occasion that such disobedience or non-compliance occurs and recurs, there is the
 offence committed. The distinction between the two kinds of offences is between an act or omission which
 constitutes an offence once and for all and an act or omission which continues and therefore, constitutes a
 fresh offence every time or occasion on which it continues. In the case of a continuing offence, there is thus
 the ingredient of continuance of the offence which is absent in the case of an offence which takes place
 when an act or omission is committed once and for all.”

Extension of period of limitation – The Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period
of limitation if it is satisfied that (i) the delay is properly explained or (ii) it is necessary to do so in the interests
of justice. (Section 519)

 OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY
Chapter XVII (Section 303 to 334) of BNS, provides the provisions and law related to the offences against
property.
The Property is of two kinds i.e. movable and immovable. The offence which is committed in regard to any kind
of property whether it is movable or immovable is punishable under the provisions of the Chapter XVII of BNS.




                                                                                                                      255
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure




 Theft (Section 303)
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that
person’s consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.
The essentials elements of theft are:
      1.   There should an intention to dishonestly take the property.
   2.      The property should be movable property.
   3.      The property should be taken out of the possession without that person’s consent.
   4.      The property should be moved in order to take that property.
Explanation 1. – A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable property, is not the subject of
theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from the earth.

 Example: Wood of the tree.


256
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                     LESSON 7

Explanation 2. – A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance may be a theft.

 Example: Opening the tap for the purpose of taking the expensive liquid kept thereunder.

Explanation 3. – A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which prevented it from
moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it.
Explanation 4. – A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that animal, and to
move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5. – The consent mentioned in this section may be express or implied, and may be given either by
the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either express or implied.

 Situations which constitute theft
   (1)   A cuts down a tree on Z’s ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the tree out of Z’s possession
         without Z’s consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order to such taking, he has committed
         theft.
   (2)   A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z’s dog to follow it. Here, if A’s intention be
         dishonestly to take the dog out of Z’s possession without Z’s consent. A has committed theft as soon as
         Z’s dog has begun to follow A.

 Situations which do not constitute theft
   (3)   Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall return. A carries the
         plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z’s possession. It could not therefore be taken
         out of Z’s possession, and A has not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach
         of trust.
   (4)   A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by taking it, commits no
         theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of property.

 Punishment for theft
According to section 303(2) of BNS, whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both and in case of second or
subsequent conviction of any person under this section, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years and with fine.
However, in cases of theft where the value of the stolen property is less than five thousand rupees, and a person
is convicted for the first time, shall upon return of the value of property or restoration of the stolen property, shall
be punished with community service.
However, there are different punishment for theft depending upon situation, which may understood with the
help of below:

                       Description                                                 Punishment

  Theft in a dwelling house, or means of transportation       shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  or place of worship, etc.                                   description for a term which may extend to seven
                                                              years, and shall also be liable to fine.




                                                                                                                   257
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


  Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession        shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  of master                                                  description for a term which may extend to seven
                                                             years, and shall also be liable to fine.

  Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt       shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
  or restraint in order to committing of theft               term which may extend to ten years, and shall also
                                                             be liable to fine.

 Snatching (Section 304)
A new sub-offence from Theft has been defined in the BNS namely “Snatching”. Theft is snatching if, in order
to commit theft, the offender suddenly or quickly or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or takes away from any
person or from his possession any movable property.
Whoever commits snatching, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.

 Extortion (Section 308)
Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly
induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property, or valuable security or anything signed
or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits extortion.
The essential elements of extortion are:
      1.   There should be an intention to put any person in fear of any injury.
   2.      By that fear of injury, dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver any property, or valuable
           security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security.

 Situations which constitute extortion
   (1)     A threatens Z that he will keep Z’s child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver to A a
           promissory note binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z signs and delivers the note. A has committed
           extortion.
   (2)     A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z’s field unless Z will sign and deliver to B a bond binding Z
           under a penalty to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the bond. A
           has committed extortion.

 Punishment of Extortion

                        Description                                              Punishment

  Whoever commits extortion                                shall be punished with imprisonment of either
                                                           description for a term which may extend to seven
                                                           years, or with fine, or with both.

  Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion,        shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  puts any person in fear, or attempts to put any          description for a term which may extend to two years,
  person in fear, of any injury                            or with fine, or with both.



258
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                LESSON 7

  Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion,      shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  puts or attempts to put any person in fear of death    description for a term which may extend to seven
  or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other     years, and shall also be liable to fine.

  Whoever commits extortion by putting any person        shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person    description for a term which may extend to ten years,
  or to any other                                        and shall also be liable to fine.

  Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion,      shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an       description for a term which may extend to ten years,
  accusation, against that person or any other,          and shall also be liable to fine.
  of having committed, or attempted to commit,
  an offence punishable with death or with
  imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a
  term which may extend to ten years

  Whoever commits extortion by putting any person        shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  in fear of an accusation against that person or        description for a term which may extend to ten years,
  any other, of having committed or attempted to         and shall also be liable to fine.
  commit any offence punishable with death, or
  with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment
  for a term which may extend to ten years, or of
  having attempted to induce any other person to
  commit such offence


  CASE LAW

 In Jadunandan Singh v. Emperor (AIR 1941 Pat 129), the accused, along with others, assaulted two persons
 and forcibly took their thumb impressions on three blank papers. The court observed that cases frequently
 occur which turn on the difference between the giving and taking of thumb impression. The forcible taking of
 the victim’s thumb impression does not necessarily involve inducing the victim to deliver papers with thumb
 impressions. Therefore, the offence of extortion is not established. It is not a case of theft because papers
 were not taken from the victim’s possession. It is a case of criminal force or assault.

 Distinction between Extortion and Theft
Both are different from in following respects:
    i.    Extortion is done by wrongfully getting the consent of the owner while there is no present of consent in
          case of theft.
    ii.   Both movable and immovable property may be the subject of an extortion whereas theft is limited to
          movable property only because of its nature.

 Robbery (Section 309)
As per Section 309 of BNS, in all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or
attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end voluntarily causes or attempts


                                                                                                              259
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant
wrongful restraint.

 Example:
 If during committing of theft, the offender, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt
 or wrongful restraint, or the fear of these or of instant wrongful restraint, he Commits Robbery.

Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence of the person put
in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant
wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put
in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extorted.

 Example:
 If during committing of extortion, the offender is present before victim and commits the extortion by
 putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint, he commits
 robbery.

The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the other person in fear of instant death, of
instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

 Situations which constitute robbery
   (1)   A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z’s money and jewels from Z’s clothes, without Z’s consent.
         Here A has committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft, has voluntarily caused wrongful
         restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery.

 Situation which does not constitute robbery
   (2)   A obtains property from Z by saying – “Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will be put to death
         unless you send us ten thousand rupees”. This is extortion, and punishable as such; but it is not robbery,
         unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his child.

 Punishment for Robbery
According to section 309(4), whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be committed on the highway
between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years.
According to section 309, whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
According to section 309 (6), If any person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes
hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in committing or attempting to commit such robbery,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.

 Dacoity (Section 310)
When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number
of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such
commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to
commit dacoity.

260
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                               LESSON 7

The essentials elements of Dacoity are:
    1.   There should be at least five persons by active participation or aiding.
   2.    They will commit robbery or its attempt.
    3.   Every person whether committing or aiding is said to commit dacoity.

  CASE LAW

 In the case of Emperor v. Lashkar (1921) 2 Lah. 275, a gang of five dacoits, one of whom had a gun, raided
 the house of X. After looting, while they were running away with their booty, they shot down one villager.
 It was held that the murder committed by the dacoits while carrying away the stolen property was murder
 committed in the commission of dacoity, and every offender was therefore liable for the murder.

Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits murder in so committing
dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, or rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever makes any preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever is one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever belongs to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity, shall be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
However, there are different punishment for dacoity and/or depending upon situation, which may understood
with the help of below:

                       Description                                             Punishment

  Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death         shall be punished shall not be less than seven
  or grievous hurt                                         years.

  Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed          shall be punished shall not be less than seven years
  with deadly weapon

  Punishment for belonging to gang of robbers, etc.        shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a
                                                           term which may extend to seven years, and shall
                                                           also be liable to fine.

 Criminal Misappropriation of property (Section 314 and Section 315)
Dishonest misappropriation of property
The definition of criminal misappropriation has not been provided by the provisions. The section directly states
whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to
two years and with fine.

                                                                                                             261
EP-JI&GL                                                                          Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

Illustrations.
   (a)   A takes property belonging to Z out of Z’s possession, in good faith believing at the time when he takes
         it, that the property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after discovering his mistake,
         dishonestly appropriates the property to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
   (b)   A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z’s library in Z’s absence, and takes away a book without Z’s
         express consent. Here, if A was under the impression that he had Z’s implied consent to take the book
         for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft. But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own
         benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
   (c)   A and B, being, joint owners of a horse. A takes the horse out of B’s possession, intending to use it. Here,
         as A has a right to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells the horse and
         appropriates the whole proceeds to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section.
Explanation 1. – A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation within the meaning of this
section.
Illustration.
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement. A, knowing that the note
belongs to Z, pledges it with a banker as a security for a loan, intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has
committed an offence under this section.
Explanation 2. – A person who finds property not in the possession of any other person, and takes such property
for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or misappropriate it dishonestly,
and is not guilty of an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his own use,
when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner, or before he has used reasonable means to discover
and give notice to the owner and has kept the property a reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it.
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question of fact.
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that any particular person is
the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe it to be his own property, or in
good faith believe that the real owner cannot be found.
Illustrations.
   (1)   A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, A picks up the rupee. Here
         A has not committed the offence defined in this section.
   (2)   A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank-note. From the direction and contents of the letter he
         learns to whom the note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an offence under this section.

 Essential ingredients of Dishonest Misappropriation of Property
Dishonestly is an essential ingredient of the offence and BNS provides that whoever does anything with
the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that
‘dishonestly’. Misappropriation means the intentional, illegal use of the property or funds of another person for
one’s own use or other unauthorized purpose.
There are two things necessary before an offence under section 314 can be established. Firstly, that the property
must be misappropriated or converted to the use of the accused, and, secondly, that he must misappropriate
or convert it dishonestly.




262
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                              LESSON 7

  CASE LAWS

 In Bhagiram Dome v. Abar Dome, (1888) 15 Cal 388, 400, it has been held that under Section 403 criminal
 misappropriation takes place even when the possession has been innocently come by, but where, by a
 subsequent change of intention or from the knowledge of some new fact which the party was not previously
 acquainted, the retaining become wrongful and fraudulent.
 In Mohammad Ali v. State, 2006 CrLJ 1368 (MP), fifteen bundles of electric wire were seized from the
 appellant but none including electricity department claimed that wires were stolen property. Evidence
 on records showed that impugned electric wire was purchased by the applicant from scrap seller. Merely
 applicant not having any receipt for purchase of impugned wire cannot be said to be guilty of offence
 punishable under Section 403 of the Code. Order of framing charge was, therefore, quashed by the Supreme
 Court and the accused was not held guilty under section 403 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
 In U. Dhar v. State of Jharkhand, (2003) 2 SCC 219, there were two contracts- one between the principal
 and contractor and another between contractor and sub-contractor. On completion of work sub-contractor
 demanded money for completion of work and on non-payment filed a criminal complaint alleging that
 contractor having received the payment from principal had misappropriated the money. The magistrate took
 cognizance of the case and High Court refused to quash the order of magistrate. On appeal to the Supreme
 Court, it was held that matter was of civil nature and criminal complaint was not maintainable and was liable
 to be quashed. The Supreme Court also observed that money paid by the principal to the contractor was
 not money belonging to the complainant, sub-contractor, hence there was no question of misappropriation.

 Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his death
 (Section 315)
Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any property, knowing that such property was
in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person’s decease, and has not since been in the
possession of any person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at
the time of such person’s decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, the imprisonment may extend
to seven years.
Illustration.
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money comes into the possession of any
person entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed the offence defined in this
section.
The offence under this section consists in the pillaging of property during the interval which elapses between
the time when the possessor of the property dies, and the time when it comes into the possession of some
person or officer authorized to take charge of it.

 CRIMINAL BREACH OF TRUST
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, dishonestly
misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in
violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal
contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any
other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.
Explanation 1. – A person, being an employer of an establishment whether exempted under section 17 of the


                                                                                                            263
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 or not who deducts the employee’s
contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund
established by any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount
of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said
Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution
in violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Explanation 2. – A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’ contribution from the wages payable
to the employee for credit to the Employees’ State Insurance Fund held and administered by the Employees’
State Insurance Corporation established under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 shall be deemed to
have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes default in the
payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly
used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as aforesaid.
Illustrations.
   (a)     A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the law which directs him to
           divide the effects according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has committed criminal
           breach of trust.
   (b)     A is a warehouse-keeper Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a contract that it shall
           be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A dishonestly sells the goods. A has
           committed criminal breach of trust.
The gist of the offence of criminal breach of trust as defined under section 316 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023 is ‘dishonest misappropriation’ or ‘conversion to own use’, another person’s property.

 Essential Ingredients of Criminal Breach of Trust
The essential ingredients of the offence of criminal breach of trust are as under:
      1.   The accused must be entrusted with the property or with dominion over it,
   2.      The person so entrusted must use that property, or;
   3.      The accused must dishonestly use or dispose of that property or wilfully suffer any other person to do
           so in violation,
            (i) of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or;
            (ii)   of any legal contract made touching the discharge of such trust.

  CASE LAWS

 The Supreme Court of India in V.R. Dalal v. Yugendra Naranji Thakkar, 2008 (15) SCC 625, has held that
 the first ingredient of criminal breach of trust is entrustment and where it is missing, the same would not
 constitute a criminal breach of trust. Breach of trust may be held to be a civil wrong but when mens-rea
 is involved it gives rise to criminal liability also. The expression ‘direction of law’ in the context of Section
 405 would include not only legislations pure and simple but also directions, instruments and circulars
 issued by authority entitled therefor. In a landmark judgment of Pratibha Rani v. Suraj Kumar, AIR 1985 SC
 628, the appellant alleged that her stridhan property was entrusted to her in-laws which they dishonestly
 misappropriated for their own use. She made out a clear, specific and unambiguous case against in-laws.
 The accused were held guilty of this offence and she was held entitled to prove her case and no court would
 be justified in quashing her complaint.


264
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                 LESSON 7

 The Supreme Court in Onkar Nath Mishra v. State (NCT of Delhi), 2008 CrLJ 1391 (SC), has held that in
 the commission of offence of criminal breach of trust, two distinct parts are involved. The first consists of the
 creation an obligation in relation to property over which dominion or control is acquired by accused. The
 second is a misappropriation or dealing with property dishonestly and contrary to the terms of the obligation
 created. In another case, Suryalakshmi Cotton Mills Ltd. v. Rajvir Industries Ltd., 2008 (13) SCC 678, it was
 held that a cheque is property and if the said property has been misappropriated or has been used for a
 purpose for which the same had not been handed over, a case under Section 406 of the Code may be found
 to have been made out.

 In S.K. Alagh v. State of U.P.and others, 2008 (5) SCC 662, where demand drafts were drawn in the name of
 company for supply of goods and neither the goods were sent by the company nor the money was returned,
 the Managing Director of the company cannot be said to have committed the offence under Section 406 of
 Indian Penal Code. It was pointed out that in absence of any provision laid down under statute, a director of
 a company or an employer cannot be held vicariously liable for any offence committed by company itself.

 Analysis of the cases
After analyzing all the cases, we may conclude that for an offence to fall under this section all the four
requirements are essential to be fulfilled.
    1.   The person handing over the property must have confidence in the person taking the property so as to
         create a fiduciary relationship between them or to put him in position of trustee.
   2.    The accused must be in such a position where he could exercise his control over the property i.e;
         dominion over the property.
    3.   The term property includes both movable as well as immovable property within its ambit.
   4.    It has to be established that the accused has dishonestly put the property to his own use or to some
         unauthorized use. Dishonest intention to misappropriate is a crucial fact to be proved to bring home the
         charge of criminal breach of trust.

 Punishments for the criminal breach of trust
Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, commits criminal breach
of trust in respect of such property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being in any manner entrusted in such
capacity with property, or with any dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity
of a public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.




                                                                                                               265
EP-JI&GL                                                                   Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


 CASE LAWS

 In Bagga Singh v. State of Punjab, the appellant was a taxation clerk in the Municipal Committee, Sangrur.
 He had collected arrears of tax from tax-payers but the sum was not deposited in the funds of the committee
 after collection but was deposited after about 5 months. He pleaded that money was deposited with the
 cashier Madan Lal, a co-accused, who had defaulted on the same but the cashier proved that he had not
 received any such sum and was acquitted by lower court. The mere fact that the co-accused cashier was
 acquitted was not sufficient to acquit accused in the absence of any proof that he had discharged the trust
 expected of him. As such the accused was liable under section 409 of Indian Penal Code, 1860.

 In Bachchu Singh v. State of Haryana, AIR 1999 SC 2285, the appellant was working as ‘Gram Sachiv’
 for eight gram panchayats. He collected a sum of Rs. 648 from thirty villagers towards the house tax and
 executed receipts for the same. As he was a public servant, and in that capacity he had collected money as
 house tax but did not remit the same, he was charged under Section 409 of Indian Penal Code, 1860. It was
 held that the appellant dishonestly misappropriated or converted the said amount for his own use and his
 conviction under section 409 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 was upheld by the Supreme Court.

 In Girish Saini v. State of Rajasthan, a public servant was accused of neither depositing nor making entries
 of stationery required for official purpose. Accused public servant was in charge of the store in the concerned
 department at the time of commission of offence. Hence entrustment was proved. It was held accused could
 not take the benefit of misplacing of one of registers of company as he could not prove maintenance of two
 registers by department. Therefore, the accused was held guilty of committing criminal breach of trust.

 Receiving Stolen Property (Section 317)
Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft or extortion or robbery or cheating, and property
which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which criminal breach of trust has been committed,
is designated as stolen property, whether the transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust
has been committed, within or without India, but, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a
person legally entitled to the possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.
Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to
be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, the possession whereof he knows or has reason
to believe to have been transferred by the commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, whom
he knows or has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows
or has reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever habitually receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property,
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with property which he knows or has
reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.



266
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

 Cheating (Section 318 and 319)
Sections 318 to 319 of BNS deal with the offence of cheating. In most of the offences relating to property the
accused merely get possession of thing in question, but in case of cheating he obtains possession as well as
the property in it.
Section 318 states that Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so
deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or
intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he
were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in
body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.
Explanation. – A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section.
   (1)   A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces
         Z to let him have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A cheats.
   (2)   A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a belief that this article was
         made by a certain celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the
         article. A cheats.
   (3)   A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally deceives Z into believing that the article
         corresponds with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A
         cheats.
   (4)   A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no money, and by which
         A expects that the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z
         to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A cheats.

 Main Ingredients of Cheating
The main ingredients of cheating are as under:
    1.   Deception of any person.
   2.    (a) Fraudulently or dishonestly inducing that person:
                (i)    to deliver any property to any person; or
                (ii)   to consent that any person shall retain any property; or
         (b)   Intentionally inducing that person to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he
               were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to
               that person in body, mind, reputation or property.

  CASE LAWS

 The Supreme Court in Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v. Motorola Incorporated and Ors., (2005) 2 SCC 145,
 has held that deception is necessary ingredient under both parts of section. Complainant must prove that
 inducement has been caused by deception exercised by the accused. It was held that non-disclosure of
 relevant information would also be treated a misrepresentation of facts leading to deception.
 The Supreme Court in M.N. Ojha and others v. Alok Kumar Srivastav and anr, (2009) 9 SCC 682, has held
 that where the intention on the part of the accused is to retain wrongfully the excise duty which the State is
 empowered under law to recover from another person who has removed non-duty paid tobacco from one
 bonded warehouse to another, they are held guilty of cheating.


                                                                                                                267
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


 In T.R. Arya v. State of Punjab, 1987 CrLJ 222, it was held that negligence in duty without any dishonest
 intention cannot amount to cheating. A bank employee when on comparison of signature of drawer passes
 a cheque there may be negligence resulting in loss to bank, but it cannot be held to be cheating.

Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss to a person whose interest
in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was bound, either by law, or by a legal contract, to protect,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine,
or with both.
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person,
or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed,
and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

  CASE LAWS

 In Kuriachan Chacko v. State of Kerala, (2004) 12 SCC 269, the money circulation scheme was allegedly
 mathematical impossibility and promoters knew fully well that scheme was unworkable and false
 representations were being made to induce persons to part with their money. The Supreme Court held that
 it could be assumed and presumed that the accused had committed offence of cheating under section 420
 of the IPC.
 In Mohd. Ibrahim and others v. State of Bihar and another, (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 929, the accused was alleged
 to have executed false sale deeds and a complaint was filed by real owner of property. The accused had a
 bonafide belief that the property belonged to him and purchaser also believed that suit property belongs to
 the accused. It was held that accused was not guilty of cheating as ingredients of cheating were not present.
 In Shruti Enterprises v. State of Bihar and ors, 2006 CrLJ 1961, it was held that mere breach of contract
 cannot give rise to criminal prosecution under section 420 unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown
 right at the beginning of transaction when the offence is said to have been committed. If it is established
 that the intention of the accused was dishonest at the time of entering into the agreement then liability will
 be criminal and the accused will be guilty of offence of cheating. On the other hand, if all that is established
 is that a representation made by the accused has subsequently not been kept, criminal liability cannot
 be fastened on the accused and the only right which complainant acquires is to a decree of damages for
 breach of contract.

 Cheating by personation (Section 319)
A person is said to cheat by personation if he cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly
substituting one person for or another, or representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or
such other person really is.
The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real or imaginary person.
Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both.
Illustrations
   (1)   A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats by personation.

268
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                    LESSON 7

   (2)        A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by personation.

 FRAUDULENT DEEDS AND DISPOSITIONS OF PROPERTY
Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property are covered under section 320 to 323 of BNS.

 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among
 creditors (Section 320)
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers or causes to
be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any property, intending thereby to prevent, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent, the distribution of that property according to law among his
creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

 Example
 A is the Debtor and B is the creditor. A has to pay INR 1 crore to B. Now, A has certain movable and immovable
 property. A does not wants to pay back INR 1 crore to B. For that, A transferred the properties to X just to
 prevent the distribution of his properties to B. A is liable under section 320.


  CASE LAW

 Guwahati High Court in Ramautar Chaukhany v. Hari Ram Todi & Anr, 1982 CrLJ 2266, held that an offence
 under this section has following essential ingredients:
     a.        That the accused removed, concealed or delivered the property or that he transferred, it caused it
               to be transferred to someone;
     b.        That such a transfer was without adequate consideration;
         c.    That the accused thereby intended to prevent or knew that he was thereby likely to prevent the
               distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or creditors of another person;
     d.        That he acted dishonestly and fraudulently. This section specifically refers to frauds connected with
               insolvency. The offence under it consists in a dishonest disposition of property with intent to cause
               wrongful loss to the creditors. It applies to movable as well as immovable properties. In view of this
               section, the property of a debtor cannot be distributed according to law except after the provisions
               of the relevant enactments have been complied with.

 Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors (Section 321)
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself or to any other person from
being made available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of such other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with
both.

 Example
 A is the Debtor and B is the creditor. A has to pay Rs. 1 crore to B. But A do not have any money. But X, a
 person, who has to pay INR 1 crore to A. If X pays back his money to A, A can pay back that money to B.
 But A does not want to make the payment to B and informs X not to pay any amount to B. This is clearly a
 fraudulent intention and A is liable under section 321.


                                                                                                                  269
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

This section, like the preceding section 320, is intended to prevent the defrauding of creditors by masking
property.
The expression ‘debt’ has not been defined in the BNS or in the General Clauses Act but there are judicial
pronouncements on the same.

  CASE LAWS

 In Commissioner of Wealth Tax v G.D. Naidu, AIR 1966 Mad 74, it was held that the essential requisites of
 debt are-
      (1)   ascertained or ascertainable,
      (2)   an absolute liability, in present or future, and
      (3)   an obligation which has already accrued and is subsisting. All debts are liabilities but all liabilities
            are not debt.
 The Supreme Court in Mangoo Singh v. Election Tribunal, AIR 1957 SC 871, has laid down that the word
 ‘demand’ ordinarily means something more than what is due; it means something which has been demanded,
 called for or asked for, but the meaning of the word must take colour from the context and so ‘demand’ may
 also mean arrears or dues.

 Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of consideration
 (Section 322)
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or instrument which
purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or any interest therein, and which contains any
false statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge, or relating to the person or persons for
whose use or benefit it is really intended to operate, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

 Example
 While making agreement of lease, the actual amount should be entered is INR 5 crore but parties made the
 lease agreement for only INR 4 crore just to avoid stamp duty and other taxes. The parties are liable under
 section 322.

This section deals with fraudulent and fictitious conveyances and transfers. The essential ingredient of an
offence under section 423 is that the sale deed or a deed subjecting a property to a charge must contain a
false statement relating to the consideration or relating to the person for whose use or benefit it is intended to
operate.
Though dishonest execution of a benami deed is covered under this section, the section stands superseded
by The Prohibition of Benami Properties Transactions Act, 1988 because the latter covers a wider field,
encompassing the field covered by this section.

 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property (Section 323)
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself or any other person, or
dishonestly or fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand
or claim to which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.


270
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                LESSON 7

 OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND PROPERTY MARKS

 Forgery
According to section 336, whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a document
or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or to support any
claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or
with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery.

 Punishment for Forgery

                      Description                                             Punishment

  Whoever commits forgery                               shall be punished with imprisonment of either
                                                        description for a term which may extend to two years,
                                                        or with fine, or with both.

  Whoever commits forgery, intending that the           shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  document or electronic record forged shall be         description for a term which may extend to seven
  used for the purpose of cheating                      years, and shall also be liable to fine.

  Whoever commits forgery, intending that the           shall be punished with imprisonment of either
  document or electronic record forged shall harm       description for a term which may extend to three
  the reputation of any party, or knowing that it is    years, and shall also be liable to fine.
  likely to be used for that purpose

Further, the provisions relating to forgery in different circumstances has inter alia also been provided under 337
to 341 of BNS.

  CASE LAWS

 The Supreme Court in Ramchandran v. State, AIR 2010 SC 1922, has held that to constitute an offence
 of forgery document must be made with dishonest or fraudulent intention. A person is said to do a thing
 fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not otherwise. The Supreme Court in Parminder
 Kaur v. State of UP, has held that mere alteration of document does not make it a forged document. Alteration
 must be made for some gain or for some objective.
 Similarly, in Balbir Kaur v. State of Punjab, 2011 CrLJ 1546 (P&H), the allegation against the accused was
 that she furnished a certificate to get employment as ETT teacher which was found to be bogus and forged
 in as much as school was not recognized for period given in certificate. However the certificate did not
 anywhere say that school was recognized. It was held that merely indicating teaching experience of the
 accused, per se, cannot be said to indicate wrong facts. So the direction which was issued for prosecution
 is liable to be quashed.

 Offences relating to Property Mark (Section 345)
A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular person is called a property mark.
Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other receptacle containing movable
property or goods, or uses any case, package or other receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner
reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the property or goods so marked, or any property or


                                                                                                              271
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to
use a false property mark.
Whoever uses any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with
both.

 DEFAMATION
   (1)   Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations,
         makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing
         or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except
         in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
		Explanation 1. – It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation
  would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his
  family or other near relatives.
		Explanation 2. – It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an
  association or collection of persons as such.
		Explanation 3. – An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to
  defamation.
		Explanation 4. – No imputation is said to harm a person’s reputation, unless that imputation directly or
  indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers
  the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person,
  or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally
  considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations.
   (a)   A says – “Z is an honest man; he never stole B’s watch”; intending to cause it to be believed that Z did
         steal B’s watch. This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
   (b)   A is asked who stole B’s watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B’s watch.
         This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
   (c)   A draws a picture of Z running away with B’s watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B’s watch.
         This is defamation, unless it falls within one of the exceptions.
Exception 1. – It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public
good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of
fact.
Exception 2. – It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of
a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character
appears in that conduct, and no further.
Exception 3. – It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of
any person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that
conduct, and no further.
Illustration.
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z’s conduct in petitioning


272
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question, in presiding
or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any society which invites the public support, in voting or
canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of the duties of which the public
is interested.
Exception 4. – It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court, or of the
result of any such proceedings.
Explanation. – A Magistrate or other officer holding an inquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a Court, is
a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Exception 5. – It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any
case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party,
witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears
in that conduct, and no further.
Illustrations.
   (a)   A says – “I think Z’s evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be stupid or dishonest”. A is
         within this exception if he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses respects
         Z’s character as it appears in Z’s conduct as a witness, and no further.
   (b)   But if A says – “I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man without
         veracity”; A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which expresses of Z’s character, is
         an opinion not founded on Z’s conduct as a witness.
Exception 6. – It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance
which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as
his character appears in such performance, and no further.
Explanation. – A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on the part
of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public.
Illustrations.
   (a)   A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
   (b)   A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public.
   (c)   An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to the judgment of the
         public.
   (d)   A says of a book published by Z – “Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z’s book is indecent; Z
         must be a man of impure mind”. A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, in as much as the
         opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z’s character only so far as it appears in Z’s book, and no
         further.
   (e)   But if A says “I am not surprised that Z’s book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a
         libertine”. A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z’s character
         is an opinion not founded on Z’s book.
Exception 7. – It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law or
arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of that
other in matters to which such lawful authority relates.
Illustration.
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court; a head of a department

                                                                                                                273
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

censuring in good faith those who are under his orders, a parent censuring in good faith a child in the presence
of other children; a school master, whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in
the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker
censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct of such cashier as such cashier are within this
exception.
Exception 8. – It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who
have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation.
Illustration.
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z’s
master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z’s father, A is within this exception.
Exception 9. – It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation
be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for
the public good.
   (a)   A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business – “Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you ready
         money, for I have no opinion of his honesty”. A is within the exception, if he has made this imputation on
         Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests.
   (b)   A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the character of
         Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within the exception.
Exception 10. – It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided
that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom
that person is interested, or for the public good.

 Punishment for defamation
Section 356(2): Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both, or with community service.
Section 356 (3): Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such
matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Section 356(4): Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory
matter, knowing that it contains such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.

 Kinds of Defamation
The wrong of defamation is of two kinds- libel and slander.
In libel, the defamatory statement is made in some permanent and visible form, such as writing, printing or
pictures.
In slander it is made in spoken words or in some other transitory form, whether visible or audible, such as
gestures or inarticulate but significant sounds.
The ambit of ‘publish’ is very wide. The publication of defamatory matter means that it is communicated to some
person other than the person about whom it is addressed.




274
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                  LESSON 7

  CASE LAWS

 In Sankaran v. Ramkrishna Pillai, AIR 1960 Ker 141, the defamatory matter was printed in Malayalam and
 the accused did not know the language, his mens rea was absent and he was not guilty.

 GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) also provides for general exceptions for a person accused of
committing any offence under BNS to plead in his defense. General defences or exceptions are contained in
sections 14 to 44 of the BNS (Chapter III). In general exceptions to criminal liability there will be absence of mens
rea (guilty mind) on the part of the wrong-doer. If there is any general defense of the accused in a criminal case,
the burden of proving lies on him under section 108 of the Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023. The exceptions
strictly speaking came within the following six categories.




    1.   Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law: According to
         section 14, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact
         and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.
		 The mistake or ignorance must be of fact, but not of law.
		 Mistake of fact, is a general defence based on the Common Law maxim –ignorantia facit excusat;
   igoranita juris non excusat- (Ignorance of fact excuses; Ignorance of law does not excuse).
   2.    Act of Judge when acting judicially: According to section 15, nothing is an offence which is done by a
         Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to
         be, given to him by law.
   3.    Act done pursuant to judgment or order of Court: According to section 16, nothing which is done in
         pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a Court; if done whilst such judgment
         or order remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass
         such judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had
         such jurisdiction.
		 Words “Court of Justice” is replaced by “Court” in the BNS.

                                                                                                                275
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

		 Section 15 protects judges from any criminal liability for their judicial acts. Section 16 extends this
   protection to ministerial and other staff, who may be required to execute orders of the court. If such
   immunity was not extended, then executing or implementing court orders would become impossible.
   4.      Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law: According to
           section 17, nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason
           of a mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified
           by law, in doing it.
   5.      Accident in doing a lawful act: According to section 18, nothing is an offence which is done by accident
           or misfortune, and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful
           manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution.
   6.      Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm: According to
           section 19, nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely
           to cause harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the
           purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property.
		 It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was of such a nature
   and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that it was likely to
   cause harm.
      7.   Act of a child under seven years of age: According to section 20, nothing is an offence which is done
           by a child under seven years of age.
   8.      Act of a child above seven and under twelve years of age of immature understanding: According to
           section 21, nothing is an offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve
           years of age, who has not attained sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and
           consequences of his conduct on that occasion.
   9.      Act of a person of unsound mind: According to section 22, nothing is an offence which is done by a
           person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the
           nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
  10.      Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will: According
           to section 23, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason
           of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong,
           or contrary to law; provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his
           knowledge or against his will.
  11.      Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated: According
           to section 24, in cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge
           or intent, a person who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he
           had the same knowledge as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which
           intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or against his will.
  12.      Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by consent:
           According to section 25, nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is
           not known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm
           which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age,
           who has given consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which
           it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the
           risk of that harm.


276
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                   LESSON 7

        This section is based on the principle of legal maxim ‘volenti-non-fit injuria’ which means he who
        consents suffers no injury. The policy behind this section is that everyone is the best judge of his own
        interest and no one consents to that which he considers injurious to his own interest.
		Illustration: A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the consent
  of each to suffer any harm which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and
  if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence.
  13.   Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person’s benefit: According to
        section 26, nothing, which is not intended to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm which
        it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to
        any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or
        implied, to suffer that harm, or to take the risk of that harm.
  14.   Act done in good faith for benefit of child or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent of guardian:
		 According to section 27, nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve
   years of age, or person of unsound mind, by, or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian
   or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may
   cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person:
		 However, this exception shall not extend to –
         (a)   the intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause death;
         (b)   the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose
               other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
               infirmity;
         (c)   the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for
               the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity;
         (d)   the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
		 Words “insane person” are replaced with “person of unsound mind” in the BNS.
  15.   Consent known to be given under fear or misconception: According to section 28, a consent is not
        such a consent as is intended by any section of BNS, –
         (a)   if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and if the
               person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent was given in consequence
               of such fear or misconception; or
         (b)   if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable to
               understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or
         (c)   unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person who is under
               twelve years of age.
  16.   Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused: According to section 29, the
        exceptions in sections 25, 26 and 27 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any
        harm which they may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person
        giving the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given.
		Illustration: Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
  woman) is an offence independently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the
  woman. Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm”; and the consent of the woman or of
  her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act.

                                                                                                                 277
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

   17.     Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent: According to section 30, nothing is an
           offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith,
           even without that person’s consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to
           signify consent, or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person
           in lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with
           benefit:
		 However, this exception shall not extend to –
           (a)   the intentional causing of death, or the attempting to cause death;
           (b)   the doing of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose
                 other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
                 infirmity;
           (c)   the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than the
                 preventing of death or hurt;
           (d)   the abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it would not extend.
  18.      Communication made in good faith: According to section 31, no communication made in good faith is
           an offence by reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that
           person.
  19.      Act to which a person is compelled by threats: According to section 32, except murder, and offences
           against the State punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is
           compelled to do it by threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that
           instant death to that person will otherwise be the consequence:
		 However, the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a reasonable apprehension of
   harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by which he became subject to such
   constraint.
		Explanation 1. – A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a gang
  of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of his
  having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law.
		Explanation 2. – A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant death, to do a
  thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door
  of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception.
  20.      Act causing slight harm: Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to cause,
           or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of ordinary
           sense and temper would complain of such harm.

 Right of Private Defence
Right of Private defence is also part of Chapter III under the BNS. 11 sections deals with Right to Private Defence.
These defences are as follows:
      1.   Things done in private defence: According to section 34, nothing is an offence which is done in the
           exercise of the right of private defence.
   2.      Right of private defence of body and of property: According to section 35, every person has a right,
           subject to the restrictions contained in section 37, to defend –



278
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                   LESSON 7

         (a)    his own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human body;
         (b)    the property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against any act
                which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or
                which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass.
   3.   Right of private defence against act of a person of unsound mind, etc.: According to section 36, when
        an act, which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want
        of maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act,
        or by reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private
        defence against that act which he would have if the act were that offence.
   4.   Acts against which there is no right of private defence: According to section 37(1), There is no right of
        private defence,-
         (a)    against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if
                done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office,
                though that act, may not be strictly justifiable by law;
         (b)    against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt,
                if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith under
                colour of his office, though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law;
         (c)    in cases in which there is time to have recourse to the protection of the public authorities.
		 According to sub-section 2, the right of private defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm
   than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence.
   5.   When right of private defence of body extends to causing death: According to section 38, the right
        of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary
        causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the exercise of
        the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: –
         (a)    such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be the
                consequence of such assault;
         (b)    such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be
                the consequence of such assault;
         (c)    an assault with the intention of committing rape;
         (d)    an assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust;
         (e)    an assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting;
          (f)   an assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances which
                may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public
                authorities for his release;
         (g)    an act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer acid which may
                reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such
                act.
   6.   When such right extends to causing any harm other than death: According to section 39, if the offence
        be not of any of the descriptions specified in section 38, the right of private defence of the body does
        not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions
        specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death.

                                                                                                                 279
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure

      7.   Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of body: According to section 40, the
           right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to
           the body arises from an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been
           committed; and it continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues.
   8.      When right of private defence of property extends to causing death: According to section 41, the right
           of private defence of property extends, under the restrictions specified in section 37, to the voluntary
           causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the
           attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions
           hereinafter enumerated, namely: –
           (a) robbery;
           (b)   house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise;
           (c)   mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any building, tent or vessel, which
                 building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property;
           (d)   theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause
                 apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence
                 is not exercised.
   9.      When such right extends to causing any harm other than death: According to section 42, If the offence,
           the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise of the right of private
           defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions specified in section 41,
           that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions
           specified in section 37, to the voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other than death.
  10.      Commencement and continuance of right of private defence of property: According to section 43, the
           right of private defence of property, –
           (a) commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences;
           (b)   against theft continues till the offender has effected his retreat with the property or either the
                 assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property has been recovered;
           (c)   against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to cause to any person
                 death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or of instant hurt or of
                 instant personal restraint continues;
           (d)   against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender continues in the commission
                 of criminal trespass or mischief;
           (e)   against house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise continues as long as the house-trespass
                 which has been begun by such house-breaking continues.
  11.      Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent person:
           According to section 44, If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which
           reasonably causes the apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually
           exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the
           running of that risk.




280
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                LESSON 7

                                              LESSON ROUND-UP

      l   The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023(BSA) is a modern day legislation which has replaced the
          colonial Indian Penal Code of 1860 which was retained as the main penal law of the country even
          after India became independent in 1947. Enforced from 1st July 2024, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita
          (BNS) 2023 represents a transformative update to India’s criminal laws, replacing the colonial-era
          Indian Penal Code (IPC) of 1860.
      l   The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita(BNSS) is an Act to consolidate and amend the law
          relating to Criminal Procedure. BNSS was introduced to replace the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
          as part of India's efforts to modernize and streamline its criminal justice system in alignment with
          contemporary needs and societal expectations.
      l   The geographical area or the subjects to which a law applies is defined as the jurisdiction of that
          law. Ordinarily, laws made by a country are applicable within its own boundaries because a country
          cannot have legal machinery to enforce its laws in other sovereign countries. Thus, for most of the
          laws, the territorial jurisdiction of a law is the international boundary of that country. Countries,
          however, also make laws that apply to territories outside of their own country. This is called the
          extra-territorial jurisdiction.
      l   The commission of a crime consists of some significant stages. If a person commits a crime voluntarily,
          it involves four important stages, viz. 1. Criminal Intention, Preparation, Attempt and Commission of
          Crime or Accomplishment.
      l   There are a total 5 types of Punishments: Death, Imprisonment for life, Imprisonment, which is of two
          descriptions, namely: (1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour; (2) Simple, Forfeiture of property, Fine
          and Community Services.
      l   The basic function of criminal law is to punish the offender and to deter the incidence of crime in the
          society. A criminal act must contain the following elements: Human Being, mens rea and actus rea.
      l   According to Section 21, any offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 may be tried by
          the High Court or the Court of Session or any other Court by which such offence is shown in the
          First Schedule to be triable, whereas any offence under any other law shall be tried by the Court
          mentioned in that law and if not mentioned, it may be tried by the High Court or any other Court by
          which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable.
      l   Section 528 of the BNSS is one of the most important section of Sanhita. It states that nothing in
          this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such
          orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of
          the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
      l   The word “arrest” when used in its ordinary and natural sense means the apprehension or restrain
          or the deprivation of one’s personal liberty to go where he pleases. The word “arrest” consists of
          taking into custody of another person under authority empowered by law, for the purpose of holding
          or detaining him to answer a criminal charge and preventing the commission of a criminal offence.
          ection 35 enumerates different categories of cases in which a police officer may arrest a person
          without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant.
      l   The general processes to compel appearance are: (1) Summons and (2) Warrants
      l   Where a warrant remains unexecuted, the Code of Procedure Code, 1973 provides for two remedies:
          (1) Issuing a proclamation and (2) Attachment and Sale of Property


                                                                                                              281
EP-JI&GL                                                                         Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


      l    Sometimes it is necessary that a person should produce a document or other thing which may be in
           his possession or power for the purposes of any investigation or inquiry under the BNSS 2023. This
           can be compelled to be produced by issuing summons (Sections 94 and 95) or a warrant (Sections
           96 to 101).

      l    Summary trial is a speedy trial by dispensing with formalities or delay in proceedings. By summary
           cases is meant a case which can be tried and disposed of at once. Generally, it will apply to such
           offences not punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.

      l    Section 359 of the BNSS enumerates the provisions related to compounding of offences.
           Compounding means settlement of offence committed by a person. The settlement must be with
           the consent of the court of law.

      l    According to section 478, when any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable offence
           is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or
           is brought before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at
           any stage of the proceeding before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail.
           However, such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, may, and shall, if such person is indigent and
           is unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail bond from such person, discharge him on his
           executing a bond for his appearance as hereinafter provided.

      l    In general, there is no limitation of time in filing complaints under the Sanhita but delay may hurdle
           the investigation. Further, the Limitation Act, 1963 provides the period of limitation for appeal and
           revision applications. Therefore, chapter XXXVIII has been introduced in the Sanhita prescribing
           limitation period for taking cognizance of certain offences. (Sections 513 to 519).

      l    Chapter XVII (Section 303 to 334) of BNS, provides the provisions and law related to the offences
           against property.

      l    Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person
           without that person’s consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft.

      l    A new sub-offence from Theft has been defined in the BNS namely “Snatching”. Theft is snatching
           if, in order to commit theft, the offender suddenly or quickly or forcibly seizes or secures or grabs or
           takes away from any person or from his possession any movable property.

      l    Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any other, and
           thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property, or
           valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security,
           commits extortion.

      l    Theft is robbery if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away
           or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end voluntarily
           causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant
           death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.

      l    Extortion is robbery if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence of the
           person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in fear of instant death, of instant
           hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so putting in fear,
           induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extorted.


282
Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure                                                                 LESSON 7

      l   When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole
          number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present
          and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing,
          attempting or aiding, is said to commit dacoity.
      l   The definition of criminal misappropriation has not been provided by the provisions. The section
          directly states whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable
          property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
          less than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.
      l   Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property,
          dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or disposes
          of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be
          discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge
          of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits criminal breach of trust.
      l   Section 318 states that Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the
          person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain
          any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which
          he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to
          cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to cheat.
      l   A person is said to cheat by personation if he cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by
          knowingly substituting one person for or another, or representing that he or any other person is a
          person other than he or such other person really is.
      l   Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers or
          causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any property, intending
          thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent, the distribution of that
          property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished
          with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than six months but which
          may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
      l   According to section 336, whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a
          document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person,
          or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any
          express or implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits
          forgery.
      l   Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations,
          makes or publishes in any manner, any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or
          knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person,
          is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
      l   The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) also provides for general exceptions for a person accused
          of committing any offence under the Sanhita to plead in his defense. General defences or exceptions
          are contained in sections 14 to 44 of the BNS (Chapter III). In general exceptions to criminal liability
          there will be absence of mens rea (guilty mind) on the part of the wrong-doer. If there is any general
          defense of the accused in a criminal case, the burden of proving lies on him under section 108 of the
          Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023.




                                                                                                               283
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Laws relating to Crime and its Procedure


                                                     GLOSSARY

 Mens rea: Mens rea is the mental element necessary to constitute criminal liability.
 Actus non facit reum, nisi mens sit rea: The act alone does not amount to guilt; the act must be accompanied
 by a guilty mind.
 Summary Trials: Summary trial is a speedy trial by dispensing with formalities or delay in proceedings. By
 summary cases is meant a case which can be tried and disposed of at once.
 Recklessness: Recklessness occurs when the actor does not desire the consequence, but foresees the
 possibility and consciously takes the risk


                                                  TEST YOURSELF

       (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for
                                                   evaluation)
      1.   What are the fundamental elements of a criminal act?
      2.   Is the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita a substantive or an adjective law, or both?
      3.   Distinguish between: (a) Cognizable and Non-cognizable offences (b) Inquiry, Investigation and Trial
           (c) Bailable and Non-bailable offences (d) F.I.R. and Complaint.
      4.   What are the various classes of Criminal Courts? Discuss their powers.
      5.   How can arrest be affected by the police? When can police arrest without warrant? Can a private
           person cause arrest without warrant?
      6.   State the cases in which mens rea is not required in criminal law.
      7.   Write a short note on: (i) Forgery (ii) Defamation.
      8.   Enumerate the general exceptions for a person accused of committing any offence under the Indian
           Penal Code to plead his defense.


                                           LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

      l    Bare Act of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
      l    Bare Act on the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023


                         OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

      l    https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/20062/1/a2023-45.pdf
      l    https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/20099/3/A2023-46.pdf




284
                                                                                              Lesson
Law relating to Evidence
                                                                                                 8
KEY CONCEPTS
n Oath n Relevancy of Evidence n Admissibility of Evidence n Fact in Issue n Admissions n Confessions n Dying
Declaration n Opinion of third persons

Learning Objectives
To understand:
   Basic concepts under Law of Evidence
   The importance of relevancy of Evidence
   Need and importance of rules relating to admissibility of Evidence
   Facts in issue and related facts
   Admissions and Confessions
   Privileged Communications
   Provisions relating to Oral, Documentary and E-evidence


Lesson Outline
       Introduction                                          Oral, Documentary and Circumstantial
                                                               Evidence
       Judicial Proceedings
                                                              Presumptions
       Few Important Terms
                                                              Estoppel
       Classification of Relevant Facts
                                                              Electronic Evidence (e-Evidence)
       Fundamental Rules
                                                              Lesson Round Up
       Closely Connected Facts
                                                              Glossary
       Admissions and Confessions
                                                              Test Yourself
       Opinion of Third Persons
                                                              List of Further Readings
       Facts of which evidence cannot be given
        (Privileged Communications)                           Other References (Including Websites /
                                                               Video Links)




                          Law are not invented. They grow out of circumstances.
                                                                                                  – Azarias


                                                                                                         285
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Law relating to Evidence


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.


 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l   The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023

 INTRODUCTION
The “Law of Evidence” may be defined as a system of rules for ascertaining controversial questions of fact in
judicial inquiries. This system of ascertaining the facts, which are the essential elements of a right or liability and
is the primary and perhaps the most difficult function of the Court, is regulated by a set of rules and principles
known as “Law of Evidence”.
The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 an Act to consolidate and to provide for general rules and principles
of evidence for fair trial.

 JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 does not define the term “judicial proceedings” but it is inclusively
defined under Section 2(1)(m) of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 as “any proceeding in the
course of which evidence is or may be legally taken on oath.
The word evidence in the Act signifies only the instruments by means of which relevant facts are brought before
the Court, viz., witnesses and documents, and by means of which the court is convinced of these facts.
Evidence under Section 2 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 may be either oral or personal (i.e. all
statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses), and documentary (documents
produced for the inspection of the court), which may be adduced in order to prove a certain fact (principal fact)
which is in issue. There must be an open and visible connection between the principal fact and the evidentially
facts. Facts are which form part of the same transaction, though not in issue, place or at different times and
places.
In general the rules of evidence are same in civil and criminal proceedings but there is a strong and
marked difference as to the effect of evidence in civil and criminal proceedings. In the former a mere
preponderance of probability due regard being had to the burden of proof, is sufficient basis of a decision,
but in the latter, specially when the offence charged amounts to felony or treason, a much higher degree
of assurance is required. The persuasion of guilt must amount to a moral certainty such as to be beyond
all reasonable doubt.
In civil cases, the principle “mere preponderance of probability” is sufficient basis of a decision. In criminal
cases, the principle “beyond all reasonable doubt” is required for taking decision.




286
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                    LESSON 8

 SCHEME OF THE ADHINIYAM

                                       The Act is divided into four parts
     Part I:             Part II:             Part III: ON PROOF             Part IV: PRODUCTION AND EFFECT
  PRELIMINARY          RELEVANCY                                                        OF EVIDENCE
                                          Chapter III: FACTS WHICH
                        OF FACTS
    Chapter I -                            NEED NOT BE PROVED                 Chapter VII: OF THE BURDEN OF
    Preliminary         Chapter II:                                                        PROOF
                                             Chapter IV: OF ORAL
                       Relevancy of
                                                 EVIDENCE                          Chapter VIII: ESTOPPEL
                          Facts
                                             Chapter V: OF                       Chapter IX: OF WITNESSES
                                         DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
                                                                              Chapter X: OF EXAMINATION OF
                                            Chapter VI: OF THE                          WITNESSES
                                             EXCLUSION OF
                                                                                Chapter XI: OF IMPROPER
                                           ORAL EVIDENCE BY
                                                                              ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF
                                         DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
                                                                                       EVIDENCE
                                                                               Chapter XII: Repeal and Savings

Relevancy of Facts: Sections 3 to 50 of the Adhiniyam deal with relevancy of facts. A fact is also known as
Factum Probans or a fact that proves. The question arises what then the term “fact” signifies?
According to section 2(1)(f), “fact” means and includes – (i) any thing, state of things, or relation of things,
capable of being perceived by the senses; (ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Thus facts are classified into physical and psychological facts.
Illustrations.
    (i)    That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is a fact.
   (ii)    That a person heard or saw something, is a fact.
   (iii)   That a person said certain words, is a fact.
  (iv)     That a person holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good faith, or fraudulently, or
           uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a specified time conscious of a particular
           sensation, is a fact;
Changes in BSA: Word “man” is replaced by the word “person” in illustrations and illustration (e)-”That a
man has a certain reputation, is a fact” is now not the part of BSA.
Illustrations (i), (ii) and (iii), are the examples of physical facts whereas illustration (iv) are the examples of
psychological facts.
Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.
According to section 3 of BSA, evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence
of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no others.
Explanation to section 3, however, explains that section 3 shall not enable any person to give evidence
of a fact which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force relating to
civil procedure.



                                                                                                                 287
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Evidence

Illustrations.
   (a)   A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of causing his death. At A’s
         trial the following facts are in issue: –
           l     A’s beating B with the club;
           l     A’s causing B’s death by such beating;
           l     A’s intention to cause B’s death.
   (b)   A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first hearing of the case, a
         bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce the bond or prove its contents at
         a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the conditions prescribed
         by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

 FEW IMPORTANT TERMS
To understand the relevancy it is necessary to know the meanings of the few terms. These are as follows:
 Relevant Fact
Section 2(1)(k) of BSA provides the definition of “relevant” as: A fact is said to be relevant to another when it
is connected with the other in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Adhiniyam relating to the
relevancy of facts
Section 4 to 14 provides the provisions relating to closely connected facts.
 Logical relevancy and legal relevancy
A fact is said to be logically relevant to another when it bears such casual relation with the other as to render
probably the existence or non-existence of the latter. All facts logically relevant are not, however, legally
relevant. Relevancy under the Adhiniyam is not a question of pure logic but of law, as no fact, however logically
relevant, is receivable in evidence unless it is declared by the Act to be relevant. Of course every fact legally
relevant will be found to be logically relevant; but every fact logically relevant is not necessarily relevant under
the Adhiniyam as common sense or logical relevancy is wider than legal relevancy. A judge might in ordinary
transaction, take one fact as evidence of another and act upon it himself, when in Court, he may rule that it was
legally irrelevant. And he may exclude facts, although logically relevant, if they appear to him too remote to be
really material to the issue.
Under Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, Legal relevancy is to be considered as against logical relevancy.

 Legal relevancy and admissibility
Relevancy and admissibility are not co-extensive or interchangeable terms. A fact may be legally relevant,
yet its reception in evidence may be prohibited on the grounds of public policy, or on some other ground.
Similarly every admissible facts not necessarily relevant. The tenth Chapter of the Adhiniyam makes a number
of facts receivable in evidence, but these facts are not “relevant” under the second Chapter which alone defines
relevancy.
Relevancy and admissibility are not co-extensive or interchangeable terms. A fact may be relevant yet not
admissible.

 Facts in Issue
According to section 2(1)(g) of BSA, “facts in issue” means and includes any fact from which, either by itself or
in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liability or disability,
asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily follows.


288
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                  LESSON 8

Explanation. – Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating to Civil Procedure,
any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustration
A is accused of the murder of B. At his trial, the following facts may be in issue: –
    (i)    That A caused B’s death.
   (ii)    That A intended to cause B’s death.
   (iii)   That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B.
  (iv)     That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B’s death, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind,
           incapable of knowing its nature;
A fact in issue is called as the principal fact to be proved or factum probandum and the relevant fact the
evidentiary fact or factum probans from which the principal fact follows. The fact which constitute the right or
liability called “fact in issue” and in a particular case the question of determining the “facts in issue” depends
upon the rule of the substantive law which defines the rights and liabilities claimed.

 Facts in issue and issues of fact
Under Civil Procedure Code, the Court has to frame issues on all disputed facts which are necessary in the case.
These are called issues of fact but the subject matter of an issue of fact is always a fact in issue. Thus when
described in the context of Civil Procedure Code, it is an ‘issue of fact’ and when described in the language of
Evidence Act it is a ‘fact in issue’. Thus as discussed above, distinction between facts in issue and relevant facts
is of fundamental importance.

 CLASSIFICATION OF RELEVANT FACTS
Principles of Sections relating to relevancy of facts are mere rules of logic.

                                         Classification of relevant facts

           Details                                                                      Sections

           Closely connected facts                                                 Sections 4 to 14

           Admissions                                                              Sections 15 to 25

           Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses                Sections 26 to 27

           Statements made under special circumstances                            Sections 28 to 32

           How much of a statement is to be proved                                      Section 33

           Judgments of Courts when relevant                                      Sections 34 to 38

           Opinions of third persons, when relevant                               Sections 39 to 45

           Character when relevant                                                Sections 46 to 50



                                                                                                                289
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Law relating to Evidence

 FUNDAMENTAL RULES

                                      Fundamental Rules of Evidences
                    1. No facts other than those having        2. All facts having rational probative
                    rational probative value should be           value are admissible in evidence
                           admitted in evidence.               unless excluded by a positive rule of
                                                                       paramount importance.

According to section 2(1)(h) of BSA, Whenever it is provided by this Adhiniyam that the Court may presume a
fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved or may call for proof of it.
For example: Section 88: Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records, Section 89: Presumption
as to books, maps and charts, Section 90: Presumption as to electronic messages, 92. Presumption as to
documents thirty years old, etc.
According to section 2(1)(l) of BSA, whenever it is directed by this Adhiniyam that the Court shall presume a fact,
it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.
For example: Section 78: Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies, Section 79: Presumption as to
documents produced as record of evidence, etc., Section 80: Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, and
other documents; Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.
Presumption is an inference of the existence of some fact, which is drawn, without evidence, from some other
fact already proved or assumed to exist (wills). Presumption is either of a fact or law. These presumptions which
are inference are always rebuttable. Presumption of law is either conclusive or rebuttable.
The Adhiniyam also provides that when one fact is declared by this Adhiniyam to be conclusive proof of another,
the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given
for the purpose of disproving it.

 CLOSELY CONNECTED FACTS
      1.   Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction (Section 4): Facts which, though not in issue, are
           so connected with a fact in issue or a relevant fact as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant,
           whether they occurred at the same time and place or at different times and places.
		Illustrations.
           (a)   A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B or the
                 bystanders at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction, is a
                 relevant fact.
           (b)   A is accused of waging war against the Government of India by taking part in an armed insurrection
                 in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked and jails are broken open. The occurrence of
                 these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general transaction, though A may not have been
                 present at all of them.
           (c)   A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters between the
                 parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of the correspondence
                 in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain the libel itself.
           (d)   The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The goods were
                 delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a relevant fact.


290
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                  LESSON 8

   2.   Facts which are occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue or relevant facts (Section 5): Facts which
        are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which
        constitute the state of things under which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their
        occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
		Changes in BSA: Words “or relevant facts” added in heading.
		Illustration: The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, shortly before the robbery, B went to
  a fair with money in his possession, and that he showed it, or mentioned the fact that he had it, to third
  persons, are relevant.
   3.   Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct (Section 6): Any fact is relevant which shows
        or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
		 The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to such
   suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any
   person, an offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences
   or is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
		 The word “conduct” in this section does not include statements, unless those statements accompany
   and explain acts other than statements; but this explanation is not to affect the relevancy of statements
   under any other section of this Adhiniyam.
		 When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or in his presence and hearing,
   which affects such conduct, is relevant.
		Illustrations
		 A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the bond. The fact that, at the
   time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required money for a particular purpose, is relevant.
		 The question is, whether A owes B ten thousand rupees. The facts that A asked C to lend him money,
   and that D said to C in A’s presence and hearing – “I advise you not to trust A, for he owes B ten
   thousand rupees”, and that A went away without making any answer, are relevant facts.
		Motive means which moves a person to act in a particular way. It is different from intention. The
  substantive law is rarely concerned with motive, but the existence of a motive, from the point of view
  of evidence would be a relevant fact, in every criminal case. That is the first step in every investigation.
  Motive is a psychological fact and the accused’s motive, will have to be proved by circumstantial
  evidence. When the question is as to whether a person did a particular act, the fact that he made
  preparations to do it, would certainly be relevant for the purpose of showing that he did it.
		 The Section makes the conduct of certain persons relevant. Conduct means behaviour. The conduct of
   the parties is relevant. The conduct to be relevant must be closely connected with the suit, proceeding,
   a fact in issue or a relevant fact, i.e., if the Court believes such conduct to exist, it must assist the Court
   in coming to a conclusion on the matter in controversy. It must influence the decision. If these conditions
   are satisfied it is immaterial whether the conduct was previous to or subsequent to the happening of the
   fact in issue.
   4.   Facts necessary to explain or introduce fact in issue or relevant facts (Section 7): Facts necessary to
        explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by
        a fact in issue or a relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything, or person whose identity, is
        relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the
        relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary
        for that purpose.


                                                                                                                291
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Evidence

		Illustrations
		 The question is, whether a given document is the will of A. The state of A’s property and of his family at
   the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
		 A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on leaving A’s service,
   says to A – “I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer”. This statement is a relevant fact
   as explanatory of C’s conduct, which is relevant as a fact in issue.
   5.      Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design (Section 8): Where there is
           reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired together to commit an offence
           or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or written by any one of such persons in reference to their
           common intention, after the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a
           relevant fact as against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of
           proving the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party
           to it.
		Illustration
		 Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war against the State.
		 The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected money in
   Kolkata for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Mumbai, E published writings
   advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to G at Singapore the money which
   C had collected at Kolkata, and the contents of a letter written by H giving an account of the conspiracy,
   are each relevant, both to prove the existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A’s complicity in it,
   although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were done
   were strangers to him, and although they may have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or
   after he left it.
   6.      When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant (Section 9): Facts not otherwise relevant are
           relevant –
            (1)   if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
           (2)    if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or non-existence of any
                  fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
		Illustration
		 The question is, whether A committed a crime at Chennai on a certain day. The fact that, on that day,
   A was at Ladakh is relevant. The fact that, near the time when the crime was committed, A was at a
   distance from the place where it was committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not
   impossible, that he committed it, is relevant.
      7.   Facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are relevant in suits for damages (Section 10):
           In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to determine the amount of
           damages which ought to be awarded, is relevant.
   8.      Facts relevant when right or custom is in question (Section 11): Where the question is as to the
           existence of any right or custom, the following facts are relevant –
           (a)    any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created, claimed, modified,
                  recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence;


292
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                    LESSON 8

         (b)   particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised or exercised, or in which
               its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
   9.    Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body or bodily feeling (Section 12): Facts showing
         the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-
         will or goodwill towards any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body or bodily
         feeling, are relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue
         or relevant.
		Explanation 1. – A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind must show that the
  state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular matter in question.
		Explanation 2. – But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous commission
  by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this section, the previous conviction of
  such person shall also be a relevant fact.
		Illustration
		 A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B, being induced to trust
   C, who was insolvent, suffered loss. The fact that, at the time when A represented C to be solvent, C
   was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing
   that A made the representation in good faith.
  10.    Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional (Section 13): When there is a
         question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or intention,
         the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing
         the act was concerned, is relevant.
         Illustration
		 A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B a counterfeit currency. The question is, whether the
   delivery of the currency was accidental. The facts that, soon before or soon after the delivery to B,
   A delivered counterfeit currency to C, D and E are relevant, as showing that the delivery to B was
   not accidental.
   11.   Existence of course of business when relevant (Section 14): When there is a question whether a
         particular act was done, the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally would
         have been done, is a relevant fact.
		Illustration
         (a)   The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched. The facts that it was the ordinary
               course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post, and that particular
               letter was put in that place are relevant.
         (b)   The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was posted in due course,
               and was not returned through the Return Letter Office, are relevant.

 ADMISSIONS AND CONFESSIONS
The general rule known as the hearsay rule is that what is stated about the fact in question is irrelevant. To this
general rule there are three exceptions which are:




                                                                                                                  293
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Evidence




                                               Statements as to
                                                certain matters          Statements
                          Admissions and         under certain          made under
                           confessions         circumstances by            special
                                               persons who are         circumstances
                                                 not witnesses




 (i) Admissions and Confessions
Sections 15 to 25 lay down the exceptions to the general rule known as “admissions” and “confessions”.
Admissions
An admission is defined in Section 15 as a statement, oral or documentary or contained in electronic form which
suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and
under the circumstances mentioned under Sections 16 to 18. Thus, whether a statement amounts to an admission
or not depends upon the question whether it was made by any of the persons and in any of the circumstances
described in Sections 16 to 18 and whether it suggests an inference as to a fact in issue or a relevant fact in the
case. Thus admission may be verbal or contained in documents as maps, bills, receipts, letters, books etc.
(However, the word ‘statement’ has not been defined in the Act. Therefore the ordinary dictionary meaning is to
be followed which is “something that is stated.”)
An admission may be made by a party, by the agent or predecessor-in-interest of a party, by a person having
joint propriety of pecuniary interest in the subject matter (Section 16) or by a “reference” (Section 18).
An admission is the best evidence against the party making the same unless it is untrue and made under the
circumstances which does not make it binding on him.
An admission by the Government is merely relevant and non-conclusive, unless the party to whom they are
made has acted upon and thus altered his detriment.
An admission must be clear, precise, not vague or ambiguous. In Basant Singh v. Janky Singh, (1967) 1 SCR 1,
The Supreme Court held:
  “(1)   Section 15 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, makes no distinction between an admission made by a
         party in a pleading and other admission. Under the Indian law, an admission made by a party in a plaint
         signed and verified by him may be used as evidence against him in other suits. However, this admission
         cannot be regarded as conclusive and it is open to the party to show that it is not true.
   (2)   All the statements made in the plaint are admissible as evidence. The Court is, however, not bound to
         accept all the statements as correct. The Court may accept some of the statements and reject the rest.”
Admission means conceding something against the person making the admission. That is why it is stated as a
general rule (the exceptions are in Section 17), that admissions must be self-harming; and because a person is
unlikely to make a statement which is self-harming unless it is true evidence of such admissions as received in
Court.

294
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                 LESSON 8

These Sections deal only with admissions oral and written. Admissions by conduct are not covered by these
sections. The relevancy of such admissions by conduct depends upon Section 6 and its explanations.
Oral admissions as to the contents of electronic records are not relevant unless the genuineness of the record
produced is in question. (Section 20)
Confessions
Sections 22 to 24 deal with confessions. However, the Adhiniyam does not define a confession but includes in it
admissions of which it is a species. Thus confessions are special form of admissions. Whereas every confession
must be an admission but every admission may not amount to a confession. Proviso to section 23 and section
24 deal with confessions which the Court will take into account. A confession is relevant as an admission unless
it is made.

      Person in Authority by           (i) to a person in authority in consequence of some inducement, threat
      inducement, threat or                or promise held out by him in reference to the charge against the
            promise                        accused; or

           Police Officer              (ii) to a Police Officer; or

    In custody of police officer      (iii) to any one at a time when the accused is in the custody of a Police
      without the presence of               Officer and no Magistrate is present.
            magistrate

Changes made by BSA:
In section 22 [24 of IEA] - The word “coercion” has been added in 22. Section 28 IEA and Section 29 IEA are
given as provisos to Section 22 of the BSA. Heading is dropped as sections are included as provisos.
In section 23(2) [26 of IEA] - Heading is dropped as the section is included as a subsection. Word “whilst” is
replaced by “while” and words “such person” are replaced by “him”.
In section 24 [30 of IEA] - A new explanation II is added, mentioning that “A trial of more persons than one held
in the absence of the accused who has absconded or who fails to comply with a proclamation issued under
Section 84 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, shall be deemed to be a joint trial for the purpose
of this section.”
Thus, a statement made by an accused person if it is an admission, is admissible in evidence. The confession is
evidence only against its maker and against another person who is being jointly tried with him for an offence.
Section 24 is an exception to the general rule that confession is only an evidence against the confessor and not
against the others.
The confession made in front of magistrate recorded is admissible against its maker is also admissible against
co-accused under Section 24.
The Privy Council in Pakala Narayanaswami v. Emperor, (1929) PC 47, observed that:
No statement that contains self exculpatory matter can amount to confession, if the exculpatory statement is
of some fact which if true would negative the offence alleged to be confessed. All confessions are admissions
but not vice versa.
A confession must, either admit, in terms the offence, or substantially all the facts which constitute the offence.
An admission of a gravely incriminating fact, is not of itself a confession. For example, an admission that the
accused was the owner of and was in recent possession of the knife or revolver which caused a death with


                                                                                                               295
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Law relating to Evidence

no explanation of any other man’s possession of the knife or revolver. A confession cannot be construed as
meaning a statement by the accused suggesting the inference that he committed the crime.
According to Section 22(1), confession caused by inducement, threat, coercion or promise is irrelevant. To attract
the prohibition contained in Section 22 of BSA the following six facts must be established:
      (i)   that the statement in question is a confession;
   (ii)     that such confession has been made by an accused person;
  (iii)     that it has been made to a person in authority;
  (iv)      that the confession has been obtained by reason of any inducement, threat, coercion or promise
            proceeded from a person in authority;
   (v)      such inducement, threat, coercion or promise, must have reference to the charge against the accused
            person;
  (vi)      the inducement, threat or promise must in the opinion of the Court be sufficient to give the accused
            person grounds, which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by making it he would gain
            any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.
To exclude the confession it is not always necessary to prove that it was the result of inducement, threat,
coercion or promise. It is sufficient if a legitimate doubt is created in the mind of the Court or it appears to the
Court that the confession was not voluntary. It is however for the accused to create this doubt and not for the
prosecution to prove that it was voluntarily made. A confession if voluntary and truthfully made is an efficacious
proof of guilt.
Confessions vs. Admissions
A confession, however, is received in evidence for the same reason as an admission, and like an admission it
must be considered as a whole. Further, there can be an admission either in a civil or a criminal proceedings,
whereas there can be a confession only in criminal proceedings. An admission need not be voluntary to be
relevant, though it may affect its weight; but a confession to be relevant, must be voluntary. There can be
relevant admission made by an agent or even a stranger, but, a confession to be relevant must be made by the
accused himself. A confession of a co-accused is not strictly relevant, though it may be taken into consideration,
under Section 24 in special circumstances.
Confessions are classified as:
   (a)      judicial, and
   (b)      extra-judicial
Judicial confessions are those made before a Court or recorded by a Magistrate under Section 183 of BNSS
2023 after following the prescribed procedure such as warning the accused that he need not to make the
confession and that if he made it, it would be used against him. Extra-judicial confessions are those which are
made either to the police or to any person other than Judges and Magistrates as such.
An extra-judicial confession, if voluntary, can be relied upon by the Court along with other evidences. It will
have to be proved just like any other fact. The value of the evidence depends upon the truthfulness of the
witness to whom it is made.
In Ram Khilari v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1999 SC 1002, the Supreme Court held that where an extra-judicial
confession was made before a witness who was a close relative of the accused and the testimony of said
witness was reliable and truthful, the conviction on the basis of extra judicial confession is proper.
In another case, the Supreme Court has further held that the law does not require that the evidence of an extra

296
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                  LESSON 8

judicial confession should be corroborated in all cases. When such confession was proved by an independent
witness who was a responsible officer and one who bore no animus against the accused, there is hardly any
justification to disbelieve it. Also, where the Court finds that the confession made by the accused to his friend was
unambiguous and unmistakably conveyed that the accused was the perpetrator of the crime and the testimony
of the friend was truthful, reliable and trustworthy, a conviction based on such extra-judicial confession is proper
and no corroboration is necessary. Much importance could not be given to minor discrepancies and technical
errors (Vinayak Shivajirao Pol v. State of Maharashtra, 1998 (1) Scale 159).
Illustrations
    1.   A undertakes to collect rents for B. B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B. A denies that rent
         was due from C to B. A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission, and is a relevant fact as
         against A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.
   2.    The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound. A says to B – “Go and ask C, C knows all about
         it”. C’s statement is an admission.
   3.    The question between A and B is, whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A affirms that it is genuine,
         B that it is forged. A may prove a statement by B that the deed is genuine, and B may prove a statement
         by A that deed is forged; but A cannot prove a statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can
         B prove a statement by himself that the deed is forged.
   4.    A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away. Evidence is given to show that the ship was taken
         out of her proper course. A produces a book kept by him in the ordinary course of his business showing
         observations alleged to have been taken by him from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not
         taken out of her proper course. A may prove these statements, because they would be admissible
         between third parties, if he were dead, under clause (b) of section 26.
   5.    A is accused of a crime committed by him at Kolkata. He produces a letter written by himself and dated
         at Chennai on that day, and bearing the Chennai post-mark of that day. The statement in the date of
         the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be admissible under clause (b) of section 26.
   6.    A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. He offers to prove that he refused to
         sell them below their value. A may prove these statements, though they are admissions, because they
         are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
    7.   A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit currency which he knew to be
         counterfeit. He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the currency as he doubted
         whether it was counterfeit or not, and that person did examine it and told him it was genuine. A may
         prove these facts.
   8.    A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said – “B and I murdered C”. The Court
         may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
   9.    A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered by A and B, and that
         B said – “A and I murdered C”. This statement may not be taken into consideration by the Court against
         A, as B is not being jointly tried.

 (ii) Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses
Statements (written or verbal) of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who
has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay
or expense which under the circumstances of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves
relevant facts in the following cases, namely:


                                                                                                                297
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Law relating to Evidence

      1.   Statements relating to cause of death: When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his
           death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which
           the cause of that person’s death comes into question. Such statements are relevant whether the person
           who made them was or was not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death, and
           whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question.
   2.      Statement relating to Course of Business: When the statement was made by such person in the
           ordinary course of business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by
           him in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an
           acknowledgement written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods, securities or property of
           any kind; or of a document used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other
           document usually dated, written or signed by him.
   3.      Statement against interest: When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of
           the person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to a criminal
           prosecution or to a suit for damages.
   4.      Statement relating to the opinion as to existence of Public Right, Custom or matter of Public or
           General Interest: when the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any
           public right or custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed, he
           would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement was made before any controversy as to
           such right, custom or matter had arisen.
   5.      Statement relating to the existence of any relationship: When the statement relates to the existence
           of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood,
           marriage or adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when the
           statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
   6.      Statement relating to the existence of any relationship with deceased: When the statement relates
           to the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and
           is made in any will or deed relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person
           belonged, or in any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which
           such statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the question in dispute
           was raised.
      7.   Statement in any deed, will or other document relating to right or custom: When the statement is
           contained in any deed, will or other document which relates to any such transaction as is specified
           in clause (a) of section 11 i.e. any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created,
           claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence.
   8.      Statement relating to expression feelings or Impression: when the statement was made by a number
           of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations
   (a)     The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or A dies of injuries received in a transaction in the
           course of which she was raped. The question is whether she was raped by B; or the question is, whether
           A was killed by B under such circumstances that a suit would lie against B by A’s widow. Statements
           made by A as to the cause of his or her death, referring respectively to the murder, the rape and the
           actionable wrong under consideration, are relevant facts.
   (b)     The question is as to the date of A’s birth. An entry in the diary of a deceased surgeon regularly kept in
           the course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended A’s mother and delivered her of a son,
           is a relevant fact.

298
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                   LESSON 8

   (c)    The question is, whether A was in Nagpur on a given day. A statement in the diary of a deceased
          solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business, that on a given day the solicitor attended A at a place
          mentioned, in Nagpur, for the purpose of conferring with him upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
   (d)    The question is, whether a ship sailed from Mumbai harbour on a given day. A letter written by a
          deceased member of a merchant’s firm by which she was chartered to their correspondents in Chennai,
          to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed on a given day from Mumbai port, is a
          relevant fact.
   (e)    The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land. A letter from A’s deceased agent to A,
          saying that he had received the rent on A’s account and held it at A’s orders is a relevant fact.
   (f)    The question is, whether A and B were legally married. The statement of a deceased clergyman that
          he married them under such circumstances that the celebration would be a crime is relevant.
   (g)    The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a certain day. The fact that
          a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
   (h)    The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship. A protest made by the captain, whose
          attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
    (i)   The question is, whether a given road is a public way. A statement by A, a deceased headman of the
          village, that the road was public, is a relevant fact.
   ( j)   The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market. A statement of the
          price, made by a deceased business person in the ordinary course of his business, is a relevant fact.
   (k)    The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B. A statement by A that B was his son, is a
          relevant fact.
    (l)   The question is, what was the date of the birth of A. A letter from A’s deceased father to a friend,
          announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.
  (m)     The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married. An entry in a memorandum book by C, the
          deceased father of B, of his daughter’s marriage with A on a given date, is a relevant fact.
   (n)    A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window. The question is as to
          the similarity of the caricature and its libellous character. The remarks of a crowd of spectators on these
          points may be proved.

 (iii) Statements made under special circumstances:
The following statements become relevant on account of their having been made under special circumstances:
   (a)    Entries in the books of account, including those maintained in an electronic form, regularly kept in the
          course of business are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into which the Court has to inquire, but
          such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence to charge any person with liability.
   (b)    An entry in any public or other official book, register or record or an electronic record, stating a fact
          in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any
          other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book,
          register or record or an electronic record, is kept, is itself a relevant fact.
   (c)    Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts generally offered for
          public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of the Central Government or any State
          Government, as to matters usually represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves
          relevant facts.

                                                                                                                 299
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Law relating to Evidence

   (d)     When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public nature, any statement
           of it, made in a recital contained in any Central Act or State Act or in a Central Government or State
           Government notification appearing in the respective Official Gazette or in any printed paper or in
           electronic or digital form purporting to be such Gazette, is a relevant fact.
   (e)     When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement of such law contained
           in a book purporting to be printed or published including in electronic or digital form under the authority
           of the Government of such country and to contain any such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts
           of such country contained in a book including in electronic or digital form purporting to be a report of
           such rulings, is relevant.
When any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement, or of a conversation or part
of an isolated document, or is contained in a document which forms part of a book, or is contained in part of
electronic record or of a connected series of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more
of the statement, conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the Court
considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect of the statement,
and of the circumstances under which it was made. (Section 33)

 OPINION OF THIRD PERSONS
Generally opinion of third persons is irrelevant. However, in the below mentioned cases, opinion of third person
may be treated as relevant:
      1.   Opinions of experts (Section 39): When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or
           of science or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the opinions
           upon that point of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or any other field, or in
           questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions are relevant facts and such persons are
           called experts.
		Illustration: The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another document is
  produced which is proved or admitted to have been written by A. The opinions of experts on the question
  whether the two documents were written by the same person or by different persons, are relevant.
		         Further, when in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to any information
           transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or digital form, the opinion of the
           Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, is
           a relevant fact.
   2.      Facts bearing upon opinions of experts (Section 40): acts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they
           support or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
		Illustration: The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain sea-wall. The
  fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there were no such sea-walls,
  began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
   3.      Opinion as to handwriting and signature, when relevant (Section 41): When the Court has to form
           an opinion as to the person by whom any document was written or signed, the opinion of any person
           acquainted with the handwriting of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was
           or was not written or signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
		 A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another person when he has seen that
   person write, or when he has received documents purporting to be written by that person in answer
   to documents written by himself or under his authority and addressed to that person, or when, in the
   ordinary course of business, documents purporting to be written by that person have been habitually
   submitted to him.

300
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                   LESSON 8

   4.    Opinion as to existence of general custom or right, when relevant (Section 42): When the Court has
         to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom or right, the opinions, as to the existence
         of such custom or right, of persons who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
		 The expression “general custom or right” includes customs or rights common to any considerable class
   of persons.
   5.    Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant (Section 43): When the Court has to form an opinion
         as to –
          (i)    the usages and tenets of any body of men or family;
          (ii)   the constitution and governance of any religious or charitable foundation; or
         (iii)   the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people,
		 the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
   6.    Opinion on relationship, when relevant (Section 44): When the Court has to form an opinion as to
         the relationship of one person to another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of
         such relationship, of any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of
         knowledge on the subject, is a relevant fact:
		 However, such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings under the Divorce Act,
   1869, or in prosecution under sections 82 and 84 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
    7.   Grounds of opinion, when relevant (Section 45): Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant,
         the grounds on which such opinion is based are also relevant.

 FACTS OF WHICH EVIDENCE CANNOT BE GIVEN (PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS)
There are some facts of which evidence cannot be given though they are relevant, such as facts are mainly
covered under Sections 127 to 134 of the BSA, where evidence is prohibited under those Sections. They are also
referred to as ‘privileged communications’.

                                        Types of privileged communications

  (i) Evidence of a Judge or Magistrate in regard to         (iv) Official communications (Section 130)
  certain matters (Section 127)

  (ii) Communications during marriage; (Section 128)         (v) Source of information of a Magistrate or Police
                                                             officer or Revenue officer as to commission of an
                                                             offence or crime (Section 131)

  (iii) Evidence as to Affairs of State; (Section 129)       (vi) Professional communication between a client
                                                             and his barrister, attorney or other professional or
                                                             legal advisor (Sections 132(1) &(2) and 134).

Changes in Section 132(1) &(2) BSA [126 of IEA]: The words “barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil” are replaced by
“advocate”. Word “employment” is replaced by “service”.
A witness though compellable to give evidence is privileged in respect of particular matters within the limits of
which he is not bound to answer questions while giving evidence. These are based on public policy.




                                                                                                                  301
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Evidence

 Evidence of Judges and Magistrates
Under Section 127 of BSA, no Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some Court to which
he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any questions as to his own conduct in Court as such Judge or
Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court as such Judge or Magistrate;
He may be examined as to other matters which occurred in his presence whilst he was so acting.

 Communications during marriage
Under Section 128 of BSA, communication between the husband and the wife during marriage is privileged and
its disclosure cannot be enforced. This provision is based on the principle of domestic peace and confidence
between the married couple. The Section contains two parts; the first part deals with the privilege of the witness
while the second part of the Section deals with the privilege of the husband or wife of the witness.

 Evidence as to affairs of State
Section 129 of the BSA applies only to evidence derived from unpublished official record relating to affairs
of State. According to Section 129, no one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished
official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head of the
department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.

 Professional communications
Section 132 of BSA deal with the professional communications between an advocate and a client, which are
protected from disclosure. A client cannot be compelled and an advocate cannot be allowed without the express
consent of his client to disclose oral or documentary communications passing between them in professional
confidence. The rule is founded on the impossibility of conducting legal business without professional assistance
and securing full and unreserved communication between the two. Under these sections neither an advocate
nor his interpreter, clerk or employees can be permitted to disclose any communication made to him in the
course and for the purpose of professional employment of such advocate or to state the contents or condition
of any document with which any such person has become acquainted in the course and for the purpose of such
employment.
Further, under section 134, no one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, unless he offers himself as a witness, in which case
he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may appear to the Court necessary to be known
in order to explain any evidence which he has given, but no others.
Changes in Section 132 of BSA [126 of IEA]: The words “barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil” are replaced by
“advocate”. Word “servant” is replaced by “employee”.

 ORAL, DOCUMENTARY AND CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE

 Oral Evidences
All facts, except the contents of documents may be proved by oral evidence (Section 54). The contents of
documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence (Section 55).
Thus, the two broad rules regarding oral evidence are:
      (i)   All facts except the contents of documents may be proved by oral evidence;
   (ii)     Oral evidence must in all cases be “direct”.

302
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                  LESSON 8

Oral evidence means statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses in
relation to matters of fact under inquiry. But, if a witness is unable to speak he may give his evidence in any
manner in which he can make it intelligible as by writing or by signs. (Section 125)

 Direct Evidence
In Section 55 of the BSA, expression “oral evidence” has an altogether different meaning. It is used in the
sense of “original evidence” as distinguished from “hearsay” evidence and it is not used in contradiction to
“circumstantial” or “presumptive evidence”. According to Section 55 oral evidence must in all cases whatever,
be direct; that is to say:
    –   if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it; – if it
        refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard it;
    –   if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must be the
        evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner;
    –   if it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of the
        person who holds that opinion on those grounds.
However, the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on
which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such treatises if the author is dead or cannot
be found, or has become incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of
delay or expense which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Further, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing other than a document, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for its inspection.

 Documentary Evidences
According to section 2(1)(d) “document” means any matter expressed or described or otherwise recorded upon
any substance by means of letters, figures or marks or any other means or by more than one of those means,
intended to be used, or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter and includes electronic
and digital records.
And according to section 56, the contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary
evidence.
So, the documentary evidences can further be classified in two ways i.e. Primary or Secondary.




 Primary evidence
“Primary evidence” means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court (Section 57). The rule that
the best evidence must be given of which the nature of the case permits has often been regarded as expressing
the great fundamental principles upon which the law of evidence depends. The general rule requiring primary

                                                                                                               303
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Law relating to Evidence

evidence of producing documents is commonly said to be based on the best evidence principle and to be
supported by the so called presumption that if inferior evidence is produced where better might be given, the
latter would tell against the withholder.

 Secondary evidence
Secondary evidence is generally in the form of compared copies, certified copies or copies made by such
mechanical processes as in themselves ensure accuracy. Section 58 defines the kind of secondary evidence
permitted by the Sanhita. According to Section 58, “secondary evidence” means and includes:
      (i)   certified copies given under the provisions after section 58;
   (ii)     copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves ensure the accuracy of
            the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
  (iii)     copies made from or compared with the original;

  (iv)      counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them;

   (v)      oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it;

  (vi)      oral admissions;

  (vii)     written admissions;

 (viii)     evidence of a person who has examined a document, the original of which consists of numerous
            accounts or other documents which cannot conveniently be examined in Court, and who is skilled in
            the examination of such documents.

Illustrations

   (a)      A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the two have not been
            compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.

   (b)      A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary evidence of the
            contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying machine was made from the
            original.

   (c)      A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original, is secondary evidence; but
            the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the original, although the copy from which it
            was transcribed was compared with the original.

   (d)      Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account of a photograph or
            machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.

Further, section 60 provides the Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.
Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a document in the following cases,
namely:

   (a)      when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power –

             (i) of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved; or

             (ii)   of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court; or

            (iii)   of any person legally bound to produce it,


304
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                    LESSON 8

		 and when, after the notice mentioned in section 64 such person does not produce it;

   (b)     when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to be admitted in writing by
           the person against whom it is proved or by his representative in interest;

   (c)     when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its contents cannot,
           for any other reason not arising from his own default or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;

   (d)     when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;

   (e)     when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;

    (f)    when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this Adhiniyam, or by any
           other law in force in India to be given in evidence;

   (g)     when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot conveniently be
           examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the whole collection.

Explanation. – For the purposes of –

    (i)    clauses (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the document is admissible;

   (ii)    clause (b), the written admission is admissible;

   (iii)   clause (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of secondary evidence, is admissible;

  (iv)     clause (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents by any person who has
           examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such document.

Section 62 provides that the contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of
Section 63.

Section 63 is non-obstante clause which provides that any information contained in an electronic record which
is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is
produced by a computer or any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic
form (hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions
mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be
admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence or any contents
of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.

In English law the expression direct evidence is used to signify evidence relating to the ‘fact in issue’ (factum
probandum) whereas the terms circumstantial evidence, presumptive evidence and indirect evidence are
used to signify evidence which relates only to “relevant fact” (facta probandum). However, under Section
55 of the BSA, the expression “direct evidence” has altogether a different meaning and it is not intended to
exclude circumstantial evidence of things which could be seen, heard or felt. Thus, evidence whether direct
or circumstantial under English law is “direct” evidence under Section 55. Before acting on circumstances put
forward are satisfactorily proved and whether the proved circumstances are sufficient to bring the guilt to the
accused the Court should not view in isolation the circumstantial evidence but it must take an overall view of
the matter.

 PRESUMPTIONS
The Sanhita recognises some rules as to presumptions. Rules of presumption are deduced from enlightened
human knowledge and experience and are drawn from the connection, relation and coincidence of facts and

                                                                                                                  305
EP-JI&GL                                                                                        Law relating to Evidence

circumstances. A presumption is not in itself an evidence but only makes a prima facie case for the party in
whose favour it exists. A presumption is a rule of law that courts or juries shall or may draw a particular inference
from a particular fact or from particular evidence unless and until the truth of such inference is disproved.

                                        Three Categories of Presumptions
      (i) Presumptions of law, It is a rule   (ii) Presumptions of fact, it is a   (iii)  Mixed     presumptions,
      of law that a particular inference      rule of law that a fact otherwise    they consider mainly certain
      shall be drawn by a court from          doubtful may be inferred from a      inferences    between      the
      particular circumstances.               fact which is proved.                presumptions of law and
                                                                                   presumptions of fact.

The terms presumption of law and presumption of fact are not defined by the Sanhita. Section 2(1)(b), (h) and (l)
only refers to the terms “conclusive proof”, “shall presume” and “may presume”. The term “conclusive proof”
specifies those presumptions which in English Law are called irrebuttable presumptions of law; the term “shall
presume” indicates rebuttable presumptions of law; the term “may presume” indicates presumptions of fact.

 ESTOPPEL
When we see a man knocked down by a speeding car and a few yards away, there is a car going, there is a
presumption of fact that the car has knocked down the man.

The general rule of estoppel is when one person has by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or
permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor his representative
shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative to deny the
truth of that thing (Section 121). However, there is no estoppel against the Statute. Where the Statute prescribes
a particular way of doing something, it has to be done in that manner only.

Sections 122 and 123 are also other important sections relating to Estoppel of tenant and of licensee of person
in possession and Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.

 Principle of Estoppel
Estoppel is based on the maxim ‘allegans contratia non est audiendus’ i.e. a person alleging contrary facts
should not be heard. The principles of estoppel covers one kind of facts. It says that man cannot approbate and
reprobate, or that a man cannot blow hot and cold, or that a man shall not say one thing at one time and later
on say a different thing.

The doctrine of estoppel is based on the principle that it would be most inequitable and unjust that if one
person, by a representation made, or by conduct amounting to a representation, has induced another to act as
he would not otherwise have done, the person who made the representation should not be allowed to deny or
repudiate the effect of his former statement to the loss and injury of the person who acted on it (Sorat Chunder
v. Gopal Chunder).

Estoppel is a rule of evidence and does not give rise to a cause of action. Estoppel by record results from the
judgement of a competent Court. It was laid down by the Privy Council in Mohori Bibee v. Dharmodas Ghosh,
(1930) 30 Cal. 530 PC, that the rule of estoppel does not apply where the statement is made to a person who
knows the real facts represented and is not accordingly misled by it. The principle is that in such a case the
conduct of the person seeking to invoke rule of estoppel is in no sense the effect of the representation made to


306
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                LESSON 8

him. The main determining element is not the effect of his representation or conduct as having induced another
to act on the faith of such representation or conduct.

In Biju Patnaik University of Tech. Orissa v. Sairam College, AIR 2010 (NOC) 691 (Orissa), one private university
permitted to conduct special examination of students pursuing studies under one time approval policy. After
inspection, 67 students were permitted to appear in the examination and their results declared. However,
university declined to issue degree certificates to the students on the ground that they had to appear for further
examination for another condensed course as per syllabus of university. It was held that once students appeared
in an examination and their results declared, the university is estopped from taking decision withholding degree
certificate after declaration of results.

 Different kinds of Estoppel

                     Estoppel by attestation

                           Estoppel by contract

                            Constructive estoppel

                             Estoppel by election

                            Equitable estopple

                           Estoppel by negligence

                     Estoppel by silence


 ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE (E-EVIDENCE)
The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of section 63 of BSA.

 Admissibility of electronic records
According to section 63, notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information contained in
an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media or
semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or any communication device or otherwise stored,
recorded or copied in any electronic form (hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to
be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and
computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of the
original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would
be admissible.
As per section 63(2), the conditions in respect of a computer output are as follows:
   (a)   the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer or communication
         device during the period over which the computer or Communication device was used regularly to
         create, store or process information for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that
         period by the person having lawful control over the use of the computer or communication device;

                                                                                                              307
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Evidence

   (b)   during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record or of the kind from
         which the information so contained is derived was regularly fed into the computer or Communication
         device in the ordinary course of the said activities;
   (c)   throughout the material part of the said period, the computer or communication device was operating
         properly or, if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of
         operation during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy
         of its contents; and
   (d)   the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from such information fed
         into the computer or Communication device in the ordinary course of the said activities.

 Treatment of activity regularly carried on over a period by means of one or more computers or
 communication
Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing information for the purposes of any
activity regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in section 63(2)(a) was regularly performed by
means of one or more computers or communication device, whether –
   (a)   in standalone mode; or
   (b)   on a computer system; or
   (c)   on a computer network; or
   (d)   on a computer resource enabling information creation or providing information processing and storage;
         or
   (e)   through an intermediary,
all the computers or communication devices used for that purpose during that period shall be treated for the
purposes of this section as constituting a single computer or communication device; and references in this
section to a computer or communication device shall be construed accordingly.

 Submission of certificate along with the electronic record
In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate doing
any of the following things shall be submitted along with the electronic record at each instance where it is being
submitted for admission, namely:
   (a)   identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the manner in which it was
         produced;
   (b)   giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic record as may be
         appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic record was produced by a computer or a
         communication device referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (3);
   (c)   dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub-section (2) relate,
and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the computer or communication device or the management
of the relevant activities (whichever is appropriate) and an expert shall be evidence of any matter stated in the
certificate; and for the purposes of this sub-section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of
the knowledge and belief of the person stating it in the certificate specified in the Schedule.
Further, as per section 66 of BSA, except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature
of any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that such electronic signature
is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.

308
Law relating to Evidence                                                                                   LESSON 8

 CASE LAWS

 Amlesh Kumar v. The State Of Bihar, Supreme Court, 09.06.2025
 The Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that an accused person has a right to voluntarily undergo a narco-
 analysis test, but at the appropriate stage of the trial, that is, when the accused is exercising his right to lead
 the evidence. Having said that, there is no indefeasible right of the accused to undergo a narco-analysis test
 as the right is dependent on many factors to be considered by the Court concerned.


                                               LESSON ROUND-UP

   l The law of Evidence may be defined as a system of rules for ascertaining controverted questions of
       fact in judicial inquiries. This system of ascertaining the facts, which are the essential elements of a
       right or liability and is the primary and perhaps the most difficult function of the court, is regulated by
       a set of rules and principles known as “law of Evidence”.
   l The word evidence in the Sanhita signifies only the instruments by means of which relevant facts are
       brought before the court, viz., witnesses and documents, and by means of which the court is convinced
       of these facts.
   l Evidence under the Sanhita may be either oral or personal (i.e. all statements which the court permits or
       requires to be made before it by witnesses), and documentary (documents produced for the inspection
       of the court), which may be adduced in order to prove a certain fact (principal fact) which is in issue.
   l The general rule known as the hearsay rule is that what is stated about the fact in question is irrelevant.
       To this general rule there are three exceptions which are: (i) Admissions and confessions; (ii) Statements
       as to certain matters under certain circumstances by persons who are not witnesses; and (iii) Statements
       made under special circumstances.
   l All facts which are neither admitted nor are subject to judicial notice must be proved. The Sanhita
       divides the subject of proof into two parts: (i) proof of facts other than the contents of documents; (ii)
       proof of documents including proof of execution of documents and proof of existence, condition and
       contents of documents.
   l A presumption is a rule of law that courts or juries shall or may draw a particular inference from a
       particular fact or from particular evidence unless and until the truth of such inference is disproved. There
       are three categories of presumptions:(i) presumptions of law, which is a rule of law that a particular
       inference shall be drawn by a court from particular circumstances; (ii) presumptions of fact, it is a rule of
       law that a fact otherwise doubtful may be inferred from a fact which is proved; (iii) mixed presumptions,
       they consider mainly certain inferences between the presumptions of law and presumptions of fact.
   l The general rule of estoppel is when one person has by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally
       caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he
       nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such person or
       his representative to deny the truth of that thing.
   l According to section 63, notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information
       contained in an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or
       magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or any communication
       device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic form (hereinafter referred to as the
       computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section
       are satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible.

                                                                                                                 309
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Law relating to Evidence


                                                       GLOSSARY

 Judicial Proceedings: According to Section 2(1)(m) of the BNSS as “a proceeding in the course of which
 evidence is or may be legally taken on oath”.
 Documentary Evidence: All documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the Court
 are called documentary evidence.
 Fact in Issue: means and includes-any fact from which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the
 existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or
 proceedings, necessarily follows.
 Res gestae: Facts which though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same
 transaction.
 Confessions: The confession is an admission, which is evidence only against its maker and against another
 person who is being jointly tried with him for an offence. A confession must, either admit, in terms the offence,
 or substantially all the facts which constitute the offence.
 Judicial Confessions: Judicial confessions are those made before a Court or recorded by a Magistrate under
 the BNSS after following the prescribed procedure.
 Extra Judicial Confessions: Extra-judicial confessions are those which are made either to the police or to any
 person other than Judges and Magistrates as such.
 Privileged Communication: There are some facts of which evidence cannot be given under Bharatiya
 Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 though they are relevant. They are referred to as ‘privileged communications’
 Primary Evidence: Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court.
 Estoppel : Estoppel is based on the maxim ‘allegans contratia non est audiendus’ i.e. a person alleging
 contrary facts should not be heard.


                                                     TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
      1.   What is oral, documentary and circumstantial evidence?
      2.   Differentiate between Primary Evidence and Secondary Evidence.
      3.   Explain in Brief Principal of Estoppel.
      4.   Write a short note on Admissions and Confession.
      5.   State the cases in which opinion of expert is relevant.
      6.   Write a short note on admissibility of electronic evidence.


                                           LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

       l   Bare Act of Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023
       l   “Relevancy, Proof and Evaluation of Evidence in Criminal Cases” authored by Mr. Justice U.L. Bhat
       l   Vepa P. Sarathi, Law of Evidence, 6th Edition.


                          OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

       l   https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/250882_english_01042024.pdf


310
                                                                                               Lesson
Law relating to Limitation
                                                                                                  9
KEY CONCEPTS
n Bar of Limitation n Computation of period n Legal disability n Judicial process n Time barred n Pauper




Learning Objectives
To understand:
       Computation of period of Limitation
       Bar on institution of suits created by Limitation Act
       Extension and continuous running of time under Limitation Law
       Acquisition of property after lapse of time
       Period prescribed for various suits for filling under Limitation law




Lesson Outline
       Introduction
       Computation of the Period of Limitation
       Bar of Limitation
       Extension of time in certain cases
       Continuous running of time
       Computation of period of limitation
       Effect of acknowledgement on the period of limitation
       Effect of Payment on account of debtor interest on legacy
       Computation of time mentioned in the instrument
       Acquisition of ownership by possession
       Limitation and writs under the constitution
       The Schedule
       Classification of period of limitation
       Lesson Round-Up
       Glossary
       Test Yourself
       List of Further Readings and References


                                                                                                           311
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Limitation


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l   The Limitation Act, 1963

 INTRODUCTION – LAW RELATING TO LIMITATION
The law relating to limitation is incorporated in the Limitation Act of 1963, which prescribes different periods of
limitation for suits, petitions or applications.
The Act applies to all civil proceedings and some special criminal proceedings which can be taken in a Court of
law unless its application is excluded by any enactment. The Act extends to whole of India.

 CASE LAW

 The Law of limitation bars the remedy in a Court of law only when the period of limitation has expired, but it
 does not extinguish the right that it cannot be enforced by judicial process, in Bombay Dying & Mfg. Co. Ltd.
 v. State of Bombay, AIR 1958 SC 328. Thus if a claim is satisfied outside the Court of law after the expiry of
 period of limitation, that is not illegal.

 COMPUTATION OF THE PERIOD OF LIMITATION FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF SUITS
The Courts in India are bound by the specific provisions of the Limitation Act and are not permitted to move
outside the ambit of these provisions. The Limitation Act prescribes the period of limitation in Articles in Schedule
to the Act. In the Articles of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, Columns 1, 2, and 3 must be read together to give
harmonious meaning and construction.
The Schedule containing the table showing the relevant Articles prescribing limitation period for a specified suit
and also time from which such period commences is given at the end of this Lesson.

                                            Format of the schedule to
                                               Limitation Act, 1963



                                                                             Time from
                          Description of             Period of
                                                                            which period
                               suit                 Limitation
                                                                            begins to run


 BAR OF LIMITATION
Section 3 of the Act provides that any suit, appeal or application if made beyond the prescribed period of
limitation, it is the duty of the Court not to proceed with such suits irrespective of the fact whether the plea
of limitation has been set up in defence or not. The provisions of Section 3 are mandatory. The Court can suo
motu take note of question of limitation. The question whether a suit is barred by limitation should be decided
on the facts as they stood on the date of presentation of the plaint. It is a vital section upon which the whole
limitation Act depends for its efficacy.

312
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                      LESSON 9

The effect of Section 3 is not to deprive the Court of its jurisdiction. Therefore, decision of a Court allowing a suit
which had been instituted after the period prescribed is not vitiated for want of jurisdiction. A decree passed in
a time barred suit is not a nullity.

 CASE LAW

 Noharlal Verma vs. District Cooperative Central Bank Limited, Jagdalpur, (SC), 2008
 The Supreme Court observed that, if the statute stipulates a particular period of limitation, no concession
 or order would make an application barred by time to be within the limitation and the authority had no
 jurisdiction to consider such application on merits.
 Limitation period under IBC
 S.M. Ghogbhai vs. Schedulers Logistics India Pvt. Ltd. (23.05.2022 - NCLAT) :2022 SCC OnLine NCLAT 216
 In this case, the Appeal was filed against the Order dated 16th November, 2021 passed by National
 Company Law Tribunal, Mumbai Bench, Court-III by which the Application C.P. No. 3857/I & B/2019 filed by
 the Appellant under Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 was rejected as barred by time.
 Tribunal dismissed the appeal stating -
 “We are satisfied that for the limitation for filing Section 9 application it is Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963
 which is attracted. Under Article 137, time from which period begins to run is “when the right to apply accrues”
 the right to apply accrues when invoices issued by the Appellant to the Corporate Debtor were not paid. Invoices
 on the basis of which payment is claimed are more than three years earlier from the date of filing of Section 9
 Application which is the basis for rejection of the Application of the Appellant by the Adjudicating Authority.”

 EXTENSION OF TIME IN CERTAIN CASES

 Doctrine of sufficient cause
Section 5 allows the extension of prescribed period in certain cases on sufficient cause being shown for the
delay. This is known as doctrine of “sufficient cause” for condonation of delay which is embodied in Section 5 of
the Limitation Act, 1963. Section 5 provides that any appeal or any application, other than an application under
any of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, may be admitted after the prescribed
period if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal or making the application within such period.
It is clarified by the explanation appended to Section 5 that the fact that the appellant or applicant was misled
by any order, practice or judgement of the High Court in ascertaining or computing the prescribed period may
be a sufficient cause within the meaning of this section.
Thus, the Court may admit an application or appeal even after the expiry of the specified period of limitation
if it is satisfied with the applicant or the appellant, as the case may be as to sufficient cause for not making it
within time.
The Section is not applicable to applications made under any of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 and also to suits. The Court has no power to admit a time barred suit even if there is a
sufficient cause for the delay. It applies only to appeals or applications as specified therein. The reason for non-
applicability of the Section to suits is that, the period of limitation allowed in most of the suits extends from 3
to 12 years whereas in appeals and application it does not exceed 6 months. For the applicability of Section 5,
the “prescribed period” should be over. The prescribed period means any period prescribed by any law for the
time being in force.
The party applying for condonation of delay should satisfy the Court for not making an appeal or application
within the prescribed period for sufficient cause. The term sufficient cause has not been defined in the Limitation
Act. It depends on the circumstances of each case.


                                                                                                                      313
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Law relating to Limitation

However, it must be a cause which is beyond the control of the party.

 CASE LAW

 In Ramlal v. Rewa Coal Fields Ltd., AIR 1962 SC 361, the Supreme Court held that once the period of limitation
 expires then the appellant has to explain the delay made thereafter for day by day and if he is unable to explain
 the delay even for a single day, it would be deemed that the party did not have sufficient cause for delay.
 It is the Court’s discretion to extend or not to extend the period of limitation even after the sufficient cause
 has been shown and other conditions are also specified. However, the Court should exercise its discretion
 judicially and not arbitrarily.

What is sufficient cause and what is not may be explained by the following observations:
      1.   Wrong practice of High Court which misled the appellant or his counsel in not filing the appeal should
           be regarded as sufficient cause under Section 5;
   2.      In certain cases, mistake of counsel may be taken into consideration in condonation of delay. But
           such mistake must be bona fide;
   3.      Wrong advice given by advocate can give rise to sufficient cause in certain cases;
   4.      Mistake of law in establishing or exercising the right given by law may be considered as sufficient
           cause. However, ignorance of law is not excuse, nor the negligence of the party or the legal adviser
           constitutes a sufficient cause;
   5.      Imprisonment of the party or serious illness of the party may be considered for condonation of delay;
   6.      Time taken for obtaining certified copies of the decree of the judgment necessary to accompany the
           appeal or application was considered for condoning the delay.
      7.   Non-availability of the file of the case to the State counsel or Panel lawyer is no ground for condonation
           of inordinate delay (Collector and Authorised Chief Settlement Commissioner v. Darshan Singh and
           others, AIR 1999 Raj. 84).
   8.      Ailment of father during which period the defendant was looking after him has been held to be a sufficient
           and genuine cause [Mahendra Yadav v. Ratna Devi & others, AIR 2006 (NOC) 339 Pat].
The quasi-judicial tribunals, labour courts or executive authorities have no power to extend the period under
this Section.

 The test of “sufficient cause” is purely an individualistic test. It is not an objective test. Therefore, no two cases
 can be treated alike. The statute of limitation has left the concept of ‘sufficient cause’ delightfully undefined
 thereby leaving to the court a well-intended discretion to decide the individual cases whether circumstances
 exist establishing sufficient cause. There are no categories of sufficient cause. The categories of sufficient
 cause are never exhausted. Each case spells out a unique experience to be dealt with by the Court as such.
 R B Ramlingam v. R B Bhvansewari (2009) 2 SCC 689


 G. Ramegowda, Major, Etc. v. Special Land Acquisition Officer , Bangalore, AIR, 1988, SC 897
 The Supreme Court held that the expression ’sufficient cause’ in Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 must
 receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice and generally delays in preferring appeals
 are required to be condoned in the interest of justice where no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or
 lack of bona fides is imputable to the party seeking condonation of the delay.


314
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                LESSON 9

 Example
 The limitation period of the suit was 3 years. On the last day, X was hospitalized and could not file the suit. He
 recovered within next 2 days. Can he be allowed to file a suit under section 5 after showing sufficient cause?
 No, section 5 is applicable for applications and appeals.


 CASE LAWS

 B.K. Educational Services Private Limited v. Parag Gupta and Associates (2019) 11 SCC 633
 In this case, the question raised by the Appellants was whether the Limitation Act, 1963 will apply to
 applications that are made under Section 7 and/or Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
 on and from its commencement on 01.12.2016 till 06.06.2018. The Supreme Court held that Limitation Act,
 1963 is applicable to proceedings under Sections 7 and 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
 retrospectively since its inception. It was stated –
 “that, relying upon the Report of the Insolvency Law Committee of March, 2018, that the object of the
 Amendment Act which introduced Section 238A into the Code was to clarify the law and, thus, Section 238A
 must be held to be retrospective.
 …It is thus clear that since the Limitation Act is applicable to applications filed Under Sections 7 and 9 of
 the Code from the inception of the Code, Article 137 of the Limitation Act gets attracted. “The right to sue”,
 therefore, accrues when a default occurs. If the default has occurred over three years prior to the date of filing
 of the application, the application would be barred Under Article 137 of the Limitation Act, save and except
 in those cases where, in the facts of the case, Section 5 of the Limitation Act may be applied to condone the
 delay in filing such application”
 Pathapati Subba Reddy (Died) by L.Rs. & Ors v. The Special Deputy Collector (LA) by Supreme Court on
 08.04.2024
 Merits of the case are not required to be considered in condoning the delay. A right or the remedy that
 has not been exercised or availed of for a long time must come to an end or cease to exist after a fixed
 period of time
 This case can be referred to understand the law relating to condonation of delay under the Limitation Act,
 1963.
 The present Special Leave Petition was filed challenging the judgment and order whereby the High Court
 has dismissed the application of the petitioners for condoning the delay of 5659 days in filing the proposed
 appeal.
 The moot question before the Hon’ble Supreme court was whether in the facts and circumstances of the
 case, the High Court was justified in refusing to condone the delay in filing the proposed appeal and to
 dismiss it as barred by limitation.
 The Supreme Court has laid down that on a harmonious consideration of the provisions of the law, as
 aforesaid, and the law laid down by this Court, it is evident that:
      (i)   Law of limitation is based upon public policy that there should be an end to litigation by forfeiting
            the right to remedy rather than the right itself;
     (ii)   A right or the remedy that has not been exercised or availed of for a long time must come to an end
            or cease to exist after a fixed period of time;



                                                                                                                315
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Law relating to Limitation


      (iii)   The provisions of the Limitation Act have to be construed differently, such as Section 3 has to be
              construed in a strict sense whereas Section 5 has to be construed liberally;
      (iv)    In order to advance substantial justice, though liberal approach, justice-oriented approach or cause
              of substantial justice may be kept in mind but the same cannot be used to defeat the substantial law
              of limitation contained in Section 3 of the Limitation Act;
       (v)    Courts are empowered to exercise discretion to condone the delay if sufficient cause had been
              explained, but that exercise of power is discretionary in nature and may not be exercised even if
              sufficient cause is established for various factors such as, where there is inordinate delay, negligence
              and want of due diligence;
      (vi)    Merely some persons obtained relief in similar matter, it does not mean that others are also entitled
              to the same benefit if the court is not satisfied with the cause shown for the delay in filing the appeal;
      (vii)   Merits of the case are not required to be considered in condoning the delay; and
   (viii)     Delay condonation application has to be decided on the parameters laid down for condoning the
              delay and condoning the delay for the reason that the conditions have been imposed, tantamounts
              to disregarding the statutory provision.
 Moreover, the High Court, in the facts of this case, has not found it fit to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
 of condoning the delay. There is no occasion for us to interfere with the discretion so exercised by the High
 Court for the reasons recorded. First, the claimants were negligent in pursuing the reference and then in
 filing the proposed appeal. Secondly, most of the claimants have accepted the decision of the reference
 court. Thirdly, in the event the petitioners have not been substituted and made party to the reference before
 its decision, they could have applied for procedural review which they never did. Thus, there is apparently
 no due diligence on their part in pursuing the matter. Accordingly, in our opinion, High Court is justified in
 refusing to condone the delay in filing the appeal.
 Ajay Dabra vs. Pyare Ram and Ors, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 92, decided by Supreme Court on
 31.01.2023
 In this case the impugned order of High Court of Himachal Pradesh dismissed the delay condonation
 applications filed Under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, declining to condone a delay of 254 days,
 because the reasons assigned for the condonation were not sufficient reasons for condonation of the delay.
 This was not found to be a sufficient reason for the condonation of delay as the Appellant was an affluent
 businessman and a hotelier.
 The Supreme Court has said that we do not have a case at hand where the Appellant is not capable of
 purchasing the court fee. He did pay the court fee ultimately, though belatedly. But then, under the facts and
 circumstances of the case, the reasons assigned for the delay in filing the appeal cannot be a valid reason
 for condonation of the delay, since the Appellant could have filed the appeal deficient in court fee under the
 provisions of law, referred above. Therefore, we find that the High Court was right in dismissing Section 5
 application of the Appellant as insufficient funds could not have been a sufficient ground for condonation of
 delay, under the facts and circumstance of the case. It would have been entirely a different matter had the
 Appellant filed an appeal in terms of Section 149 Code of Civil Procedure and thereafter removed the defects
 by paying deficit court fees. This has evidently not been done.

 Persons under legal disability
Section 6 is an enabling section to enable persons under disability to exercise their legal rights within a certain
time. Section 7 supplements Section 6, Section 8 controls these sections, which serves as an exception to Sections
6 and 7. The combined effect of Sections 6 and 8 is that where the prescribed period of limitation expires before
the cessation of disability, for instance, before the attainment of majority, the minor will no doubt be entitled

316
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                  LESSON 9

to a fresh period of limitation from the attainment of his majority subject to the condition that in no case the
period extended by Section 6 shall by virtue of Section 8 exceeds three years from cessation of disability, i.e.,
attainment of majority.
Sections 6, 7 and 8 must be read together. Section 8 imposes a limitation on concession provided under Sections
6 and 7 to a person under disability up to a maximum of three years after the cessation of disability. The Section
applies to all suits except suits to enforce rights of pre-emption.
The period of three years under Section 6 of this Act has to be counted, not from the date of attainment of
majority by the person under disability, but from the date of cessation of minority or disability.
Both Sections 6 and 7 go together. Section 7 is an extension of Section 6, where the point of time at which the
existence of disability is to be recognised “the time from which the period of limitation is to be reckoned”.
Section 7 is only an application of the principle in Section 6 to a joint-right inherited by a group of persons
wherein some or all of whom are under the disability. The disability of all except one does not prevent the
running of time, if the discharge can be given without the concurrence of the other. Otherwise the time will run
only when the disability is removed.
To apply Section 7, disability must exist when the right to apply accrued, i.e., at the time from which period of
limitation is to be reckoned.
In other words, Section 8 provides that in those cases where the application of Section 6 or 7 of the Act results
in an extension of the period prescribed by Schedule, that extension is not to be more than three years after the
cessation of the disability.

 Example
 The limitation period for filling a suit is 12 years. When the limitation period commenced X was minor of age
 10 years
 He will not get 12 years after cessation of minority. He will get only 3 years due to bar of section 8 of the
 Limitation Act.


 Example
 Disabilities are being a minor or insane, or an idiot.
 Section 7 deals with the situation where there is joint entitlement of filling a suit or application. It give rise to
 two situation:

      1.   When Discharge may be given by any other person without concurrence: In this situation, time will
           run against them all.
     2.    When discharge cannot be given by any other person without concurrence: In this situation, time will
           not run as against any of them until one of them becomes capable of giving such discharge without
           the concurrence of the others or until the disability has ceased

 CONTINUOUS RUNNING OF TIME
According to Section 9 of the Act where once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to
institute a suit or make an application can stop it provided that where letters of administration to the estate of a
creditor have been granted to his debtor, the running of the period of limitation for a suit to recover debt shall be
suspended while the administration continues.
The rule of this Section is based on the English dictum. “Time when once it has commenced to run in any case

                                                                                                                   317
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Limitation

will not cease to be so by reason of any subsequent event”. Thus, when any of the statutes of limitation is begun
to run, no subsequent disability or inability will stop this running.
The applicability of this Section is limited to suits and applications only and does not apply to appeals unless the
case fell within any of the exceptions provided in the Act itself.
For the applicability of Section 9 it is essential that the cause of action or the right to move the application
must continue to exist and subsisting on the date on which a particular application is made. If a right itself had
been taken away by some subsequent event, no question of bar of limitation will arise as the starting point of
limitation for that particular application will be deemed not to have been commenced.
Thus, time runs when the cause of action accrues. True test to determine when a cause of action has accrued
is to ascertain the time, when plaintiff could have maintained his action to a successful result first if there is an
infringement of a right at a particular time, the whole cause of action will be said to have arisen then and there.
Section 9 contemplates only cases where the cause of action continues to exist. Section 10 excludes suits against
trustees and their representatives from the purview of the Act. In order to invoke the application of Section 10 the
property must be vested in a trustee or trustees for a specific-purpose.

 COMPUTATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION

 Exclusion of certain days or exclusion of time in legal proceedings
While computing Period of Limitation certain day/days are to be excluded.
Part III of the Act containing Sections 12 to 24 deals with computation of period of limitation and Section 12
prescribes the time which shall be excluded in computing the time of limitation in legal proceedings.
   (i)    Computation of period of limitation for a suit, appeal or application: According to Section 12(1), the day
          which is to be excluded in computing period of limitation is the day from which the period of limitation
          is to be reckoned. In case of any suit, appeal or application, the period of limitation is to be computed
          exclusive of the day on which the time begins to run.
   (ii)   Computation of period of limitation for an appeal or an application for leave to appeal or for
          revision orfor review of a judgement: The day on which the judgement complained of was pronounced
          and the time requisite for obtaining a copy of the decree, sentence or order appealed from or sought to
          be revised or reviewed shall be excluded [Section 12(2)].
  (iii)   Computation of period for an application made for leave to appeal from a decree or order: The time
          requisite for obtaining a copy of the judgement shall also be excluded [Section 12(3)].
  (iv)    Computation of Limitation period for an application to set aside an award: The time required for
          obtaining a copy of the award shall be excluded [Section 12(4)].
Thus, the time required for getting copies of certain decisions, mentioned under Section 12 is also to be excluded
in computing the period of limitation as per Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4).

 CASE LAW

 The term “time requisite for obtaining a copy” means the time which is reasonably required for obtaining
 such a copy, On the explanation to Section 12, the Supreme Court in the case of Udayan China Bhai v. R.C.
 Bali, AIR 1977 SC 2319, held that by reading Section 12(2) with explanation it is not possible to accept the
 submission that in computing the time requisite for obtaining copy of a decree by an application made after
 preparation of the decree, the time that elapsed between the pronouncement of the judgement and the
 signing of the decree should be excluded.


318
Law relating to Limitation                                                                              LESSON 9

However, the time taken by the Court to prepare the decree or order before an application for a copy is
made shall not be excluded in computing the time for obtaining a copy of a decree or an order. (Explanation
to Section 12)

 CASE LAW

 Jharkhand Urja Utpadan Nigam Ltd. & Anr. v. M/s Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Supreme Court,
 15.04.2025
 In this case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that the limitation period for filing an appeal under the
 Commercial Courts Act, 2015, commences from the date of pronouncement of the judgment and that a party
 cannot insist that the limitation starts only from the date of receiving a copy of the judgment.
 In this case , the petitioners was aggrieved by the Jharkhand High Court’s refusal to condone a 301-day
 delay in filing a commercial appeal under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.
 The petitioners argued that the limitation period should commence only after receiving a copy of the
 judgment, as mandated by Order XX Rule 1 CPC (as amended for commercial courts).
 The Court clarified that while Order XX Rule 1 of the CPC places a duty on the court to provide a copy of
 the judgment to the litigant, the litigant is nonetheless expected to make reasonable efforts to apply for it.
 The Court said “Thus, merely because Order XX Rule I enjoins a duty upon the commercial courts to
 provide the copies of the judgment that does not mean that the parties can shirk away all responsibility
 of endeavoring to procure the certified copies thereof in their own capacity. Any such interpretation would
 result in frustrating the very fundamental cannons of law of limitation and the salutary purpose of the Act,
 2015 of ensuring timely disposals.”
 The Court further added “One of the core tenets of the law of limitation is to enthuse diligence amongst
 parties as to their rights. The law of limitation cannot be read in such a manner whereby parties stop showing
 any modicum of regard for their own rights and on the pre-text of untimely communication continue to
 litigate without being vigilante themselves.”
 The Court thus noted that “In the present case we find that after the order in question came to be pronounced
 by the Commercial Court, Ranchi, the appellants herein during the limitation period did not bother to even
 inquire as to why the said order was not available. It was only eight-months after the pronouncement of
 the said order and almost 150-days after the expiry of the limitation period, that the realization suddenly
 dawned upon the appellants herein to apply for the certified copy.”
 Hence, the appeal was dismissed.

 Exclusion of time during which leave to sue or appeal as a pauper is applied for (Section 13)
In computing the period of limitation prescribed for any suit or appeal in any case where an application for
leave to sue or appeal as a pauper has been made and rejected, the time during which the applicant has been
prosecuting in good faith his application for such leave shall be excluded, and the court may, on payment of
the court fees prescribed for such suit or appeal, treat the suit or appeal as having the same force and effect as
if the court fees had been paid in the first instance.

 Exclusion of time bona fide taken in a court without jurisdiction (Section 14)
The relief to a person is given by Section 14 of the Act when the period of limitation is over, because another
civil proceedings relating to the matter in issue had been initiated in a court which is unable to entertain it,
by lack of jurisdiction or by any other like cause. The following conditions must co-exist for the applicability
of this Section:

                                                                                                              319
EP-JI&GL                                                                                           Law relating to Limitation

  (a)        that the plaintiff or the applicant was prosecuting another civil proceedings against the defendant with
             due diligence in the above said court;
  (b)        that the previous suit or application related to the same matter in issue;
  (c)        that the plaintiff or the applicant prosecuted in good-faith in that court; and
  (d)        that the court was unable to entertain a suit or application on account of defect of jurisdiction or other
             like cause.

 CASE LAW

      02.04.2024                Purni Devi & Anr. V. Babu Ram & Anr.                           Supreme Court

 In computing the period of limitation for any suit the time during which the plaintiff has been prosecuting
 with due diligence another civil proceeding against the defendant should be excluded
 Facts
 The genesis of the case at hand dates back to 01.06.1984, wherein the predecessors in interest of the
 Appellant (“Plaintiff”) filed a suit for possession against the Respondents (“Defendants”). On 10.12.1986, this
 suit was decreed by learned Munsiff, First Class Hiranagar, in favour of the Plaintiff, and the Defendants
 were directed to deliver vacant and peaceful possession of the property to the Plaintiff. This decree was
 challenged by the Respondents before the learned District Judge, Kathua, in First Appeal, which came to
 be dismissed on 09.02.1990. Thereafter, the Respondents preferred a Second Appeal before the High Court
 of Jammu and Kashmir which came to be dismissed vide Order dated 09.11.2000. No further appeal was
 preferred. Therefore, the decree of the learned Munsiff Court attained finality on 09.11.2000.
 The present lis arises from the application for execution filed by the predecessor in interest of the Plaintiff,
 before the learned Tehsildar (Settlement), Hiranagar on 18.12.2000. This application came to be rejected on
 29.01.2005, whereby the learned Tehsildar observed that the Plaintiff had not applied before the Court with
 appropriate jurisdiction.
 The Plaintiff thereafter, on 03.10.2005 preferred a fresh application for execution before the Court of Munsiff,
 Hiranagar. This application resulted in the order dated 28.11.2007, whereby, the learned Munsiff Court
 dismissed the application as being barred by limitation, which has come to be confirmed vide the impugned
 order.
 Issue
 Whether the time spent in wrong forum be excluded from the Period of Limitation?
 Decision
 The principles pertaining to applicability of Section 14, were extensively discussed and summarised by
 Supreme Court in Consolidated Engg. Enterprises case, wherein while holding the exclusion of time period
 under Section 14 of the Limitation Act to a petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act it was observed:-
 “Section 14 of the Limitation Act deals with exclusion of time of proceeding bona fide in a court without
 jurisdiction. On analysis of the said section, it becomes evident that the following conditions must be satisfied
 before Section 14 can be pressed into service:
       (1)    Both the prior and subsequent proceedings are civil proceedings prosecuted by the same party;



320
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                      LESSON 9

     (2)        The prior proceeding had been prosecuted with due diligence and in good faith;

     (3)        The failure of the prior proceeding was due to defect of jurisdiction or other cause of like nature;

     (4)        The earlier proceeding and the latter proceeding must relate to the same matter in issue; and

     (5)        Both the proceedings are in a court.”

 This Court in Consolidated Engg. Enterprises (Supra) further expounded that the provisions of this Section,
 must be interpreted and applied in a manner that furthers the cause of justice, rather than aborts the
 proceedings at hand and the time taken diligently pursuing a remedy, in a wrong Court, should be excluded.

 In the present case, it is not in dispute that:-

         (i)    Both the proceedings are civil in nature and have been prosecuted by the Plaintiff or the predecessor
                in interest.

     (ii)       The failure of the execution proceedings was due to a defect of jurisdiction.

     (iii)      Both the proceedings pertain to execution of the decree dated 10.12.1986, which attains finality on
                09.11.2000.

     (iv)       Both the proceedings are in a court.

 More recently, in Laxmi Srinivasa R and P Boiled Rice Mill v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr.6 (2-Judge
 Bench), Supreme Court followed the dictum in Consolidated Engg. Enterprises (Supra) and M.P. Steel (Supra)
 to exclude the time period undertaken by the Plaintiff therein in pursuing remedy under Writ Jurisdiction, in
 the absence of challenge to the bona fides of the Plaintiff, in view of Section 14.

 The Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down that we do not find the reasoning given by the learned High Court
 in paragraph 9 while rejecting the plea for exclusion of time to be sustainable. On a perusal of the record,
 it is apparent that the Plaintiff has pursued the matter bonafidely and diligently and in good faith before
 what it believed to be the appropriate forum and, therefore, such time period is bound to be excluded when
 computing limitation before the Court having competent jurisdiction. All conditions stipulated for invocation
 of Section 14 of the Limitation Act are fulfilled.

 Exclusion of time in certain other cases
   (a)         When a suit or application for the execution of a decree has been stayed by an injunction or order, the
               time of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on which it was issued or made and the day
               on which it was withdrawn shall be excluded. [Section 15(1)].
   (b)         The time required to obtain the sanction or consent of the Govt. required, or a notice period shall also
               be excluded in case of suits. [Section 15(2)].
   (c)         In a suit or an application for execution of a decree by any receiver or interim receiver or any liquidator,
               the period beginning with the date of institution of such proceeding and ending with the expiry of three
               months from the date of their appointment shall be excluded. [Section 15(3)].
   (d)         The time during which a proceeding to set aside the sale has been prosecuted shall be excluded in
               case of a suit for possession by a purchaser at a sale in execution of a decree. [Section 15(4)].
   (e)         The time during which the defendant has been absent from India and from the territories outside India
               administered by the Central Government, shall also be excluded. [Section 15(5)].

                                                                                                                       321
EP-JI&GL                                                                                     Law relating to Limitation

   (f)   In case of death of a person before the right to institute a suit accrues, the period of limitation shall be
         computed from the time when there is a legal representative of the deceased capable of instituting
         such suit or making such application. The same rule applies in case if defendant dies. [Sections 16(1) and
         (2)].
		 However, the above rule does not apply to suits to enforce rights of pre-emption or to suits for the
   possession of immovable property or of a hereditary office. [Section 16(3)].
   (g)   Where the suit or application is based upon the fraud or mistake of the defendant or respondent or
         his agent or in other cases as mentioned in Section 17, the period of limitation shall not begin to run
         until the plaintiff or applicant has discovered fraud or mistake or could with reasonable diligence have
         discovered it or in the case of a concealed document, until the plaintiff or the applicant first had the
         means of producing the concealed document or compelling its production. These rules are subject to
         certain exceptions as provided in proviso to section 17(1). When a judgment-debtor by fraud or force
         prevented the execution of a decree or order within the period of limitation, the court may extend the
         period for execution of the decree or order on the application of Judgement Creditor. Such application
         shall be made within one year from the date of the ‘discovery of the fraud’ or the ‘cessation of force’.
         (Section 17).

 EFFECT OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ON THE PERIOD OF LIMITATION
Section 18 of the Act deals with the effect of acknowledgement of liability in respect of property or right on the
period of limitation.
The following requirements should be present for a valid acknowledgement as per Section 18:


                   There must be an admission or acknowledgement




                   Such acknowledgement must be in respect of any property or
                   right




                   It must be made before the expiry of period of limitation




                   It must be in writing and signed by the party against whom such
                   property or rights is claimed



If all the above requirements are satisfied, a fresh period of limitation shall be computed from the time when
the acknowledgement was signed.



322
Law relating to Limitation                                                                              LESSON 9

 CASE LAW

 Laxmi Pat Surana vs. Union Bank of India and Ors. (26.03.2021 - SC) : AIR 2021 SC 1707

 This case has discussed, that a fresh period of limitation is required to be computed from the date of
 acknowledgment of debt by the principal borrower. The Supreme Court stated that-

     “Suffice it to conclude that there is no substance even in the second ground urged by the Appellant
     regarding the maintainability of the application filed by the Respondent-financial creditor Under Section
     7 of the Code on the ground of being barred by limitation. Instead, we affirm the view taken by the NCLT
     and which commended to the NCLAT - that a fresh period of limitation is required to be computed from
     the date of acknowledgment of debt by the principal borrower from time to time and in particular the
     (corporate) guarantor/corporate debtor vide last communication dated 08.12.2018. Thus, the application
     Under Section 7 of the Code filed on 13.02.2019 is within limitation.”

 Asset Reconstruction Company (India) Limited vs. Bishal Jaiswal and Ors. (15.04.2021 - SC) : AIR 2021 SC
 5249

 The supreme court addressed the issue as to whether an entry made in a balance sheet of a corporate
 debtor would amount to an acknowledgement of liability Under Section 18 of the Limitation Act. The Supreme
 Court held that several judgments of this Court have indicated that an entry made in the books of accounts,
 including the balance sheet, may amount to an acknowledgement of liability within the meaning of Section
 18 of the Limitation Act but subject to further examination. It stated-

     “that there is a compulsion in law to prepare a balance sheet but no compulsion to make any particular
     admission, is correct in law as it would depend on the facts of each case as to whether an entry made in a
     balance sheet qua any particular creditor is unequivocal or has been entered into with caveats, which then
     has to be examined on a case by case basis to establish whether an acknowledgement of liability has, in
     fact, been made, thereby extending limitation Under Section 18 of the Limitation Act”

 EFFECT OF PAYMENT ON ACCOUNT OF DEBT OR OF INTEREST ON LEGACY
As per Section 19 of the Act where payment on account of a debt or of interest on a legacy is made before
the expiration of the prescribed period by the person liable to pay the debt or legacy or by his agent duly
authorised in this behalf, a fresh period of limitation shall be computed from the time when the payment was
made. The proviso says that, save in the case of payment of interest made before the 1st day of January, 1928
an acknowledgement of the payment must appear in the handwriting of, or in a writing signed by the person
making the payment.
According to the explanation appended to this Section:
   (a)   where mortgaged land is in the possession of the mortgagee, the receipt of the rent or produce of
         such land shall be deemed to be a payment;
   (b)   ‘debt’ does not include money payable under a decree or order of a court for the purpose of this Section.
Thus, according to this section a fresh period of limitation becomes available to the creditor when part-payment
of debt is made by the debtor before the expiration of the period of limitation.

 COMPUTATION OF TIME MENTIONED IN INSTRUMENTS
All instruments shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed to be made with reference to the Gregorian
Calendar. (Section 24).


                                                                                                              323
EP-JI&GL                                                                                        Law relating to Limitation

 ACQUISITION OF OWNERSHIP BY POSSESSION
Section 25 applies to acquisition of easements. It provides that the right to access and use of light or air, way,
watercourse, use of water, or any other easement which have been peaceably enjoyed without interruption
and for twenty years (thirty years if property belongs to Government) shall be absolute and indefeasible. Such
period of twenty years shall be a period ending within two years next before the institution of the suit.

 CASE LAW
 Ravinder Kaur Grewal and Ors. vs. Manjit Kaur and Ors. (07.08.2019 - SC): 2019 SCC OnLine SC 975

 In this case, the question was whether a person claiming the title by virtue of adverse possession can maintain
 a suit Under Article 65 of Limitation Act, 1963 for declaration of title and for a permanent injunction seeking
 the protection of his possession thereby restraining the Defendant from interfering in the possession or for
 restoration of possession in case of illegal dispossession by a Defendant whose title has been extinguished
 by virtue of the Plaintiff remaining in the adverse possession or in case of dispossession by some other
 person? Court held that there is no bar under Limitation Act, 1963 to file a suit. It stated that -

  “In our opinion, consequence is that once the right, title or interest is acquired it can be used as a sword
  by the Plaintiff as well as a shield by the Defendant within ken of Article 65 of the Act and any person who
  has perfected title by way of adverse possession, can file a suit for restoration of possession in case of
  dispossession….

  We hold that plea of acquisition of title by adverse possession can be taken by Plaintiff Under Article 65
  of the Limitation Act and there is no bar under the Limitation Act, 1963 to sue on aforesaid basis in case of
  infringement of any rights of a Plaintiff.”

 LIMITATION AND WRITS UNDER THE CONSTITUTION
The subject of limitation is dealt with in entry 13, List III of the Constitution of India. The Legislature may, without
violating the fundamental rights, enact statutes prescribing limitation within which actions may be brought or varying
or changing the existing rules of limitation either by shortening or extending time provideda reasonable time is allowed
for enforcement of the existing right of action which would become barred under the amended Statute.
The Statute of Limitation is not unconstitutional since it applies to right of action in future. It is a shield and not a
weapon of offence.
The State cannot place any hindrance by prescribing a period of limitation in the way of an aggrieved person
seeking to approach the Supreme Court of India under Article 32 of the Constitution. To put curbs in the way of
enforcement of Fundamental Rights through legislative action might well be questioned under Article 13(2)of the
Constitution. It is against the State action that Fundamental Rights are claimed. (Tilokchand Motichand v. H.P.
Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898).
The Limitation Act does not in terms apply to a proceeding under Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution.
But the Courts act on the analogy of the statute of limitation and refuse relief if the delay is more than the
statutory period of limitation (State of M.P. v. Bhai Lal Bhai, AIR 1964 SC 1006). Where the remedy in a writ petition
corresponds to a remedy in an ordinary suit and latter remedy is subject to bar of a statute of limitation, the Court
in its writ jurisdiction adopts in the statute its own rule of procedure and in absence of special circumstances
imposes the same limitation in the writ jurisdiction.
If the right to property is extinguished by prescription under Section 27 of the Limitation Act, 1963, there is no
subsisting right to be enforced under Article 32 of the Constitution. In other case where the remedy only, not the
right, is extinguished by limitation the Court will refuse to entertain stale claims on the ground of public policy
(Tilokchand Motichand v. H.P. Munshi, AIR 1970 SC 898).


324
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                LESSON 9

                                                                                                       ANNEXURE

                                                THE SCHEDULE
                                              (Periods of Limitation)
                                               [Sections 2( j) and 3]

 S. No.                Description of suit                Period of      Time from which period begin storun
                                                          limitation
                                              First Division - SUITS
                                      PART I – SUITS RELATING TO ACCOUNTS
   1.     For the balance due on a mutual, open and      Three years    The close of the year in which the last-
          current account, where there have been                        time admitted or proved is entered in the
          reciprocal demands between the parties.                       account, such year to be computed as in
                                                                        the account.
   2.     Against a factor for an account.               Three years    When the account is, during the
                                                                        continuance of the agency, demanded
                                                                        and refused or, where no such demand is
                                                                        made, when the agency terminates.

   3.     By a principal against his agent for           Three years    When the account is, during the
          movable property received by the latter                       continuance of the agency, demanded
          and not accounted for.                                        and refused or, where no such demand is
                                                                        made, when the agency terminates.

   4.     Other suits by principals against agents for   Three years    When the neglect or misconduct becomes
          neglect or misconduct.                                        known to the plaintiff.

   5.     For an account and a share of the profits of   Three years    The date of the dissolution.
          a dissolved partnership.
                                   PART II — SUITS RELATING TO CONTRACTS
   6.     For a seaman’s wages.                          Three years    The end of the voyage during which the
                                                                        wages are earned.
   7.     For wages in the case of any other person.     Three years    When the wages accrue due.

   8.     For the price of food or drink sold by the     Three years    When the food or drink is delivered.
          keeper of a hotel, tavern or lodging- house.

   9.     For the price of lodging.                      Three years    When the price becomes payable.
  10.     Against a carrier for compensation for         Three years    When the loss of injury occurs.
          losing or injuring goods.
   11.    Against a carrier for compensation for non-    Three years    When the goods sought to be delivered.
          delivery of, or delay in delivering goods.
  12.     For the hire of animals, vehicles, boats or    Three years    When the hire becomes payable.
          household furniture.



                                                                                                               325
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                 Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                         limitation
  13.    For the balance of money advanced in           Three years   When the goods ought to be delivered.
         payment of goods to be delivered.
  14.    For the price of goods sold and delivered      Three years   The date of delivery of the goods.
         where no fixed period of credit is agreed
         upon.
  15.    For the price of goods sold and delivered      Three years   When the period of credit expires.
         to be paid for after the expiry of a fixed
         period of credit.

  16.    For the price of goods sold and delivered      Three years   When the period of the proposed bill
         to be paid for by a bill of exchange, no                     elapses.
         such bill being given.

  17.    For the price of trees or growing crops sold   Three years   The date of the sale.
         by the plaintiff to the defendant where no
         fixed period of credit is agreed upon.

  18.    For the price of work done by the plaintiff    Three years   When the work is done.
         for the defendant at his request, where no
         time has been fixed for payment.

  19.    For money payable for money lent.              Three years   When the loan is made.


  20.    Like suit when the lender has given a          Three years   When the cheque is paid.
         cheque for the money.

  21.    For money lent under an agreement that it      Three years   When the loan is made.
         shall be payable on demand.

  22.    For money deposited under an agreement         Three years   When the demand is made.
         that it shall be payable on demand
         including money of a customer in the
         hands of his banker so payable.

  23.    For money payable to the plaintiff for         Three years   When the money is paid.
         money paid for the defendant.

  24.    For money payable by the defendant to          Three years   When the money is received.
         the plaintiff for money received by the
         defendant, for the plaintiff’s use.

  25.    For money payable for interest upon            Three years   When the interest becomes due.
         money due form the defendant to the
         plaintiff.




326
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit                Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                          limitation
  26.     For money payable to the plaintiff for         Three years   When the accounts are stated in writing
          money found to be due from the defendant                     signed by the defendant or his agent
          to the plaintiff on accounts stated between                  duly authorised in this behalf unless
          them.                                                        where the debt is, by a simultaneous
                                                                       agreement in writing signed as aforesaid,
                                                                       made payable at a future time, and then
                                                                       when that time arrives.

  27.     For compensation for breach of a promise       Three years   When the time specified arrives or the
          to do anything at a specified time, or upon                  contingency happens.
          the happening of a specified contingency.

  28.     On a single bond, where a day is specified     Three years   The day so specified.
          for payment.

  29.     On a single bond, where no such day            Three years   The date of executing the bond.
          is specified.

  30.     On a bond subject to a condition.              Three years   When the condition is broken.

  31.     On a bill of exchange or promissory note       Three years   When the bill or note falls due.
          payable at a fixed time after date.

  32.     On a bill of exchange payable at sight,        Three years   When the bill is presented.
          or after sight, but not at a fixed time.

  33.     On a bill of exchange accepted payable         Three years   When the bill is presented at that place.
          at a particular place.

  34.     On a bill of exchange or promissory note       Three years   When the fixed time expires.
          payable at a fixed time after sight or after
          demand.

  35.     On a bill of exchange or promissory note       Three years   The date of the bill or note.
          payable on demand and not accompanied
          by any writing restraining or postponing
          the right to sue.

  36.     On a promissory note or bond payable by        Three years   The expiration of the first term of
          instalments.                                                 payment as to the part then payable;
                                                                       and for the other parts, the expiration of
                                                                       the respective terms of payment.




                                                                                                              327
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                 Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                         limitation

  37.    On a promissory note or bond payable by        Three years   When the default is made unless where
         instalments, which provides that, if default                 the payee or obligee waives the benefit
         be made in payment of one or more                            of the provision and then when fresh
         instalments, the whole shall be due.                         default is made in respect of which there
                                                                      is no such waiver.

  38.    On a promissory note given by the              Three years   The date of the delivery to the payee.
         maker to a third person to be delivered
         to the payee after a certain event should
         happen.

  39.    On a dishonoured foreign bill where            Three years   When the notice is given.
         protest has been made and notice given.

  40.    By the payee against the drawer of a bill      Three years   The date of the refusal to accept.
         of exchange, which has been dishonoured
         by non-acceptance.

  41.    By the acceptor of an accommodation –          Three years   When the acceptor pays the amount of
         bill against the drawer.                                     the bill.

  42.    By a surety against the principal debtor.      Three years   When the surety pays the creditor.


  43.    By a surely against a co-surety.               Three years   When the surety pays anything in excess
                                                                      of his own share.

  44.    (a) On a policy of insurance when the          Three years   The date of the death of the deceased or
         sum insured is payable after proof of the                    where the claim on the policy is denied,
         death has been given to or received by                       either partly or wholly, the date of such
         the insurers.                                                denial.

         (b) On a policy of insurance when the          Three years   The date of the occurrence causing the
         sum insured is payable after proof of the                    loss, or where the claim on the policy is
         loss has been given to or received by the                    denied, either partly or wholly, the date
         insurers.                                                    of such denial.
  45.    By the assured to recover premia paid          Three years   When the insurers elect to avoid the
         under a policy voidable at the election of                   policy.
         the insurers.
  46.    Under the Indian Succession Act, 1925,         Three years   The date of the payment or distribution.
         Section 360 or Section 361, to compel a
         refund by a person to whom an executor
         or administrator has paid a legacy or
         distributed assets.



328
Law relating to Limitation                                                                              LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit                Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                          limitation
  47.     For money paid upon an existing                Three years   The date of the failure.
          consideration which afterwards fails.

  48.     For contribution by a party who has paid       Three years   The date of the payment in excess of the
          the whole or more than his share of the                      plaintiff’s own share.
          amount due under a joint decree, or by
          a sharer in a joint estate who has paid
          the whole or more than his share of the
          amount of revenue due from himself and
          his co-shares.
  49.     By a co-trustee to enforce against the         Three years   When the right to contribution accrues.
          estate of a deceased trustee a claim for
          contribution.
  50.     By the manager of a joint estate of an         Three years   The date of the payment.
          undivided family for contribution, in
          respect of a payment made by him on
          account of the estate.
  51.     For the profits of immovable property          Three years   When the profits are received.
          belonging to the plaintiff which have been
          wrongfully received by the defendant.
  52.     For arrears of rent.                           Three years   When the arrears become due.

  53.     By a vendor of immovable property for          Three years   The time fixed for completing the sale,
          personal payment of unpaid purchase-                         or (where the title is accepted after the
          money.                                                       time fixed for completion) the date of the
                                                                       acceptance.
  54.     For specific performance of a contract         Three years   The date fixed for the performance, or, if
                                                                       no such date is fixed, when the plaintiff
                                                                       has noticed that performance is refused.
  55.     For compensation for the breach of any         Three years   When the contract is broken or (where
          contract, express or implied not herein                      there are successive breaches) when
          specially provided for.                                      the breach in respect of which the suit is
                                                                       instituted occurs or (where the breach is
                                                                       continuing) when it ceases.
                                 PART III — SUITS RELATING TO DECLARATIONS

  56.     To declare the forgery of an instrument        Three years   When the issue or registration becomes
          issued or registered.                                        known to the plaintiff.

  57.     To obtain a declaration that an alleged        Three years   When the alleged adoption becomes
          adoption is invalid, or never, in fact, took                 known to the plaintiff.
          place.

  58.     To obtain any other declaration.               Three years   When the right to sue first accrues.



                                                                                                              329
EP-JI&GL                                                                                 Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                Period of      Time from which period begin storun
                                                        limitation

                        PART IV — SUITS RELATING TO DECREES AND INSTRUMENTS

  59.    To cancel or set aside an instrument or       Three years    When the facts entitling the plaintiff to
         decree or for the rescission of a contract.                  have the instrument or decree cancelled
                                                                      or set aside or the contract rescinded
                                                                      first becomes known to him.
  60.    To set aside a transfer of property made by the guardian of a ward —

         (a) by the ward who has attained majority;    Three years    When the ward attains majority.

         (b) by the ward’s legal representative —

         (i) When the ward dies within three years     Three years    When the ward attains majority.
         from the date of attaining majority;

         (ii) when the ward dies before attaining      Three years    When the ward dies.
         majority.

                            PART V — SUITS RELATING TO IMMOVABLE PROPERTY

  61.    By a mortgagor —

         (a) to redeem or recover the possession of    Thirty years   When the right to redeem or to recover
         immovable property mortgaged;                                possession accrues.

         (b) to recover possession of immovable          Twelve       When the transfer becomes known to the
         property mortgaged and afterwards                years       plaintiff.
         transferred by the mortgagee for a
         valuable consideration.

         (c) to recover surplus collection received    Three years    When the mortgagor re-enters on the
         by the mortgagee after the mortgage has                      mortgaged property.
         been satisfied.

  62.    To enforce payment of money secured by          Twelve       When the money sued for becomes due.
         a mortgage or otherwise charged upon             years
         immovable property.

  63.    By a mortgagee:

         (a) for foreclosure;                          Thirty years   When the money secured by the
                                                                      mortgagee becomes due.

         (b) for possession of immovable property        Twelve       When the mortgagee becomes entitled
         mortgaged.                                       years       to possession.




330
Law relating to Limitation                                                                               LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit                 Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                           limitation

  64.     For possession of immovable property              Twelve      The date of dispossession.
          based on previous possession and not on            years
          title, when the plaintiff while in possession
          of the property has been dispossessed.

  65.     For possession of immovable property or           Twelve      When the possession of the defendant
          any interest herein based on title.                years      becomes adverse to the plaintiff.

          Explanation — For the purposes of this article –

          (a) where the suit is by a remainderman,
          a reversioner (other than a landlord) or a
          devisee, the possession of the defendant
          shall be deemed to become adverse only
          when the estate of the remainderman,
          reversioner or devisee, as the case may
          be, falls into possession;

          (b) where the suit is by a Hindu or Muslim
          entitled to the possession of immovable
          property on the death of a Hindu or Muslim
          female, the possession of the defendant
          shall be deemed to become adverse only
          when the female dies; (c) where the suit
          is by a purchaser at a sale in execution
          of a decree when the judgement debtor
          was out of possession at the date of the
          sale, the purchaser shall be deemed to be
          a representative of the judgement debtor
          who was out of possession.
  66.     For possession of immovable property              Twelve      When the forfeiture is incurred or the
          when the plaintiff has become entitled to          years      condition is broken.
          possession by reason of any forfeiture or
          breach of condition.

  67.     By a landlord to recover possession from          Twelve      When the tenancy is determined.
          a tenant.                                          years

                             PART VI — SUITS RELATING TO MOVABLE PROPERTY

  68.     For specific movable property lost,             Three years   When the person having the right to the
          or acquired by theft, or dishonest                            possession of the property first learns in
          misappropriation or conversion.                               whose possession it is.

  69.     For other specific movable property.            Three years   When the property is wrongfully taken.



                                                                                                               331
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                  Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                          limitation
  70.    To recover movable property deposited or        Three years   The date of refusal after demand.
         pawned from a depository or pawnee.

  71.    To recover movable property deposited           Three years   When the sale becomes known to the
         or pawned, and afterwards bought from                         plaintiff.
         the depository or pawnee for a valuable
         consideration.

                                       PART VII — SUITS RELATING TO TORT

  72.    For compensation for doing or for omitting       One year     When the act or omission takes place.
         to do an act alleged to be in pursuance of
         any enactment in force for the time being
         in the territories to which this Act extends.

  73.    For compensation for false imprisonment.         One year     When the imprisonment ends.

  74.    For compensation        for    a   malicious     One year     When the plaintiff is acquitted or the
         prosecution.                                                  prosecution is otherwise terminated.

  75.    For compensation for libel.                      One year     When the libel is published.

  76.    For compensation for slander.                    One year     When the words are spoken, or if the
                                                                       words are not actionable in themselves,
                                                                       when the special damage complained of
                                                                       results.

  77.    For compensation for loss of service             One year     When the loss occurs.
         occasioned by the seduction of the
         plaintiff’s servant or daughter.

  78.    For compensation for inducing a person to        One year     The date of the breach.
         break a contract with the plaintiff.

  79.    For compensation for an illegal, irregular       One year     The date of the distress.
         or excessive distress.

  80.    For compensation for wrongful seizure of         One year     The date of the seizure.
         movable property under legal process.

  81.    By    executors,     administrators    or        One year     The date of the death of the person
         representatives’   under      the   Legal                     wronged.
         Representatives’ Suits Act, 1855.

  82.    By    executors’     administrators or          Two years     The date of the death of the person
         representatives under the Indian Fatal                        killed.
         Accidents Act, 1855.



332
Law relating to Limitation                                                                             LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit               Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                         limitation

  83.     Under the Legal Representatives’ Suits        Two years     When the wrong complained of is done.
          Act, 1855, against an executor, an
          administrator or any other representative.

  84.     Against one who having a right to use         Two years     When the perversion first becomes
          property for specific purposes, perverts it                 known to the person injured thereby.
          to other purposes.

  85.     For compensation for obstructing a way or     Three years   The date of the obstruction.
          a water-course.

  86.     For compensation for diverting a water-       Three years   The date of the diversion.
          course.

  87.     For compensation for trespass upon            Three years   The date of the trespass.
          immovable property.

  88.     For compensation for infringing copyright     Three years   The date of the infringement.
          or any other exclusive privilege.

  89.     To restrain waste.                            Three years   When the waste begins.

  90.     For compensation for injury caused by an      Three years   When the injunction ceases.
          injunction wrongfully obtained.

  91.     For compensation —

          (a) for wrongfully taking or detaining any    Three years   When the person having the right to the
          specific movable property lost, or acquired                 possession of the property first learns in
          by theft, or dishonest misappropriation or                  whose possession it is.
          conversion;

          (b) for wrongfully taking or injuring or      Three years   When the property is wrongfully taken
          wrongfully detaining any other specific                     or injured, or when the detainer’s
          movable property.                                           possession becomes unlawful.

                        PART VIII — SUITS RELATING TO TRUSTS AND TRUST PROPERTY

  92.     To recover possession of immovable              Twelve      When the transfer becomes known to the
          property conveyed or bequeathed in trust         years      plaintiff.
          and afterwards transferred by the trustee
          for a valuable consideration.

  93.     To recover possession of movable              Three years   When the transfer becomes known to the
          property conveyed or bequeathed in trust                    plaintiff.
          and afterwards transferred by the trustee
          for a valuable consideration.



                                                                                                             333
EP-JI&GL                                                                                Law relating to Limitation


S. No.              Description of suit                Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                       limitation
  94.    To set aside a transfer of immovable           Twelve      When the transfer becomes known to the
         property comprised in a Hindu, Muslim           years      plaintiff.
         or Buddhist religious or charitable
         endowment, made by a manager thereof
         for a valuable consideration.

  95.    A set aside a transfer of movable property   Three years   When the transfer becomes known to the
         comprised in a Hindu, Muslim or Buddhist                   plaintiff.
         religious or charitable endowment, made
         by a manager thereof for a valuable
         consideration.

  96.    By the manager of a Hindu, Muslim              Twelve      The date of death, resignation or
         or Buddhist religious or charitable             years      removal of the transferor or the date of
         endowment to recover possession                            appointment of the plaintiff as manager
         of movable or immovable property                           of the endowment whichever is later.
         comprised in the endowment which has
         been transferred by a previous manager
         for a valuable consideration.

                        PART IX — SUITS RELATING TO MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS

  97.    To enforce a right of pre-emption whether     One year     When the purchaser takes under the
         the right is founded on law or general                     sale sought to be impeached, physical
         usage or on special contract.                              possession of the whole or part of the
                                                                    property sold, or, where the subject-
                                                                    matter of the sale does not admit of
                                                                    physical possession of the whole or part
                                                                    of the property when the instrument of
                                                                    sale is registered.

  98.    By a person against whom (an order            One year     The date of the final order.
         referred to in Rule 63 or Rule 103) of
         Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure,
         1908 or an order under Section 28 of the
         Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882,
         has been made, to establish the right
         which he claims to the property comprised
         in the order.

  99.    To set aside a sale by a Civil or Revenue     One year     When the sale is confirmed or would
         Court or a sale for arrears of Government                  otherwise have become final and
         revenue or for any demand recoverable                      conclusive had no such suit been
         as such arrears.                                           brought.


334
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit                  Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                            limitation

  100.    To alter or set aside any decision or order       One year     The date of the final decision or order by
          of a Civil Court in any proceeding other                       the Court or the date of the act or order
          than a suit or any act or order or an officer                  of the officer, as the case may be.
          of Government in his official capacity.

  101.    Upon a judgement including a foreign             Three years   The date of        the   judgement     or
          judgement, or a recognisance.                                  recognisance.

  102.    For property which the plaintiff has             Three years   When the plaintiff is restored to sanity
          conveyed while insane.                                         and has knowledge of the conveyance.

  103.    To make good out of the general estate           Three years   The date of the trustee’s death or if the
          of a deceased trustee the loss occasioned                      loss has not then resulted, the date of
          by a breach of trust.                                          the loss.

  104.    To establish a periodically recurring right.     Three years   When the plaintiff is first refused the
                                                                         enjoyment of the right.

  105.    By a Hindu for arrears of maintenance.           Three years   When the arrears are payable.

  106.    For a legacy or for a share of a residue           Twelve      When the legacy or share becomes
          bequeathed by a testator or for a                   years      payable or deliverable.
          distributive share of the property of an
          interstate against an executor or an
          administrator or some other person legally
          charged with the duty of distributing the
          estate.

  107.    For possession of a hereditary office.             Twelve      When the defendant takes possession of
          Explanation — A hereditary office is                years      the office adversely to the plaintiff.
          possessed when the properties thereof
          are usually received or if there are no
          properties when the duties thereof are
          usually performed.

  108.    Suit during the life of a Hindu or Muslim          Twelve      The date of the alienation.
          female by a Hindu or Muslim who if the              years
          female died at the date of instituting the
          suit, would be entitled to the possession
          of land, to have an alienation of such land
          made by the female declared to be void
          except for her life or until her re- marriage.

  109.    By a Hindu governed by Mitakshara                  Twelve      When the alienee takes possession of
          law to set aside his father’s alienation of         years      the property.
          ancestral property.


                                                                                                                335
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                  Period of      Time from which period begin storun
                                                          limitation

 110.    By a person excluded from a joint family          Twelve       When the exclusion becomes known to
         property to enforce a right to share therein.      years       the plaintiff.

 111.    By or on behalf of any local authority          Thirty years   The date of the dispossession or
         for possession of any public street or                         discontinuance.
         road or any part thereof from which it
         has been dispossessed or of which it has
         discontinued the possession.

 112.    Any suit (except a suit before the Supreme      Thirty years   When the period of limitation would
         Court in the exercise of its original                          begin to run under this Act against a like
         jurisdiction) by or on behalf of the Central                   suit by a private person.
         Government or any State Government,
         including the Government of the State of
         Jammu & Kashmir.

                      PART X — SUITS FOR WHICH THERE IS NO PRESCRIBED PERIOD

 113.    Any suit for which no period of limitation is   Three years    When the right to sue accrues.
         provided elsewhere in this Schedule.

                                           Second Division — Appeals

 114.    Appeal from an order of Acquittal —

         (a) under Sub-section (1) or Sub-section        Ninety days    The date of the order appealed from.
         (2) of Section 417 of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure, 1898;

         (b) under Sub-section (3) of Section 417 of     Thirty days    The date of the grant of special leave.
         that Code.

 115.    Under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

         (a) from a sentence of death passed             Thirty days    The date of the sentence.
         by a Court of Session or by a High
         Court in exercise of its Original Criminal
         Jurisdiction;

         (b) from any other sentence or any order
         not being an order of acquittal –

         (i) to the High Court;                          Sixty days     The date of the sentence or order.

         (ii) to any other Court.                        Thirty days    The date of the sentence or order.


336
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                 LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit                 Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                           limitation
  116.    Under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 –

          (a) to a High Court from any decree or          Ninety days   The date of the decree or order.
          order;

          (b) to any other Court from any decree or       Thirty days   The date of the decree or order.
          order.

  117.    From a decree or order of any High Court        Thirty days   The date of the decree or order.
          to the same Court.

                                             Third Division — Applications

  118.    For leave to appear and defend a suit            Ten days     When the summons is served.
          under summary procedure.

  119.    Under the Arbitration Act, 1940.

          (a)for the filing in Court of an award.         Thirty days   The date of service of the notice of the
                                                                        making of the award.

          (b)for setting aside an award or getting an     Thirty days   The date of service of the notice of the
          award remitted for reconsideration.                           filing of the award.

  120.    Under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,        Ninety days   The date of death of the plaintiff,
          to have the legal representative of a                         appellant, defendant or respondent as
          deceased plaintiff or appellant or of a                       the case may be.
          deceased defendant or respondent, made
          a party.

  121.    Under the same Code for an order to set         Sixty days    The date of abatement.
          aside an abatement.

  122.    To restore a suit or appeal or application      Thirty days   The date of dismissal.
          for review or revision dismissed for default
          of appearance or for want of prosecution
          or for failure to pay costs of service of
          process or to furnish security for costs.

  123.    To set aside a decree passed ex parte or        Thirty days   The date of the decree or where the
          to re-hear an appeal decreed or heard ex                      summons or notice was not duly served,
          parte.                                                        when the applicant had knowledge of
                                                                        the decree.
          Explanation: For the purpose of this article,
          substituted service under rule 20 of Order
          V of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
          shall not be deemed to be due service.



                                                                                                               337
EP-JI&GL                                                                                   Law relating to Limitation


S. No.               Description of suit                   Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                           limitation

 124.    For a review of judgement by a Court             Thirty days   The date of the decree or order.
         other than the Supreme Court.

 125.    To record an adjustment or satisfaction of       Thirty days   When the payment or adjustment is
         a decree.                                                      made.

 126.    For the payment of the amount of a decree        Thirty days   The date of the decree.
         by instalments.

 127.    To set aside a sale in execution of a            Sixty days    The date of the sale.
         decree, including any such application by
         a judgement-debtor.

 128.    For possession by one dispossessed of            Thirty days   The date of the dispossession.
         immovable property and disputing the
         right of the decree-holder or purchaser at
         a sale in execution of a decree.

 129.    For possession after removing resistance         Thirty days   The date of resistance or obstruction.
         or obstruction to delivery of possession
         of immovable property decree or sold in
         execution of a decree.

 130.    For leave to appeal as a Pauper —

         (a) to the High Court;                           Sixty days    The date of decree appealed from.

         (b) to any other Court.                          Thirty days   The date of decree appealed from.

 131.    To any Court for the exercise of its             Ninety days   The date of the decree or order or
         powers of revision under the Code of Civil                     sentence sought to be revised.
         Procedure, 1908 or the Code of Criminal
         Procedure, 1973.

 132.    To the High Court for a certificate of fitness   Sixty days    The date of the decree, order or sentence.
         to appeal to the Supreme Court under
         Clause (1) of Article 132, Article 133 or sub-
         clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 134 of the
         Constitution or under any other law for the
         time being in force.




338
Law relating to Limitation                                                                                LESSON 9

 S. No.                Description of suit               Period of     Time from which period begin storun
                                                         limitation
  133.    To the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal—

          (a) in a case involving death sentence;       Sixty days    The date of the judgement, final order or
                                                                      sentence.

          (b) in a case where leave to appeal was       Sixty days    The date of the order of refusal.
          refused by the High Court;

          (c) in any other case.                        Ninety days   The date of the judgement or order.

  134.    For delivery of possession by a purchaser      One year     When the sale becomes absolute.
          of immovable property at a sale in
          execution of a decree.
  135.    For the enforcement of a decree granting      Three years   The date of the decree or where a date is
          a mandatory injunction.                                     fixed for performance, such date.

  136.    For the execution of any decree (other          Twelve      When the decree or order becomes
          than a decree granting a mandatory               years      enforceable or where the decree or any
          injunction) or order of any Civil Court.                    subsequent order directs any payment of
                                                                      money or the delivery of any property to
                                                                      be made at a certain date or at recurring
                                                                      periods, when default in making the
                                                                      payment or delivery in respect of which
                                                                      execution is sought, takes place:
                                                                      Provided that an application for the
                                                                      enforcement or execution of a decree
                                                                      granting a perpetual injunction shall not
                                                                      be subject to any period of limitation.
  137.    Any other application for which no period     Three years   When the right to apply accrues.
          of limitation is provided elsewhere in this
          Division.


 CASE LAW

 A. Valliammai vs. K.P. Murali and Others decided by Supreme Court on 11th September, 2023
 In this case the Supreme Court has referred to the provisions of Article 54 of Part II of the Schedule to the
 Limitation Act, 1963 which stipulates the limitation period for filing a suit for specific performance as three
 years from the date fixed for performance, and in alternative when no date is fixed, three years from the date
 when the plaintiff has notice that performance has been refused.
 The Supreme Court referred to the case earlier decided in Pachanan Dhara and Others v. Monmatha Nath
 Maity (2006) 5 SCC 340. The Supreme Court in referred case had held that for determining applicability
 of the first or the second part, the court will have to see whether any time was fixed for performance of
 the agreement to sell and if so fixed, whether the suit was filed beyond the prescribed period, unless a
 case for extension of time or performance was pleaded or established. However, when no time is fixed for
 performance, the court will have to determine the date on which the plaintiff had notice of refusal on part of
 the defendant to perform the contract.

                                                                                                              339
EP-JI&GL                                                                                         Law relating to Limitation

 CLASSIFICATION OF PERIOD OF LIMITATION
Depending upon the duration, period of limitation for different purposes may be classified as follows:
Period of 30 years: The maximum period of limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act is 30 years and it is
provided only for three kinds of suits:
      1.    Suits by mortgagors for the redemption or recovery of possession of immovable property mortgaged;
   2.       Suits by mortgagee for foreclosure;
   3.       Suits by or on behalf of the Central Government or any State Government including the State of Jammu
            and Kashmir.
Period of 12 years: A period of 12 years is prescribed as a limitation period for various kinds of suits relating to
immovable property, trusts and endowments.
Period of 3 years: A period of three years has been prescribed for suits relating to accounts, contracts,
declaratory suits, suits relating to decrees and instruments and suits relating to movable property.
Period varying between 1 to 3 years: The period from 1 to 3 years has been prescribed for suits relating to torts
and other miscellaneous matters and suits for which no period of limitation is provided in the schedule to the
Act.
Period in days varying between 90 to 10 days: The minimum period of limitation of 10 days is prescribed for
application for leave to appear and defend a suit under summary procedure from the date of service of the
summons. For appeals against a sentence of death passed by a court of session or a High Court in the exercise
ofits original jurisdiction the limitation period is 30 days. For appeal against any sentence other than a sentence
of death or any other not being an order of acquittal, the period of 60 days for the appeal to High Court and
30 days for appeal to any other Court is prescribed. Period of leave to appeal as a pauper from the date of the
decree is 60 days when application for leave to appeal is made to the High Court and 30 days to any other Court.



                                                   LESSON ROUND-UP

   l       The essential purpose of a limitation period is to place a time limit on the period within which a party
           can commence legal proceedings.
   l       Limitation periods are imposed by statute, primarily the Limitation Act, 1963. The Limitation Act provides
           different limitation periods for different types of suits.
   l       If a limitation period has expired for a particular claim, the claim will be “statute-barred”. This means
           that it will no longer be possible for the claimant to effect recovery for that claim against the alleged
           wrongdoer.
   l       Where once time has begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to institute a suit or make an
           application can stop it provided that where letters of administration to the estate of a creditor have
           been granted to his debtor, the running of the period of limitation for a suit to recover debt shall be
           suspended while the administration continues.
   l       Where payment on account of a debt or of interest on a legacy is made before the expiration of the
           prescribed period by the person liable to pay the debt or legacy or by his agent duly authorised in this
           behalf, a fresh period of limitation shall be computed from the time when the payment was made.
   l       Limitation is dealt with in entry 13, List III of the Constitution of India. The Statute of Limitation is not
           unconstitutional since it applies to right of action in future.


340
Law relating to Limitation                                                                             LESSON 9

                                                       GLOSSARY

 Doctrine of sufficient cause: The extension of prescribed period in certain cases on sufficient cause being
 shown for the delay.
 Harmonious construction: Interpretation of two or more provisions in a way that effect may be given to all/
 both.


                                                     TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
        1.   Explain Doctrine of Sufficient Cause.
        2.   “Period of Limitation once starts cannot be stopped”. Comment.
        3.   In which kind of suits maximum period of 30 years prescribed under the Limitation Act, 1963?
        4.   Write a short note on:-
              (i)    Effect of Payment on Account of Debt or of Interest on Legacy
              (ii)   Acquisition of Ownership by Possession
        5.   What are the sufficient causes for extension of time period under Limitation Act, 1963?


                                             LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

    l     Bare Act of Limitation Act, 1963
    l     V.G. Ramachandran : Law of Limitation; Eastern Book Company, Lucknow
    l     M.R. Mallick, B.B. Mitra The Limitation Act, 1963 (22nd ed., 2011)
    l     K. Shanmukham, Sanjiva Row’s The Limitation Act (9th ed., 2000)
    l     Law of Limitation; Eastern Book Company, Lucknow, V.G. Ramachandran
    l     Articles of Professionals.


                             OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

        l    https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1565/1/a1963-36.pdf




                                                                                                            341
EP-JI&GL   Law relating to Limitation




342
Law relating to Arbitration,
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation
                                                                                              Lesson
                                                                                                LESSON 10


Mediation and Conciliation                                                                      10
 KEY CONCEPTS
 n Alternate Disputes Resolution (ADR) n Arbitration n Conciliation n Mediation n Arbitral Proceedings
 n International Commercial     n Arbitral Institution n Arbitral Award n Conciliation Agreement n Mediation
 Agreement n Interim Measures n Grounds for Challenge n Challenge Procedure n Fast Track Procedure
 n Settlement n Termination of Proceedings n Enforcement n Appealable Orders n Arbitration Council of India
 (ACI) n Foreign Arbitral Award



 Learning Objectives
  To understand:
          Alternate Dispute Resolutions (ADR)
          Types of Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation
          The process involved in Alternate Dispute Resolutions
          The role of courts in ADR proceedings
          Challenge/Enforceability of Arbitral Awards or Mediation/Conciliation Agreements
          Law relating to International Arbitration
          Provisions of corrections and interpretation of the Arbitral Awards
          Development of Law relating to Mediation




 Lesson Outline
          Introduction
          Important definitions
          Number of arbitrators
          Powers of central government to amend fourth schedule
          Challenge procedure
          Failure or impossibility to act as an arbitrator
          Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator
          Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction
          Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal
          Equal treatment of parties


                                                                                                        343
EP-JI&GL                                                    Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


      Place of arbitration

      Commencement of arbitral proceedings

      Language

      Statements of claim and defence

      Hearings and written proceedings

      Default of a party

      Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal

      Court assistance in taking evidence

      Rules applicable to substance of dispute

      Decision making by panel of arbitrators

      Essential of awards

      Time limit for arbitral award

      Fast track procedure

      Settlement

      Form and contents of arbitral award

      Regime for costs

      Correction and interpretation of award; additional award

      Finality of arbitral awards and enforcement

      Appealable orders

      Arbitration Council of India (ACI)

      Enforcement of certain foreign arbitral awards

      Conciliation

      Commencement of conciliation proceedings

      Termination of conciliation proceedings

      Role of conciliator in other proceedings

      Development of mediation law

      Mediation rules made by high courts

      Lesson Round-Up

      Glossary

      Test Yourself

      List of Further Readings and References



344
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
    l    The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
    l    Alternate Dispute Resolution Rules
    l    The Mediation Act, 2023

 The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is an Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic
 arbitration, international commercial arbitration and enforcement of foreign arbitral awards as also to
 define the law relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

 INTRODUCTION
The history of the law of arbitration in India commences with (erstwhile Civil procedure Code) Act VIII of 1859
which codified the procedure of Civil Courts. Sections 312 to 325 of Act VIII of 1859 dealt with arbitration between
the parties to a suit while Sections 326 and 327 dealt with arbitration without the intervention of the Court. These
provisions were in operation when the Indian Contract Act, 1872, came into force which permitted settlement of
disputes by arbitration under Section 28 thereof. Act VIII of 1859 was followed by later codes relating to Civil
Procedure, namely, Act X of 1877 and Act XIV of 1882 but not much change was brought about by the law relating
to arbitration proceedings. It was in the year 1899 that an Indian Act entitled the Arbitration Act of 1899 came
to be passed. It was based on the model of the English Act of 1899. The 1899 Act applied to cases where if the
subject matter submitted to the arbitration was the subject of a suit, the suit could whether with leave or otherwise,
be instituted in a Presidency town. Then came the Code of Civil Procedure of 1908. Schedule II to the said Code
contained the provisions relating to the law of arbitration which extended to the other parts of British India.
The Civil Justice Committee in 1925 recommended several changes in the arbitration law. On the basis of the
recommendations by the Civil Justice Committee, the Indian Legislature passed the Act, i.e., the Arbitration Act
of 1940. This Act as its preamble indicated was a consolidating and amending Act and was an exhaustive code
insofar as the law relating to arbitration is concerned. Arbitration may be without the intervention of a Court or
with the intervention of a Court where there is no suit pending or it may be arbitration in a suit.
With the passage of time, the 1940 Act became outmoded, and need was expressed by the Law Commission of
India and various representative bodies of trade and industry for its amendment so as to be more responsive
to the contemporary requirements, and to render Indian economic reforms more effective. Besides, arbitration,
other mechanisms of settlement of disputes such as mediation or conciliation should have legal recognition and
the settlement agreement reached between the parties as a result of such mechanism should have the same
status and effect as an arbitral award on agreed terms.

 Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
With a view to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international commercial arbitration,
enforcement of foreign arbitral awards and also to provide for a law relating to conciliation and related matters,
a new law called Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has been passed. The new Law is based on United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), model law on International Commercial Arbitration.
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 aims at streamlining the process of arbitration and facilitating
conciliation in business matters. The Act recognises the autonomy of parties in the conduct of arbitral proceedings by


                                                                                                                 345
EP-JI&GL                                                            Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

the arbitral tribunal and abolishes the scope of judicial review of the award and minimizes the supervisory role
of Courts. The autonomy of the arbitral tribunal has further been strengthened by empowering them to decide
on jurisdiction and to consider objections regarding the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement.
With the passage of time, some difficulties in the applicability of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 have
been noticed. Interpretation of the provisions of the Act by Courts in some cases have resulted in delay of disposal
of arbitration proceedings and increase in interference of Courts in arbitration matters, which tend to defeat the
object of the Act. With a view to overcome the difficulties, Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 passed
by the Parliament. Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 facilitate and encourage Alternative Dispute
Mechanism, especially arbitration, for settlement of disputes in a more user-friendly, cost effective and expeditious
disposal of cases since India is committed to improve its legal framework to obviate in disposal of cases.
Further, the promotion of the institutional arbitration in India by strengthening Indian arbitral institutions has
been identified critical to the dispute resolution through arbitration. Though arbitral institutions have been
working in India, they have not been preferred by parties, who have leaned in favour of ad hoc arbitration
or arbitral institutions located abroad. Therefore, in order to identify the roadblocks to the development of
institutional arbitration, examine specific issues affecting the Indian arbitration landscape and also to prepare
a road map for making India a robust centre for institutional arbitration both domestic and international, the
Central Government constituted a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice B. N. Srikrishna,
Former Judge of the Supreme Court of India. The High Level Committee submitted its Report on 30th July, 2017.
With a view to strengthen institutional arbitration in the country, the said Committee, inter alia, recommended for
the establishment of an independent body for grading of arbitral institutions and accreditation of arbitrators, etc.
The Committee has also recommended certain amendments to the said Act to minimise the need to approach
the Courts for appointment of arbitrators. After examination of the said recommendations with a view to make
India a hub of institutional arbitration for both domestic and international arbitration, it was decided to amend
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. Accordingly, the Arbitration and conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019
passed by the Parliament.
A recent amendment has been made in section 36 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 in 2021. The
amendment provides that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie case is made out that,—
   (a)     the arbitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or
   (b)     the making of the award, was induced or effected by fraud or corruption,
it shall stay the award unconditionally pending disposal of the challenge under section 34 to the award.
Further an Explanation has also been added which provides that for the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that the above proviso shall apply to all court cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings,
irrespective of whether the arbitral or court proceedings were commenced prior to or after the commencement
of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015.

 Types of Arbitration
      1.   Ad hoc Arbitration - This is a type of arbitration that is not handled by a formal organisation rather the
           number of arbitrators, mode of selection, and how the arbitration will be conducted, may be decided by
           the parties. The procedural aspects should also be decided by the parties.
   2.      Domestic Arbitration - The arbitration in which the disputes are subject to Indian laws and the cause of
           action is entirely based in India are called Domestic arbitration.
   3.      International Arbitration - It is an arbitration relating to disputes where at least one of the parties is:
            (i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; or
            (ii)   a body corporate which is incorporated in any country other than India; or
           (iii)   an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is exercised in any
                   country other than India; or

346
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

         (iv) the Government of a foreign country.
    4.   Institutional arbitration - In Institutional arbitration, the matter is to be administered by established
         arbitration institutions.

 Essentials of Arbitral Process
    1.   Seat of Arbitration – The parties are free to select any location as the arbitration’s seat.
    2.   Venue of Arbitration – The Venue or location, for the sessions of the arbitral proceedings may be
         decided by the parties.
    3.   Arbitral Institution – The parties may select the arbitral institution for conducting the proceedings. The
         rules of such arbitration institution will apply to proceedings.
    4.   Law – The parties may by agreement choose any law .
    5.   Language – The parties may also agree on the language of the arbitration proceedings.
    6.   Number of arbitrators – The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that such
         number shall not be an even number. However, Failing the determination, the arbitral tribunal shall
         consist of a sole arbitrator.
    7.   Cost – The Court or arbitral tribunal have the discretion to determine the cost which includes the
         decision as to:
          (a)   whether costs are payable by one party to another;
          (b)   the amount of such costs; and
          (c)   when such costs are to be paid.

 Cases that do not fall under purview of arbitration
Most civil rights disputes with damages as the remedy are reffered to arbitration. However Section 2(3) of
the Act provides that Part I shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain
disputes may not be submitted to arbitration.

 IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS

 Arbitration
Section 2(1) (a) of the Act, defines the term “arbitration” as to mean any arbitration whether or not administered
by a permanent arbitral institution.

 Arbitrator
The term “arbitrator” is not defined in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. But “arbitrator” is a person who is
appointed to determine differences and disputes between two or more parties by their mutual consent. It is
not enough that the parties appoint an arbitrator. The person who is so appointed must also give his consent
to act as an arbitrator. His appointment is not complete till he has accepted the reference. The arbitrator must
be absolutely disinterested and impartial. He is an extra-judicial tribunal whose decision is binding on the
parties.
Any interest of the arbitrator either in one of the parties or in the subject-matter of reference unknown to either
of the parties or all the parties, as the case may be, is a disqualification for the arbitrator. Such disqualification
applies only in the case of a concealed interest. Every disclosure which might in the least affect the minds of
those who are proposing to submit their disputes to the arbitration of any particular individual as regards his
selection and fitness for the post ought to be made so that each party may have an opportunity of considering
whether the reference to arbitration to that particular individual should or should not be made.

                                                                                                                 347
EP-JI&GL                                                             Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

The parties may appoint whomsoever they please to arbitrate on their dispute. Usually the parties themselves
appoint the arbitrator or arbitrators. In certain cases, the Court can appoint an arbitrator or umpire. The parties
to an arbitration agreement may agree that any reference there under shall be referred to an arbitrator or
arbitrators to be appointed by a person designated in the agreement either by name or as the holder for the
time being of any office or appointment.

 Arbitral Institution
“Arbitral Institution” means an arbitral institution designated by the Supreme Court or a High Court under this
Act. [Section 2(1) (ca)]

 Arbitral Tribunal
“Arbitral tribunal” means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators. [Section 2(1)(d)].

 Court
Court means,
      (i)   in the case of an arbitration other than international commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court
            of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
            jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if
            the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior
            to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes;
   (ii)     in the case of international commercial arbitration, the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
            jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the
            same had been the subject-matter of a suit, and in other cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear
            appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to that High Court. [Section 2(1)(e)].

 International Commercial Arbitration
International commercial arbitration” means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of legal relationships,
whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in for in India and where at least one of
the parties is:
      (i)   an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; or
   (ii)     a body corporate which is incorporated in any country other than India; or
   (iii)    an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is exercised in any
            country other than India; or
  (iv)      the Government of a foreign country. [Section 2(1)(f)]

 Legal Representative
Legal representative means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and includes any
person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased, and, where a party acts in a representative character,
the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so acting. [Section 2(1)(g)]

 Party
Party means a party to an arbitration agreement. [Section 2(1)(h)]

 Arbitration Agreement
“Arbitration agreement” means an agreement referred to in Section 7 [Section 2(1)(b)].
Under Section 7, the Arbitration agreement has been defined to mean an agreement by the parties to submit to

348
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined
legal relationship, whether contractual or not.
        An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a
         separate agreement.
        An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
        An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in,
           – a document signed by the parties;
           – an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of telecommunication including
             communication through electronic means which provide a record of the agreement; or
           – an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the agreement is
             alleged by one party and not denied by the other.
        The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration
         agreement if the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration clause part
         of the contract.

  Specimen ADR Clause
  It is hereby agreed by and between the parties that if any controversy, dispute or difference shall arise
  concerning construction, meaning, violation, termination, validity or nullity including without limitation the
  scope of any Clause or any part thereof, or of the respective rights or liabilities herein contained, the Parties
  shall make an attempt first to resolve the same by discussion or mediation. However, if the Parties hereto
  fail to resolve the controversy, dispute or difference amicably within 7 (seven) days of commencement of
  discussions, conciliation or mediation, then any Party shall upon expiry of such period of 15 (fifteen) days
  be entitled to refer such controversy, dispute or difference to be resolved by arbitration in accordance
  with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or any statutory modifications on re-enactment thereof as in
  force. The language to be used in the mediation and in the arbitration shall be English. In any arbitration
  commenced pursuant to this clause, the sole arbitrator shall be appointed by the mutual consent of the parties
  as per the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The seat, or legal place, of arbitration shall
  be New Delhi, India. The cost of the Arbitration proceedings shall be shared equally by both the parties.


 CASE LAWS
 NBCC (India) Limited versus Zillion Infra Projects Pvt. Ltd., 2024 INSC 218 decided by Supreme Court on
 19.03.2024
 Reference in one contract to the terms and conditions of the other contract would not ipso facto make the
 arbitration clause applicable unless there is a specific mention/reference thereto
 Facts of the Case/Background
 The appellant, NBCC (India) Limited is a Government of India undertaking, engaged in construction of power
 plants and other infrastructure projects. The respondent, M/s Zillion Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd. is engaged in the
 construction and infrastructure sector. The appellant issued an Invitation to tender majorly for Construction
 of the Weir. The Respondent submitted the bid and appellant awarded the contract for Construction of the
 Weir to the respondent. A dispute arose and the respondent issued a notice invoking arbitration and further
 seeking consent for the appointment of a former Judge of a High Court, as Sole Arbitrator. The appellant did
 not respond so the respondent filed an application at the High Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
 Act. The High Court confirmed the proposed appointment of the former Judge of the Delhi High Court, as
 the Sole Arbitrator. Aggrieved by the orders, the appellant filed the appeals before Hon’ble Supreme Court.


                                                                                                                  349
EP-JI&GL                                                          Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


 Key Issue/Allegation
 Learned Senior Counsel inter alia submitted before the Supreme Court that a mere reference to the terms
 and conditions without there being an incorporation in the L.O.I. would not make the lis between the parties
 amenable to the arbitration proceedings. Relying on the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of M.R.
 Engineers and Contractors Private Limited vs. Som Datt Builders Limited, he submitted that unless the L.O.I.
 specifically provides for incorporation of the arbitration clause, a reference to the arbitration proceedings
 would not be permitted in view of the provisions of sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.
 Decision
 The Hon’ble Supreme Court held that:
 “when there is a reference in the second contract to the terms and conditions of the first contract, the
 arbitration clause would not ipso facto be applicable to the second contract unless there is a specific
 mention/reference thereto.
 We are of the considered view that the present case is not a case of ‘incorporation’ but a case of ‘reference’. As
 such, a general reference would not have the effect of incorporating the arbitration clause. In any case, Clause 7.0
 of the L.O.I., which is also a part of the agreement, makes it amply clear that the redressal of the dispute between
 the NBCC and the respondent has to be only through civil courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone.”
 Glencore International AG v. M/s. Shree Ganesh Metals and another, Supreme Court, 25th August, 2025
 In this case the Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed that the non-signing of an arbitration agreement is no
 bar to refer the dispute to arbitration, if the parties have otherwise consented to arbitration.
 This appeal is against the Delhi High Court’s decision which declined reference to arbitration merely because
 Respondent No.1 didn’t sign the arbitration agreement.
 In the present case, the court held that , since the Respondent No.1 consented to the contractual terms
 via email, the High Court’s refusal to refer to an arbitration on the ground of non-signing of the arbitration
 agreement cannot be sustained. Accordingly, the Court allowed the appeal, and the case was restored to
 the file of the High Court to be referred to an arbitration by the High Court in accordance with law.

 POWER TO REFER PARTIES TO ARBITRATION WHERE THERE IS AN ARBITRATION AGREEMENT
Section 8(1) provides that a judicial authority, before which an action is brought in a matter which is the subject
of an arbitration agreement shall, if a party to the arbitration agreement or any person claiming through or
under him, so applies not later than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute,
then, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court, refer the parties to
arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists.
Further sub-section (2) states that the application referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be entertained unless it
is accompanied by the original arbitration agreement or a duly certified copy thereof.
It may be noted that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available with
the party applying for reference to arbitration under sub-section (1), and the said agreement or certified copy is
retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file such application along with
a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon the other party to produce the
original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court.
Sub-section (3) states that notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub- section (1) and that
the issue is pending before the judicial authority, arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral
award made.

 Example
 A party to the arbitration agreement applies to the judicial authority to refer for arbitration. The application
 is filed before first statement on the substance of the dispute. There was a decree of High Court providing

350
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

  the guidelines restricting the limitation period to 15 Days from the date of receiving information regarding
  the suit for referring the dispute. The applicant parties applies it with a copy of agreement which is neither
  original nor certified copy.
  Can judicial authority refer the parties to arbitration?
  Solution:
  Judicial authority shall notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or any Court,
  refer the parties to arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists. Where the
  original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available with the party applying for reference
  to arbitration, and the said agreement or certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement,
  then, the party so applying shall file such application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a
  petition praying the Court to call upon the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its
  duly certified copy before that Court.

 INTERIM MEASURES BY COURT
Section 9(1) states that a party may, before, or during arbitral proceedings or at any time after making of the
arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, apply to a court,
    i.    for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral
          proceedings; or
    ii.   for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely,
           a.   the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject-matter of the
                arbitration agreement;
           b.   securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;
           c.   the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject-matter of the
                dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising for any of the
                aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the possession of any part)
                or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment to be tried,
                which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;
           d.   interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;
           e.   such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient,
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any
proceedings before it.
Further, sub-section (2) states that where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court
passes an order for any interim measure of protection under sub-section (1), the arbitral proceedings shall be
commenced within a period of ninety days from the date of such order or within such further time as the Court
may determine.
Under sub-section (3) once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain an application
under sub-section (1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist which may not render the remedy provided
under section 17 efficacious.

 NUMBER OF ARBITRATORS
As per Section 10(1) of the Act, the parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, provided that such
number shall not be an even number.
Failing the determination referred to in Section 10(1) above, the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator.

                                                                                                                  351
EP-JI&GL                                                 Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


 Example: A & B intends to commence arbitration proceedings. They should try to appoint odd number of
 arbitrators, i.e., 1, 3, 5 , 7 and so on.

Appointment of Arbitrators




352
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation   LESSON 10




                                                               353
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation




 Example
 A & B intends to commence arbitration proceedings. A is willing to appoint X as their arbitrator while B wants
 Y to arbitrate their matter. Both A and B, failed to appoint arbitrator within 30 days. Both A and B has an option
 to approach the Court for such appointment of arbitrator.


 CASE LAWS
 Cox & Kings Ltd. V. SAP India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr, 2024 INSC 670, decided by Supreme Court on 09.09.2024
 Jurisdiction of the Court under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is limited to
 examining whether an arbitration agreement exists between the parties. Section 16 empowers the
 Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, including any ruling on any objections with respect to the
 existence or validity of arbitration agreement.
 This case can be referred to inter alia understand the issues relating to the scope of powers of the referral
 court and scope of enquiry at the referral stage.
 The Apex Court said that having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having gone
 through the materials on record, the short question that falls for our consideration is whether the application
 of the petitioner for the appointment of an arbitrator deserves to be allowed.
 On the scope of powers of the referral court at the stage of Section 11(6), it was observed by the Supreme
 Court in Lombardi Engg. Ltd. v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd. reported in 2023 INSC 976 as follows:
 “26. Taking cognizance of the legislative change, this Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd.
 [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] , noted that post 2015
 Amendment, the jurisdiction of the Court under Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act is limited to examining whether
 an arbitration agreement exists between the parties — “nothing more, nothing less.”
 In a recent decision in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish Spinning reported in 2024 INSC 532, it was
 observed by us that the arbitral tribunal is the preferred first authority to look into the questions of arbitrability
 and jurisdiction, and the courts at the referral stage should not venture into contested questions involving
 complex facts.


354
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                  LESSON 10

 Further, on the scope of enquiry at the referral stage for the determination of whether a non-signatory can be
 impleaded as a party in the arbitration proceedings, it was observed by the Constitution Bench in Cox and
 Kings, 2023 INSC 1051 as follows:

 “158. Section 16 of the Arbitration Act enshrines the principle of competence-competence in Indian arbitration
 law. The provision empowers the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction, including any ruling on
 any objections with respect to the existence or validity of arbitration agreement. Section 16 is an inclusive
 provision which comprehends all preliminary issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal.
 [Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Ltd. v. Northern Coal Field Ltd., (2020) 2 SCC 455 : (2020) 1 SCC (Civ)
 570] The doctrine of competence-competence is intended to minimise judicial intervention at the threshold
 stage. The issue of determining parties to an arbitration agreement goes to the very root of the jurisdictional
 competence of the Arbitral Tribunal.

 Also, the Apex Court has laid down that Once the arbitral tribunal is constituted, it shall be open for the
 respondents to raise all the available objections in law, and it is only after (and if) the preliminary objections
 are considered and rejected by the tribunal that it shall proceed to adjudicate the claims of the petitioner.

 Ajay Madhusudan Patel & Ors. V. Jyotrindra S. Patel & Ors., 2024 INSC 710, decided by Supreme Court
 on 20.09.2024

 Facts of the Case/Background

 This petition has been filed under Section 11(6) read with Section 11(9) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
 1996 (“the Act, 1996”) seeking appointment of a Sole Arbitrator under an Agreement entered into between
 the petitioner AMP Group and respondent JRS Group.

 Key Issue/Allegations

 Whether the SRG Group, being a non-signatory to the FAA, should also be referred to arbitration along with
 the AMP and JRS Groups?

 Decision

 The Hon’ble Apex Court in Cox and Kings held that the definition of “parties” under Section 2(1)(h) read with
 Section 7 of the Act, 1996 includes both the signatory as well as non-signatory parties. Persons or entities
 who have not formally signed the arbitration agreement or the underlying contract containing the arbitration
 agreement may also intend to be bound by the terms of the agreement. Further, the requirement of a written
 agreement under Section 7 of the Act, 1996 does not exclude the possibility of binding non-signatory parties
 if there is a defined legal relationship between the signatory and non-signatory parties. Therefore, the issue
 as to who is a “party” to an arbitration agreement is primarily an issue of consent. Actions or conduct could
 be an indicator of the consent of a party to be bound by the arbitration agreement. This aspect is also
 evident from a reading of Section 7(4)(b) which emphasises on the manifestation of the consent of persons or
 entities through actions of exchanging documents.

 It is evident that the intention of the parties to be bound by an arbitration agreement can be gauged from
 the circumstances that surround the participation of the non-signatory party in the negotiation, performance,
 and termination of the underlying contract containing such an agreement. Further, when the conduct of
 the non-signatory is in harmony with the conduct of the others, it might lead the other party or parties to
 legitimately believe that the non-signatory was a veritable party to the contract containing the arbitration



                                                                                                                355
EP-JI&GL                                                            Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


 agreement. However, in order to infer consent of the non-signatory party, their involvement in the negotiation
 or performance of the contract must be positive, direct and substantial and not be merely incidental. Thus,
 the conduct of the non-signatory party along with the other attending circumstances may lead the referral
 court to draw a legitimate inference that it is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement.
 Therefore, considering the complexity involved in the determination of the question whether the SRG Group
 is a veritable party to the arbitration agreement or not, we are of the view that it would be appropriate for
 the arbitral tribunal to take a call on the question after taking into consideration the evidence that may be
 adduced by the parties before it and the application of the legal doctrine as elaborated in the decision in
 Cox and Kings.

 POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO AMEND FOURTH SCHEDULE
In terms of Section 11A of the Act, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do,
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule(Model fee) and thereupon the Fourth
Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.

 GROUNDS FOR CHALLENGE
Section 12(1) provides that when a person is approached in connection with his possible appointment as an
arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances,
   (a)   such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or present relationship with or interest in any
         of the parties or in relation to the subject matter in dispute, whether financial, business, professional or
         other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality; and
   (b)   which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and in particular his ability
         to complete the entire arbitration within a period of twelve months.
Explanation 1
The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule of the Act shall guide in determining whether circumstances exist\
which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator.
Explanation 2
The disclosure shall be made by such person in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule of the Act.
According to Section 12(2), an arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and throughout the arbitral
proceedings, shall, without delay, disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances referred to in sub-section (1)
unless they have already been informed of them by him. Section 12(3) states an arbitrator may be challenged
only if,
   a.    circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, or
   b.    he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties.
Section 12(4) provides that a party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he
has participated, only for reason, of which he becomes aware after the appointment has been made.
Section 12(5) states that notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person whose relationship,
with the parties or counsel the subject matter of the dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the
Seventh Schedule of the Act shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator.
Section 12(6) states that where an arbitral award is set aside on an application made under section 12(5), the
Court may decide as to whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees.

356
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                  LESSON 10

 CASE LAWS
 Jivan Kumar Lohia v. Durgadutt Lohia AIR 1992 SC 188
 In this case, revocation of the authority of the arbitrator was sought by the respondent applicants before the
 High Court on the ground of bias on the part of the arbitrator. It was stated that
 “reasonable apprehension of bias or likelihood of bias in the mind of either party is a ground for termination
 of the arbitrator.”
 BCC Developers & Promoters Ltd v. DMRC (dated 28.10.2021 in ARB.P 813/2021)
 In this case, it was observed that just because the appointed arbitrators happen to be ex-employees of one
 of the parties, it shall not make them ineligible for such appointment.
 “the plea urged by petitioner seeking appointment of sole Arbitrator and disqualification of panel of
 proposed/nominated Arbitrators by the respondent being hit by provision of Section12 of the Act, is not
 maintainable.”

 CHALLENGE PROCEDURE
Section 13 of the Act contains detailed provisions regarding challenge procedure. Sub-section (1) provides
that subject to provisions of Sub-section (4), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for challenging an
arbitrator. Sub-Section (4) states that if a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under
the procedure under Sub-section (2) is not successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral proceedings
and make an arbitral award. But at that stage, the challenging party has the right to make an application in the
Court to set aside the award in accordance with Section 34 of the Act.

Sub-section (2) provides that failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 13, a party who
intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, within 15 days after becoming aware of the constitution of the
arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in Sub-section (3) of Section 12,
send a written statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal. The tribunal shall decide
on the challenge unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section (2) withdraws from his office or the
other party agrees to the challenge. It is also provided that where an award is set aside on an application
made under sub- section (5) of Section 13 of the Act, the Court may decide as to whether the arbitrator who
is challenged is entitled to any fees.

 FAILURE OR IMPOSSIBILITY TO ACT AS AN ARBITRATOR
As per Section 14(1), the mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate and he shall be substituted by another arbitrator,

   (a)   if he becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his functions, or fails to act without undue delay due
         to some other reasons; and

   (b)   if he withdraws from his office, or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate.

Further, if there is a controversy about an arbitrator’s inability to function or occurrence of undue delay, a party
may seek intervention of the Court under Section 14(2).

According to Section 14(3) if, under section 14 or section 13(3), an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a party
agrees to the termination of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity of any
ground referred to in this section or sub-section (3) of section 12.


                                                                                                                357
EP-JI&GL                                                         Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

TERMINATION OF MANDATE AND SUBSTITUTION OF ARBITRATOR UNDER SECTION 15
   (1)   In addition to the circumstances referred to in Section 13 or Section 14, the mandate of an arbitrator shall
         terminate,
         (a)   where he withdraws from office for any reasons; or
         (b)   by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.
  (2)    Where the mandate of an arbitrator terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according to
         the rules that were applicable to such appointment being replaced.
  (3)    Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced under Sub-section (2), any
         hearings previously held may be repeated at the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.
  (4)    Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal made prior to the
         replacement of an arbitrator under this Section shall not be invalid solely because there has been a
         change in the composition of the arbitral tribunal [Section 15].

 CASE LAW
 Chennai Metro Rail Limited Administrative Building v. M/s Transtonnelstroy Afcons (JV) & Anr. decided by
 Supreme Court on 19th October, 2023

 In this case, Chennai Metro Rail Limited(“Chennai Metro”), a joint venture between the Central Government
 and the Government of Tamil Nadu, had awarded the contract to the respondent (“Afcons”).

 The tribunal recorded the agreement of parties, that the hearing fee for each arbitrator was fixed at
 `1,00,000/- per session of hearing date. A member of tribunal was substituted. Further, in the 10th Meeting,
 the tribunal sought to revise the fee payable from ` 1,00,000/- to ` 2,00,000/. Chennai Metro objected to this
 revision and Afcons requested the tribunal to keep its direction for modification of fee, in abeyance till the
 decision of this court.

 Later, Afcons informed Chennai Metro that it had paid the revised fee for five hearings but Chennai Metro
 filed an application before the Madras High Court. In this proceeding under Section 14, the relief sought was
 a declaration that the mandate of the tribunal was terminated in respect of the disputes referred to them.

 All three members of the tribunal filed affidavits, in response to the Section 14 petition acknowledging that
 Supreme Court’s judgment in ONGC v. AFCONS Gunasa JV2 (hereafter “ONGC”) had decided the issue and
 thus members of the tribunal decided to revert back to the originally agreed fee i.e., ` 1,00,000.

 Initially, the High Court granted an interim order, staying the proceedings. However, after hearing counsel
 for the parties, and considering the materials on the record, the court dismissed the application, filed by
 Chennai Metro through the impugned judgment.

 In the present SLP filed before Hon’ble Supreme Court, it was decided that the attempt by Chennai Metro
 to say that the concept of de jure ineligibility because of existence of justifiable doubts about impartiality or
 independence of the tribunal on unenumerated grounds [or other than those outlined as statutory ineligibility
 conditions in terms of Sections 12 (5)], therefore cannot be sustained. We can hardly conceive of grounds
 other than those mentioned in the said schedule, occasioning an application in terms of Section 12(3). In
 case, this court were in fact make an exception to uphold Chennai Metro’s plea, the consequences could
 well be an explosion in the court docket and other unforeseen results. Skipping the statutory route carefully
 devised by Parliament can cast yet more spells of uncertainty upon the arbitration process….


358
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                       LESSON 10

 COMPETENCE OF ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL TO RULE ON ITS JURISDICTION
Section 16 deals with competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction. According to section 16(1) the
arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with respect to the existence
or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for that purpose,
    a.    an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an agreement independent of
          the other terms of the contract; and
    b.    a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity
          of the arbitration clause.
As per Section 16(2) a plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than
the submission of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea
merely because that he has appointed, or participated in the appointment of, an arbitrator, (Sub-section 2).
Section 16(3) provides that a plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be raised
as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings.
The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred it, in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), admit a later plea
if it considers the delay justified. Further, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub-section (2)
or sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral
proceedings and make an arbitral award.
A party aggrieve by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting aside such an arbitral award
in accordance with section 34.

 CASE LAW
 Chloro Controls (I) P. Ltd v. Severn Trent Water Purification Inc and Ors 2012(9) N SCALE 595
 In this case, court observed on the rule of kompetenz kompetenz. Court held
 “challenge to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement will not prevent the arbitral tribunal from
 proceeding with hearing and ruling upon its jurisdiction. The negative effect of the kompetenz kompetenz
 principle is that arbitrators are entitled to be the first to determine their jurisdiction which is later reviewable
 by the court, when there is action to enforce or set aside the arbitral award. Where the dispute is not before
 an arbitral tribunal, the Court must also decline jurisdiction unless the arbitration agreement is patently void,
 inoperative or incapable of being performed.”

 INTERIM MEASURES ORDERED BY ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Section 17(1) provides that a party may, during the arbitral proceedings apply to the arbitral tribunal,
    (i)   for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral
          proceedings; or
   (ii)   for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:-
          (a)    the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject matter of the
                 arbitration agreement;
          (b)    securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;
           (c)   the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject-matter of
                 the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising for any
                 of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the possession of any

                                                                                                                     359
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

                 party, or authorising any samples to be taken, or any observation to be made, or experiment to be
                 tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or
                 evidence;
           (d)   interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;
           (e)   such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the arbitral tribunal to be just and
                 convenient,
		 and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the court has for the purpose
   of, and in relation to, any proceedings before it.
Sub-section (2) states that Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37 of the Act, any order issued
by the arbitral tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the Court for all purposes and shall
be enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were an order of the Court.

 Example
 An order of interim injunction under section 17 of the Act is deemed to be an order of the court and enforceable
 under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

 EQUAL TREATMENT OF PARTIES
The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given a full opportunity to present this case.
Determination of Rules of Procedure
Section 19 deals with determination of rules of procedure. It says that:
      1.   The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Indian Evidence Act,
           1872.
   2.      The parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the arbitral tribunal in conducting its
           proceedings.
   3.      Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (2), the arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part,
           conduct the proceedings in the manner it considers appropriate.
   4.      The power of the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (3) includes the power to determine the admissibility,
           relevance, materiality and weight of’ any evidence.

 PLACE OF ARBITRATION
As per Section 20(1) the parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration and sub-section (2) states that if
they fail to reach an agreement, the place of arbitration is determined by the arbitral tribunal, having regard
to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the parties. Section 20(3) introduces an option
by providing that the arbitrator/tribunal may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, may meet at any place it
considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for hearing witnesses, experts or the parties, or for
inspection of documents, goods or other property.

 CASE LAWS
 Brahmani River Pellets Limited (Appellant) vs. Kamachi Industries Limited (Respondent) decided by
 Supreme Court on 25.07.2019
 Parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration. Party autonomy has to be construed in the context of
 parties choosing a court which has jurisdiction out of two or more competent courts having jurisdiction.



360
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

 Facts of the Case: The appellant entered into an agreement with the respondent for sale of 40,000 WMT (Wet
 Metric Tonne) of Iron Ore Pellets. Dispute arose between the parties regarding the price and payment terms
 and the appellant did not deliver the goods to the respondent. The respondent claimed for damages and
 the appellant denied any liability. Clause 18 of the agreement between the parties contains an arbitration
 clause. The respondent invoked arbitration clause and the appellant did not agree for the appointment of
 arbitrator. Hence, the respondent filed petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
 1996 before the Madras High Court.
 The appellant contested the petition challenging the jurisdiction of the Madras High Court on the ground
 that the parties have agreed that Seat of arbitration be Bhubaneswar. The Madras High Court vide impugned
 order appointed a former judge of the Madras High Court as the sole arbitrator. The appellant preferred the
 appeal to the Supreme Court.
 The Hon’ble supreme court observed that Section 2(1)(e) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (the Act)
 defines the “Court” with reference to the term “subject-matter of the suit”. As per Section 2(1)(e) of the Act, if
 the “subject-matter of the suit” is situated within the arbitral jurisdiction of two or more courts, the parties can
 agree to confine the jurisdiction in one of the competent courts. In para (96) of BALCO, the Supreme Court
 held that the term “subject matter” in Section 2(1)(e) of the Act is to identify the court having supervisory
 control over the arbitral proceedings. As per Section 20 of the Act, parties are free to agree on the place
 of arbitration. Party autonomy has to be construed in the context of parties choosing a court which has
 jurisdiction out of two or more competent courts having jurisdiction. The Supreme Court observed that when
 the parties have agreed to have the “venue” of arbitration at Bhubaneswar, the Madras High Court erred in
 assuming the jurisdiction under Section 11(6) of the Act. Since only Orissa High Court will have the jurisdiction
 to entertain the petition filed under Section 11(6) of the Act. The impugned order was liable to be set aside.
 Judgement:
 For details:
 https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2019/9962/9962_2019_7_1501_15263_Judgement_25- Jul-2019. pdf
 Uttar Pradesh Ban Nigam, Almora V Bishan Nath Goswami, AIR 1985 all 351, 353
 In this case, it was held that no arbitrator can decide or fix the place of seat, venue of arbitration without
 taking into account the material information such as convenience of parties, their residence, subject matter,
 their witnesses etc. Tribunal shall take into consideration all the above material information while fixing the
 place of venue of arbitration. Court stated that
 “It was not open to the arbitrator to fix the venue of his choice regardless of the convenience of parties etc.
 Under Section 13 of Arbitration Act, which contemplates the powers and duties of arbitrator, be cannot violate
 the principles of natural justice and has to give fair hearing to the parties. There was no condition in the
 arbitration agreement to empower the arbitrator to fix the venue of arbitration as he thought fit. It must be in
 consonance with the principles of natural justice also.”
 Union of India v. Hardy Exploration and Production (India) unreported 2018 (Sup Ct (Ind)
 In this case, it was decided that the terms ‘place’ and ‘seat’ can be used interchangeably. When only the term
 ‘place’ is stated or mentioned and no other condition is postulated, it is equivalent to ‘seat’ and that finalises
 the facet of jurisdiction. But if a condition precedent is attached to the term ‘place’, the said condition has to
 be satisfied so that the place can become equivalent to seat. It was stated that
 “The word ‘determination’ has to be contextually determined. When a ‘place’ is agreed upon, it gets the
 status of seat which means the juridical seat. We have already noted that the terms ‘place’ and ‘seat’ are used
 interchangeably. When only the term ‘place’ is stated or mentioned and no other condition is postulated, it


                                                                                                                  361
EP-JI&GL                                                          Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


 is equivalent to ‘seat’ and that finalises the facet of jurisdiction. But if a condition precedent is attached to
 the term ‘place’, the said condition has to be satisfied so that the place can become equivalent to seat. In
 the instant case, as there are two distinct and disjunct riders, either of them have to be satisfied to become
 a place.”

 COMMENCEMENT OF ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
According to Section 21 of the Act, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral proceedings in respect
of a particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that dispute to be referred to arbitration is
received by the respondent.

 LANGUAGE
Section 22(1) provides that the parties are free to agree upon the language or languages to be used in the
arbitral proceedings and under sub-section (2) if they fail to reach an agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall
determine the language or languages to be used in the arbitral proceedings.
Sub-section (3) states that the agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified shall apply to any written
statement by a party, any hearing and any arbitral award, decision or other communication by the arbitral
tribunal.
As per sub-section (4) the arbitral tribunal may order that any documentary evidence shall be accompanied by
a translation into the language or languages agreed upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral tribunal.

 STATEMENTS OF CLAIM AND DEFENCE
Section 23(1) provides that within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral
tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at issue and the relief or remedy
sought, and the respondent shall state his defence in respect of these particulars, unless the parties have
otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those statements.
Sub-section (2) states that the parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be
relevant or may add a reference to the documents or other evidence they will submit.
Sub-section (2A) provides that the respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counter claim or plead
a set -off, which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set-off falls within the
scope of the arbitration agreement.
Sub-section (3) states that unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement
his claim or defence during the course of the arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it
inappropriate to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to the delay in making it.
Section 23 (4) as inserted in the Amendment Act, 2019 states that the statement of claim and defence under this
section shall be completed within a period of six months from the date the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the
case may be, received notice, in writing, of their appointment.

 HEARINGS AND WRITTEN PROCEEDINGS
Section 24(1) provides that unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall decide whether to
hold oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, or whether the proceedings shall be
conducted on the basis of documents and other materials:
      l   Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold oral hearings, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings,
          on a request by a party, unless the parties have agreed that no oral hearing shall be held.

362
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

    l    Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the presentation
         of evidence or for oral argument on day-to-day basis, and not grant any adjournments unless sufficient
         cause is made out, and may impose costs including exemplary costs on the party seeking adjournment
         without any sufficient cause.

Section 24(2) state that the parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting
of the arbitral tribunal for the purposes of inspection of documents, goods or other property.

Section 24(3) says that all statements, documents or other information supplied to, or applications made
to, the arbitral tribunal by one party shall be communicated to the other party, and any expert report or
evidentiary document on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making its decision shall be communicated
to the parties.

 DEFAULT OF A PARTY
Section 25 provides that unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, without showing sufficient cause,-

    a.   the claimant fails to communicate his statement of claim in accordance with sub-section (1) of section
         23, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings;

    b.   the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with sub-section (1) of
         section 23, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating that failure in itself as
         an admission of the allegation of the allegation by the claimant and shall have the discretion to treat
         the right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited;

    c.   a party fails to appear an oral hearing or to produce documentary evidence. The arbitral tribunal may
         continue the proceedings and make the arbitral award on the evidence before it.

           Failure under the Act                                          Consequence

 Claimant fails to communicate his Arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings
 statement of claim

 Respondent fails to communicate his Arbitral tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating
 statement of defence                that failure in itself as an admission of the allegation of the
                                     allegation by the claimant and shall have the discretion to treat
                                     the right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as
                                     having been forfeited

 Party fails to appear an oral hearing or Arbitral tribunal may continue the proceedings and make the
 to produce documentary evidence          arbitral award on the evidence before it

 EXPERT APPOINTED BY ARBITRAL TRIBUNAL
Sub-section (1) of section 26 provides that subject to agreement between the parties, the arbitral tribunal
may,

    a.   appoint one or more expert to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral tribunal,
         and

    b.   require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce or to provide access to, any
         relevant documents, goods or other property for his inspection.


                                                                                                                  363
EP-JI&GL                                                             Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

Section 26 (2) states that if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it necessary, the expert shall,
after delivery of his written or oral report, participate in an oral hearing where the parties have the opportunity
to put questions to him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify on the points at issue.

Further Section 26 (3) provides that the expert shall, on the request of a party, make available to that party for
examination all documents, goods or other property in the possession of the expert with which he was provided
in order to prepare his report.

 COURT ASSISTANCE IN TAKING EVIDENCE
According to Section 27(1) the arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of the arbitral tribunal, may apply to
the Court for assistance in taking evidence.

Under Section 27 (2) the application shall specify,

   a.      the names and addresses of the parties and the arbitrators,

   b.      the general nature of the claim and the relief sought,-

      c.   the evidence to be obtained, in particular,-

             i.   the name and addresses of any person to be heard as witness or expert witness and a statement
                  of the subject- matter of the testimony required;

            ii.   the description of any document to be produced or property to be inspected.

Section 27 (3) provides that the Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence,
execute the request by ordering that the evidence be provided directly to the arbitral tribunal.

Under Section 27 (4) the Court may, while making an order, issue the same processes to witnesses as it may
issue in suits tried before it.

Section 27 (5) provides that persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other default,
or refusing to give their evidence, or guilty of any contempt to the arbitral tribunal during the conduct of arbitral
proceedings, shall be subject to the like disadvantages, penalties and punishments by order of the Court on the
representation of the arbitral tribunal as they would incur for the like offences in suits tried before the Court.

As per Section 27 (6) the expression “Processes” includes summons and commissions for the examination of
witnesses and summons to produce documents.

 RULES APPLICABLE TO SUBSTANCE OF DISPUTE
Section 28(1) provides that where the place of arbitration is situate in India,
   a.      in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall decide the
           dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being in force in India;
   b.      in international commercial arbitration,
             i.   the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated by the
                  parties as applicable to the substance of the dispute;
            ii.   any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given country shall be construed,
                  unless otherwise expressed, as directly referring to the substantive law of that country and not to
                  its conflict of laws rules;

364
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

          iii.   failing any designation of the law under clause (a) by the parties, the arbitral tribunal shall apply
                 the rules of law it considers to be appropriate given all the circumstances surrounding the dispute.
As per Section 28(2) the arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequo et bono or as amiable compositeur only if the
parties have expressly authorised it to do so.
Under Section 28(3) while deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases, take into
account the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction.

 DECISION MAKING BY PANEL OF ARBITRATORS
As per section 29(1) unless otherwise agreed by the parties, in arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator,
any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a majority of all its members.
However section 29(2) states that notwithstanding sub-section (1), if authorised by the parties or all the members
of the arbitral tribunal, questions of procedure may be decided by the presiding arbitrator.

 ESSENTIAL OF AWARDS
Arbitral Awards means and includes on interim award.

 Arbitral Award
As per Section 2(1)(c), “arbitral award” includes an interim award. The definition does not give much detail of the
ingredients of an arbitral award. However, taking into account other provisions of the Act, the following features
are noticed:

                                         Essential Features of Arbitral award

 1. Written and              An arbitration agreement is required to be in writing. Similarly, a reference to
 stamped                     arbitration and award is also required to be made in writing.

 2. Signed                   The award is to be signed by the members of the arbitral tribunal. However, the
                             signature of majority of the members of the tribunal is sufficient if the reason for any
                             omitted signature is stated.

 3. Reasoned                 The making of an award is a rational process which is accentuated by recording
                             the reasons. The award should contain reasons. However, there are two exceptions
                             where an award without reasons is valid i.e.
                                 (a)   Where the arbitration agreement expressly provides that no reasons are to
                                       be given, or
                                 (b)   Where the award has been made under Section 30 of the Act i.e. where
                                       the parties settled the dispute and the arbitral tribunal has recorded the
                                       settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms.
                             The formulation of reasons is a powerful discipline and it may lead the arbitrator
                             to change his initial view on the matter. Recording of reasons involves, analysis of
                             the dispute to reach a logical conclusion. The tribunal should explain its view of the
                             evidence and reasons of its conclusions. The preamble of the award may contain
                             reference to the arbitration agreement, constitution of the tribunal, procedure
                             adopted by the tribunal etc. and the second part of the award may contain points
                             at issue, argument for the claimant, argument for the respondent and findings of

                                                                                                                  365
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


                             the tribunal. The points at issue may be divided into two heads i.e. issue of fact and
                             issue of law.

 4. Dated                    The award should be dated i.e. the date of making of the award should be mentioned
                             in the award.

 5. Mention of Place         Place of arbitration is important for the determination of rules applicable to
                             substance of dispute, and recourse against the award. The arbitral tribunal is under
                             obligation to state the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with Section
                             20. Place of arbitration refers to the jurisdiction of the Court of a particular city or
                             State.

 6. Clarity of Value         The arbitral tribunal may include in the sum for which award is made, interest up to
 and Interest                the date of award and also a direction regarding future interest.

 7. Cost of Arbitration      The award may also include decisions and directions of the arbitrator regarding the
                             cost of the arbitration.

 8. Delivery of copies       After the award is made, a signed copy should be delivered to each party for
                             appropriate action like implementation or recourse against arbitral award.


Types of Arbitral Awards
      1.   Interim award – It is an award made by a tribunal during the pendency of the matter. .
   2.      Additional award – Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party,
           may request, within thirty days from the receipt of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an
           additional arbitral award as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from the arbitral
           award. If the arbitral tribunal considers the request to be justified, it shall make the additional arbitral
           award within sixty days from the receipt of such request.
   3.      Settlement awards – With the agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use mediation,
           conciliation or other procedures at any time during the arbitral proceedings to encourage settlement.
           An award. If the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the proceedings and, if
           requested by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the settlement in the form
           of an arbitral award on agreed terms. .
   4.      Final award – An award which finally determines all the issues in a dispute.

CASE LAW
 Union of India v. Om Vajrakaya Construction Company (dated 20.12.2021) in OMP (COMM) 299/2021
 In this case, the High Court of Delhi held unlike the tribunal’s ability to award interest, the court’s ability
 to award costs within the meaning of section 31A is unrestricted, and any agreement between the parties
 that forbids the awarding of costs would be irrelevant unless they do so after a dispute has already
 arisen.




366
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                LESSON 10

 TIME LIMIT FOR ARBITRAL AWARD




The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings. The parties
may extend this period for making award for a further period not exceeding six months.
The parties to an arbitration agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of the
arbitral tribunal, agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track procedure.
The award under fast track procedure shall be made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral
tribunal enters upon. Section 29A(1) provides that the award in matters other than international commercial
arbitration shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a period of twelve months from the date of completion
of pleadings under section 23(4).
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration may be made as expeditiously as
possible and endeavour may be made to dispose off the matter within a period of twelve months from the date
of completion of pleadings under section 23(4).
Section 29A(2) states that if the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral tribunal
enters upon the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such amount of additional fees as
the parties may agree.
Under Section 29A(3) the parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section (1) for making
award for a further period not exceeding six months.
Section 29A(4) states that if the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) or the extended
period specified under sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless the Court has,
either prior to or after the expiry of the period so specified, extended the period:


                                                                                                              367
EP-JI&GL                                                        Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

Provided that while extending the period under this sub-section, if the Court finds that the proceedings have been
delayed for the reasons attributable to the arbitral tribunal, then, it may order reduction of fees of arbitrator(s)
by not exceeding five per cent for each month of such delay.
Provided further that where an application under sub-section (5) is pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall
continue till the disposal of the said application.
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before the fees is reduced.
As per Section 29A(5) the extension of period referred to in sub-section (4) may be on the application of any of
the parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed
by the Court.
Section 29A(6) provides that while extending the period referred to in sub-section (4), it shall be open to the
Court to substitute one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral
proceedings shall continue from the stage already reached and on the basis of the evidence and material
already on record, and the arbitrator(s) appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the said
evidence and material.
Section 29A(7) states that in the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral tribunal
thus reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously appointed arbitral tribunal.
Section 29A(8) provides that it shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon any of the
parties under this section.
As per Section 29A(9) an application filed under sub-section (5) shall be disposed of by the Court as expeditiously
as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date
of service of notice on the opposite party (Section 29A).

 CASE LAW
 Shapoorji Pallonji and Co. Pvt. Ltd. v. Jindal Thermal Power Ltd. OMP (MISC) (COMM) 512/2019
 It was stated that amended section 29A (1) of Arbitration and Conciliation Act shall have a retrospective
 effect with respect to the pending arbitration suits as on the date of amendment.

 FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
Section 29B(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the parties to an arbitration
agreement, may, at any stage either before or at the time of appointment of the arbitral tribunal, agree in writing
to have their dispute resolved by fast track procedure specified in sub- section (3).
Section 29B (2) states that the parties to the arbitration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of dispute by
fast track procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole arbitrator who shall be chosen
by the parties.
Section 29B (3) says that the arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure while conducting arbitration
proceedings under sub-section (1):

 Written pleadings without     (a) The arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written pleadings,
 oral hearing                  documents and submissions filed by the parties without any oral hearing;

 Further clarification         (b) The arbitral tribunal shall have power to call for any further information or
                               clarification from the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed
                               by them


368
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

 Oral hearing on request          (c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if the
                                  arbitral tribunal considers it necessary to have oral hearing for clarifying certain
                                  issues

 Procedural Discretion            (d) The arbitral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an
                                  oral hearing is held, and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for
                                  expeditious disposal of the case.

Section 29B(4) states that the award under this section shall be made within a period of six months from the
date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.
Section 29B(5) provides that if the award is not made within the period specified in sub-section (4), the provisions
of sub-sections (3) to (9) of section 29A shall apply to the proceedings.
Section 29B (6) says that the fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall be such
as may be agreed between the arbitrator and the parties.

 SETTLEMENT
Section 30(1) provides that it is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an arbitral tribunal
to encourage settlement of the dispute and, with the agreement of the parties; the arbitral tribunal may
use mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during the arbitral proceedings to encourage
settlement.
Under Section 30(2) if, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall
terminate the proceedings and, if requested by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record
the settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms.
As per Section 30(3) an arbitral award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with section 31 and shall
state that it is an arbitral award.
Section 30(4) states that an arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other
arbitral award on the substance of the dispute.

 CASE LAW
 State of Jharkhand v. Gitanjali Enterprises Arb. Appeal No. 09 of 2017
 It is stated that Section 73 forms part III of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and is only applicable to
 conciliation proceedings and will not have any effect on Section 30 of the Act.

 FORM AND CONTENTS OF ARBITRAL AWARD
As per section 31(1) an arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the members of the arbitral
tribunal.
Section 31(2) states that for the purposes of sub-section (1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator,
the signatures of the majority of all the members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the reason
for any omitted signature is stated.
Under Section 31 (3) the arbitral award shall state the reasons upon which it is based, unless-
    a.   the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or
    b.   the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30.


                                                                                                                   369
EP-JI&GL                                                        Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

Section 31(4) provides that the arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in
accordance with section 20 and the award shall be deemed to have been made at that place.
Section 31(5) says that after the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party.
Under Section 31(6) the arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim
arbitral award on any matter with respect to which it may make a final arbitral award.
Under Section 31(7)
   a.   Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the payment
        of money, the arbitral tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, at such
        rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part of the money, for the whole or any part of
        the period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which the award
        is made.
   b.   A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the award otherwise directs, carry interest
        at the rate of two per cent, higher than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, from
        the date of award to the date of payment.
Explanation -The expression “current rate of interest” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under
clause (b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978
As per Section 31(8) the cost of arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section 31A.

 CASE LAW
 R.P. Garg v. The Chief General Manager, Telecom Department & Ors., 2024 INSC 743 decided by Supreme
 Court on 10.09.2024
 Facts of the Case/Background
 The Arbitrator denied payment of such interest under a misplaced impression that the contract between
 the parties prohibited it. The executing Court affirmed the finding of the Arbitrator and rejected the prayer.
 However, allowing the appeal, the District Court held that the appellant will be entitled to post award interest.
 By the order impugned before Hon’ble Apex Court, the High Court allowed the revision and set aside the
 District Court order while holding that the contract between the parties did not permit grant of post award
 interest.
 Key Issue/Allegations
 Whether the appellant is entitled to post award interest on the sum awarded by the Arbitrator.
 Decision
 For the reasons to follow, while allowing the appeal the Apex Court have held that as this is a case arising
 out of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, by operation of Section 31(7)(b), the sum directed to be paid
 under the Arbitral Award shall carry interest. This is a first principle. A sum directed to be paid by an Arbitral
 Award must carry interest. In this view of the matter, we have restored the judgment of the District Court
 granting 18% interest from the date of the award to its realization.
 The interest granted by the First Appellate Court only related to post award period, and therefore, for this
 period, the agreement between the parties has no bearing. Section 31(7)(b) deals with grant of interest for
 post award period i.e., from the date of the award till its realization. The statutory scheme relating to grant of
 interest provided in Section 31(7) creates a distinction between interest payable before and after the award.
 So far as the interest before the passing of the award is concerned, it is regulated by Section 31(7)(a) of the


370
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                    LESSON 10

 Act which provides that the grant of interest shall be subject to the agreement between the parties. This is
 evident from the specific expression at the commencement of the sub-section which says “unless otherwise
 agreed by the parties”.
 So far as the entitlement of the post-award interest is concerned, sub-Section (b) of Section 31(7) provides
 that the sum directed to be paid by the Arbitral Tribunal shall carry interest. The rate of interest can be
 provided by the Arbitrator and in default the statutory prescription will apply. Clause (b) of Section 31(7) is
 therefore in contrast with clause (a) and is not subject to party autonomy. In other words, clause (b) does
 not give the parties the right to “contract out” interest for the post-award period. The expression ‘unless the
 award otherwise directs’ in Section 31(7)(b) relates to rate of interest and not entitlement of interest. The
 only distinction made by Section 31(7)(b) is that the rate of interest granted under the Award is to be given
 precedence over the statutorily prescribed rate.

 REGIME FOR COSTS
Section 31A (1) provides that in relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of the provisions
of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or arbitral tribunal, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall have the discretion to determine,
   (a)     whether costs are payable by one party to another;
   (b)     the amount of such costs; and
   (c)     when such costs are to be paid.
Explanation. - For the purpose of this sub-section, “costs” means reasonable costs relating to,
    (i)    the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts and witnesses;
   (ii)    legal fees and expenses;
   (iii)   any administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration; and
   (iv)    any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court proceedings and the arbitral award.
Under Section 31A (2) if the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of costs,
   (a)     the general rule is that the unsuccessful party will be ordered to pay the costs of the successful party; or
   (b)     the Court or arbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Section 31A (3) provides that in determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall have regard to all the
circumstances, including,
   (a)     the conduct of all the parties;
   (b)     whether a party has succeeded partly in the case;
   (c)     whether the party had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay in the disposal of the arbitral
           proceedings; and
   (d)     whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party and refused by the other party.
Under Section 31A (4) the Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including the order
that a party shall pay,
   (a)     a proportion of another party’s costs;
   (b)     a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;
   (c)     costs from or until a certain date only;


                                                                                                                   371
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

   (d)     costs incurred before proceedings have begun;
   (e)     costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;
   (f)     (f) costs relating only to a distinct part of the proceedings; and
   (g)     interest on costs from or until a certain date.
Section 31A (5) states that an agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of the costs of
the arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement is made after the dispute in question has arisen.

 Termination of Proceedings
As per section 32 (1) the arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final arbitral award or by an order of
the arbitral tribunal under sub-section (2).
Under section 32 (2) the arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of the arbitral proceedings
where,
   a.      the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the arbitral tribunal
           recognises a legitimate interest on his part in, obtaining a final settlement of the dispute,
   b.      the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or
      c.   the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other mason become
           unnecessary or impossible.
Section 32(3) says that the mandate of the arbitral tribunal terminates with the termination of the arbitral
proceedings. This is subject to the provisions of Sections 33 and 34(4) of the Act.

 CORRECTION AND INTERPRETATION OF AWARD; ADDITIONAL AWARD
Section 33(1) provides that within 30 days from the receipt of the arbitral award, unless another period of time
has been agreed upon by the parties
   a.      a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct any computation
           errors, any clerical or typographical errors or any other errors of a similar nature occurring in the
           award;
   b.      if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to
           give an interpretation of a specific point or part of the award.
Further Section 33 (2) states that if the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub-section (1) to be
justified, it shall make the correction or give the interpretation within thirty days from the receipt of the request
and the interpretation shall form part of the arbitral award.
Further Section 33 (3) states that the arbitral tribunal may correct any error of the type referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (1), on its own initiative, within thirty days from the date of the arbitral award.
Section 33 (4) provides that unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party may
request, within thirty days from the receipt of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an additional
arbitral award as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from the arbitral award.
Section 33 (5) provides that if the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub-section (4) to be
justified, it shall make the additional arbitral award within sixty days from the receipt of such request.
Under Section 33 (6) the arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make
a correction, give an interpretation or make an additional arbitral award under sub-section (2) or sub- section (5).
Section 33 (7) states that section 31 shall apply to a connection or interpretation of the arbitral award or to an
additional arbitral award made under this section.


372
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                     LESSON 10

 APPLICATION FOR SETTING ASIDE ARBITRAL AWARD
Section 34(1) provides that recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by an application
for setting aside such award in accordance with sub-section (2) and subsection (3).
Section 34 (2) states that an arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if, –
    a.     the party making the application establishes on the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal that, –
             i.    a party was under some incapacity, or
            ii.    the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it or,
                   failing any indication thereon, under the law for the time being in force; or
            iii.   the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator
                   or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or
            iv.    the arbitral award deals with a dispute not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
                   submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission
                   to arbitration: Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated
                   from those not so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which contains decisions on
                   matters not submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or
             v. the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
                agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this Part from
                which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with this
                Part; or
    b.     the Court finds that,
             i.    the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law for the
                   time being in force, or
            ii.    the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.
Explanation 1
For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the public policy of India, only if,
    (i)    the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of section 75
           or section 81 ; or
   (ii)    it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
   (iii)   it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2
For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian
law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.
As per Section 34(2A) an arbitral award arising out of arbitrations, other than international commercial
arbitrations, may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitiated by patent illegality
appearing on the face of the award:
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the law or
by re appreciation of evidence.
Section 34 (3) provides that an application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed
from the date on which the party making that application had received the arbitral award or, if a request
had been made under section 33, from the date on which that request had been disposed of by the arbitral
tribunal:


                                                                                                                   373
EP-JI&GL                                                            Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the
application within the said period of three months it may entertain the application within a further period of thirty
days, but not thereafter.
Under Section 34(4) on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Court may, where it is appropriate and
it is so requested by a party, adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the opinion
of arbitral tribunal will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the arbitral award.
As per Section 34(5) an application under this section shall be filed by a party only after issuing a prior notice
to the other party and such application shall be accompanied by an affidavit by the applicant endorsing
compliance with the said requirement.
Under Section 34(6) an application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously, and in any event,
within a period of one year from the date on which the notice referred to in sub-section (5) is served upon the
other party.

 CASE LAWS
 State of Maharashtra v. Hindustan Construction Co. AIR 2010 SC 1299
 It was decided that if any ground not initially raised cannot be raised after the expiry of prescribed period
 given under section 34.
 TPI Ltd. v. Union of India, 2001(3) RAJ 70 (Del)
 The Court upheld the constitutionality of Section 34 stating that matter in dispute is not related to judicial
 review, challenge to arbitral award can be made only on the grounds specified by the legislature and not
 just on merits.
 Oil and Natural Gas Corpn. Ltd v. Saw Pipes Ltd AIR 2003 SC 262
 It was decided that ‘public policy’ should not be interpreted in narrow terms with respect to just the Indian
 Laws, it should be interpreted in a way that aims at broadening public interest and fairness.
 “Public policy, however, is not the policy of a particular government. It connotes some matter which concerns
 the public good and the public interest. The concept of what is for the public good or in the public interest
 or what would be injurious or harmful to the public good or the public interest has varied from time to time.
 It must be held that the enforcement of a foreign award would be refused on the ground that it is contrary to
 public policy if such enforcement would be contrary to (i) fundamental policy of Indian law; or (ii) the interests
 of India; or (iii) justice or morality. If the arbitral tribunal does not dispense justice, a Court would be well within
 its right in upholding the challenge to the award on the ground that it is in conflict with the public policy of
 India.”

 FINALITY OF ARBITRAL AWARDS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 35 provides that an arbitral award made under the Act is final and binding on the parties and persons
claiming under them respectively.

 Enforcement
Section 36(1) provides that where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award under section
34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), such award shall be enforced in accordance
with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in the same manner as if it were a decree of the
court.

374
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

Further Section 36(2) provides that where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the
Court under section 34, the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that award unenforceable,
unless the Court grants an order of stay of the operation of the said arbitral award in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (3), on a separate application made for that purpose.

Section 36(3) states that upon filing of an application under sub-section (2) for stay of the operation of the
arbitral award, the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such
award for reasons to be recorded in writing:

Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of stay in the case of an arbitral
award for payment of money, have due regard to the provisions for grant of stay of a money decree under the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.

The below proviso has been added by the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2021:

Provided further that where the Court is satisfied that a Prima facie case is made out that,—

   (a)   the arbitration agreement or contract which is the basis of the award; or

   (b)   the making of the award, was induced or effected by fraud or corruption, it shall stay the award
         unconditionally pending disposal of the challenge under section 34 to the award.

Explanation. – For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply to all court
cases arising out of or in relation to arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the arbitral or court proceedings
were commenced prior to or after the commencement of the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
2015.

 APPEALABLE ORDERS
Section 37(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to the Court authorised by law to hear appeals
from original decrees of the Court passing the order, namely,

   (a)   refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under section 8;

   (b)   granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9;

   (c)   setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34.

Further Section 37(2) provides that appeal shall also lie to a court from an order of the arbitral tribunal –

   (a)   accepting the plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 16; or

   (b)   granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17.

Section 37(3) states that no second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but
nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

 CASE LAWS
 Augmont Gold Pvt Ltd. v. One97 Communication Limited (dated 27.09.202021) ARB A. (COMM.) 30/2021
 It was held that no appeal shall lie under section 37 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 with court if
 the order of the tribunal has been made under section 17 of the act owing its discretionary and final nature.



                                                                                                                 375
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


 Punjab State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd. v. Ramesh Kumar and Co. (dated 13.11.2021) (civil appeal no.
 6832/2021)
 It was observed that power of High Court while exercising its jurisdiction under section 37 is different from
 that of First Appellate Court against an order under section 34 Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
 State of Chhattisgarh v. M/s. Sal Udyog Private Ltd. (dated 08.11.2021) Civil Appeal no. 4353 of 2010)
 It was held that “patent illegality” serves as a ground available under section of 37 of the Arbitration and
 Conciliation Act, 1996 and can be raised as a fresh ground under an appeal. A party is not barred from
 raising a fresh ground of challenge in an appeal.

 Deposits
As per Section 38(1) the arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the deposit or supplementary deposit, as the case
may be, as an advance for the costs referred to in sub-section (8) of section 31, which it expects will be incurred
in respect of the claim submitted to it:
Provided that where, apart from the claim, a counter-claim has been submitted to the arbitral tribunal, it may fix
separate amount of deposit for the claim and counterclaim.
Further Section 38 (2) states that the deposit referred to in sub-section (1) shall be payable in equal shares by
the parties:
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the other party may pay that share:
Provided further that where the other party also does not pay the aforesaid share in respect of the claim or the
counter-claim, the arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the arbitral proceedings in respect of such claim
or counter-claim, as the case may be.
Section 38 (3) provides that upon termination of the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral tribunal shall render an
accounting to the parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or
parties, as the case may be.

 Lien on Arbitral Award and Deposits as to Costs
Section 39(1) provides that subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and to any provision to the contrary in the
arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall have a lien on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the
arbitration.
Section 39 (2) states that if in any case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its award except on payment of the
costs demanded by it, the Court may, on an application in this behalf, order that the arbitral tribunal shall deliver
the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court by the applicant of the costs demanded, and shall,
after such inquiry, if any, as it thinks fit, further order that out of the money so paid into Court there shall be paid
to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasonable and that the balance of
the money, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant.
As per Section 39 (3) an application under sub-section (2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded
have been fixed by written agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal and the arbitral tribunal shall be
entitled to appear and he heard on any such application.
Under Section 39 (4) the Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where
any question arises respecting such costs and the arbitral award contains no sufficient provision concerning
them.



376
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                  LESSON 10

 Arbitration Agreement not to be Discharged by Death of Party Thereto
Section 40 (1) provides that an arbitration agreement shall not be discharged by the death of any party thereto
either as respects the deceased or, as respects any other party, but shall in such event be enforceable by or
against the legal representative of the deceased.
Section 40 (2) states that the mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by
whom he was appointed.
As per Section 40 (3) nothing in this section shall affect the operation or any law by virtue of which any right of
action is extinguished by the death of a person.

 Provisions in case of insolvency
As per Section 41(1) where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an insolvent is a party that any dispute
arising there out or in connection therewith shall be submitted to arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver
adopts the contract, be enforceable by or against him so far as it relates to any such dispute.
Further, Section 41 (2) states that where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent had, before the
commencement of the insolvency proceedings, become a party to an arbitration agreement, and any matter
to which the agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or for the purposes of, the
insolvency proceedings, then, if the case is one to which sub-section (1) does not apply, any other party or the
receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order directing
that the matter in question shall be submitted to arbitration in accordance with the arbitration agreement, and
the judicial authority may, if it is of opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, the matter
ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order accordingly.
As per Section 41 (3) the expression “receiver” includes an Official Assignee.

 Jurisdiction
Section 42 provides that notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for the
time being in force, where with respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has been
made in a Court, that Court alone shall have jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent
applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no
other Court.

 Confidentiality of information
Section 42A provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the
arbitrator, the arbitral institution and the parties to the arbitration agreement shall maintain confidentiality of
all arbitral proceedings except award where its disclosure is necessary for the purpose of implementation and
enforcement of award.

 Protection of action taken in good faith
According to Section 42B of the Act, no suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the arbitrator for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.”

 Limitations
Section 43(1) provides that the Limitation Act, 1963, shall apply to arbitrations as it applies to proceedings in
court.
Section 43(2) states that for the purposes of this section and the Limitation Act, 1963, an arbitration shall be
deemed to have commenced on the date referred in section 21.

                                                                                                                377
EP-JI&GL                                                        Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

As per Section 43 (3) where an arbitration agreement to submit future disputes to arbitration provides that any
claim to which the agreement applies shall be barred unless some steps to commence arbitral proceedings is
taken within a time fixed by the agreement, and a dispute arises to which the agreement applies, the Court, if it is
of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would otherwise be caused, and notwithstanding
that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case may require, extend the
time for such period as it thinks proper.
Section 43(4) states that where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the
commencement of the, arbitration and the date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the
time prescribed by the Limitation Act, 1963, for the commencement of the proceedings (including arbitration)
with respect to the dispute so submitted.

 ARBITRATION COUNCIL OF INDIA (ACI)
Part IA as inserted in the Amendment Act, 2019 deals with Arbitration Council of India. Section 43A of Act
contains definitions of terms used in Part IA such as Chairperson, Council and Member.

 Establishment and incorporation of Arbitration Council of India
Section 43B empowers the Central Government to establish the Arbitration Council of India to perform the
duties and discharge the functions under the Arbitration Conciliation Act, 1996.
The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common
seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable
and immovable, and to enter into contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. The head office of the
Council shall be at Delhi. The Council may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices
at other places in India.

 Composition of Council
According to Section 43C of the Act, the Council shall consist of the following Members, namely:–
   (a)   A person, who has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or, Chief Justice of a High Court or, a Judge
         of a High Court or an eminent person, having special knowledge and experience in the conduct or
         administration of arbitration, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief
         Justice of India – Chairperson;
   (b)   An eminent arbitration practitioner having substantial knowledge and experience in institutional
         arbitration, both domestic and international, to be nominated by the Central Government – Member;
   (c)   An eminent academician having experience in research and teaching in the field of arbitration and
         alternative dispute resolution laws, to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the
         Chairperson – Member;
   (d)   Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice or
         his representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary – Member, ex officio;
   (e)   Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance or his
         representative not below the rank of Joint Secretary – Member, ex officio;
   (f)   One representative of a recognised body of commerce and industry, chosen on rotational basis by the
         Central Government – Part-time Member; and
   (g)   Chief Executive Officer – Member-Secretary, ex officio.
The Chairperson and Members of the Council, other than ex officio Members, shall hold office as such, for a
term of three years from the date on which they enter upon their office.

378
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

Chairperson or Member, other than ex officio Member, shall not hold office after he has attained the age of
seventy years in the case of Chairperson and sixty-seven years in the case of Member.
The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and Members as may be prescribed
by the Central Government. The Part-time Member shall be entitled to such travelling and other allowances as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.

 Duties and functions of Council
Section 43D provides that it shall be the duty of the Council to take all such measures as may be necessary to
promote and encourage arbitration, mediation, conciliation or other alternative dispute resolution mechanism
and for that purpose to frame policy and guidelines for the establishment, operation and maintenance of uniform
professional standards in respect of all matters relating to arbitration.
For the purposes of performing the duties and discharging the functions under this Act, the Council may—
   (a)     frame policies governing the grading of arbitral institutions;
   (b)     recognise professional institutes providing accreditation of arbitrators;
   (c)     review the grading of arbitral institutions and arbitrators;
   (d)     hold training, workshops and courses in the area of arbitration in collaboration of law firms, law
           universities and arbitral institutes;
   (e)     frame, review and update norms to ensure satisfactory level of arbitration and conciliation;
   (f)     act as a forum for exchange of views and techniques to be adopted for creating a platform to make
           India a robust centre for domestic and international arbitration and conciliation;
   (g)     make recommendations to the Central Government on various measures to be adopted to make
           provision for easy resolution of commercial disputes;
   (h)     promote institutional arbitration by strengthening arbitral institutions;
    (i)    conduct examination and training on various subjects relating to arbitration and conciliation and award
           certificates thereof;
    ( j)   establish and maintain depository of arbitral awards made in India;
   (k)     make recommendations regarding personnel, training and infrastructure of arbitral institutions; and
    (l)    Such other functions as may be decided by the Central Government.

 Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council
Section 43E states that no act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of—
   (a)     any vacancy or any defect, in the constitution of the Council;
   (b)     any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Council; or
   (c)     any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.

 Resignation of Members
According to Section 43F, the Chairperson or the Full-time or Part-time Member may, by notice in writing, under
his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office. Provided that the Chairperson or the Full-time
Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold

                                                                                                               379
EP-JI&GL                                                          Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

office until the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.

 Removal of Member
Section 43G (1) provides that the Central Government may, remove a Member from his office if he –
   (a)   is an undischarged insolvent; or
   (b)   has engaged at any time (except Part-time Member), during his term of office, in any paid employment;
         or
   (c)   has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral
         turpitude; or
   (d)   has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a Member;
         or
   (e)   has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
   (f)   has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member.
According to Section 43G(2) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no Member shall be removed
from his office on the grounds specified in clauses (d) and (e) of that sub-section unless the Supreme Court, on a
reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by it in accordance
with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the Member, ought
on such ground or grounds to be removed.

 Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees thereof
Section 43H provides that the Council may, appoint such experts and constitute such Committees of experts as
it may consider necessary to discharge its functions on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the
regulations.

 General norms for grading of arbitral institutions
Section 43-I states that the Council shall make grading of arbitral institutions on the basis of criteria relating
to infrastructure, quality and calibre of arbitrators, performance and compliance of time limits for disposal of
domestic or international commercial arbitrations, in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.

 Norms for accreditation
43J. The qualifications, experience and norms for accreditation of arbitrators shall be such as may be specified
by the regulations.

 General norms applicable to Arbitrator
        the arbitrator shall be a person of general reputation of fairness, integrity and capable to apply
         objectivity in arriving at settlement of disputes;
        the arbitrator must be impartial and neutral and avoid entering into any financial business or other
         relationship that is likely to affect impartiality or might reasonably create an appearance of partiality or
         bias amongst the parties;
        the arbitrator should not involve in any legal proceeding and avoid any potential conflict connected
         with any dispute to be arbitrated by him;


380
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                LESSON 10

        the arbitrator should not have been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or economic
         offence;
        the arbitrator shall be conversant with the Constitution of India, principles of natural justice, equity,
         common and customary laws, commercial laws, labour laws, law of torts, making and enforcing the
         arbitral awards;
        the arbitrator should possess robust understanding of the domestic and international legal system on
         arbitration and international best practices in regard thereto;
        the arbitrator should be able to understand key elements of contractual obligations in civil and
         commercial disputes and be able to apply legal principles to a situation under dispute and also to
         apply judicial decisions on a given matter relating to arbitration; and
        the arbitrator should be capable of suggesting, recommending or writing a reasoned and enforceable
         arbitral award in any dispute which comes before him for adjudication.

 Depository of awards
According to the Section 43K the Council shall maintain an electronic depository of arbitral awards made in
India and such other records related thereto in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.

 Power to make regulations by Council
Section 43L empowers the Council may, in consultation with the Central Government, make regulations,
consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, for the discharge of its functions and
perform its duties under the Act.

 Chief Executive Officer
Section 43M states that there shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the Council, who shall be responsible for day-
to-day administration of the Council.
The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the Chief Executive Officer
shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions and perform such duties as may be specified by the
regulations.
There shall be a Secretariat to the Council consisting of such number of officers and employees as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
The qualifications, appointment and other terms and conditions of the service of the employees and other
officers of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.’

 ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS
Chapters I and II of Part II of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 deal with the enforcement of certain
foreign awards made under the New York Convention and the Geneva Convention, respectively. Sections 44
and 53 of the Act define the foreign awards as to mean an arbitral award on differences between persons
arising out of legal relationship, whether contractual or not, considered commercial under the law in force in
India made on or after the 11th day of October 1960 in the case of New York Convention awards and after the
28th day of July 1924 in the case of Geneva Convention awards.



                                                                                                              381
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

 CHAPTER I - NEW YORK CONVENTION AWARDS

 Awards Made under New York Convention or Geneva Convention
Any foreign award, whether made under New York Convention or Geneva Convention, which would be
enforceable under the respective provisions of the Act applicable to the award, have been treated as binding
for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may accordingly be relied on by any of
those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in India.

 Power of Judicial Authority to Refer Parties to Arbitration
Section 45 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a
judicial authority, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an agreement
referred to in section 44, shall, at the request of one of the parties or any person claiming through or under him,
refer the parties to arbitration, unless it prima facie finds that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative
or incapable of being performed.

 When Foreign Award Binding
Section 46 states that any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter shall be treated as
binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may accordingly be relied on by any
of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in India and any references in
this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall be construed as including references to relying on an award.

 Evidence
Section 47 (1) provides that the party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of the
application, produces before the court-
   a.       the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of the
            country in which it was made;
   b.       the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified thereof; and
      c.    such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the award is a foreign award.
Further Section 47 (2) states that if the award or agreement to be produced under sub-section (1) is in a foreign
language, the party seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English certified as correct
by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in such other
manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.
Explanation
In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High Court having original
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award if the same had been the
subject matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court having jurisdiction to
hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such High Court.

 Conditions for Enforcement of Foreign Awards
Section 48 of the Act enumerates the conditions for enforcement of foreign awards and provides that the party,
against whom the award is invoked, may use one or more of the following grounds for the purpose of opposing
enforcement of a foreign award, namely, –
      (i)   the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, under
            some incapacity, or the said agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected
            it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the country where the award was made; or


382
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

   (ii)    the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment of the
           arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or
   (iii)   the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not failing within the terms of the submission
           to arbitration, or it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to arbitration:
           Provided that, if the decisions on matter submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not so
           submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may be
           enforced; or
   (iv)    the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
           agreement of the parties, or, failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the country
           where the arbitration took place; or
   (v)     the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a
           competent authority of the country in which. or under the law of which, that award was made; or
Enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the Court finds that:
    (i)    the subject-matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India; or
   (ii)    the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India.
Explanation 1
For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the public policy of India, only
if,
    (i)    the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of section 75
           or section 81; or
   (ii)    it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
   (iii)   it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2
For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian
law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.

 Enforcement of Foreign Awards
As per section 49 where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is enforceable, the award is executable as
a decree of the Court.

 Appealable Orders
Section 50(1) provides that “notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an
appeal shall lie from the order refusing to-
    a.     refer the parties to arbitration under section 45;
    b.     enforce a foreign award under section 48,
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.
Section 50(2) prohibits a second appeal from an order passed in appeal. However, any right of the parties to
appeal to the Supreme Court is not affected or taken away by virtue of these provisions.



                                                                                                                  383
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

 CHAPTER II: GENEVA CONVENTION AWARDS

 Power of Judicial Authority to Refer Parties to Arbitration
Section 54 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Part I of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 or in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a judicial authority, on being seized of a dispute regarding a
contract made between persons to whom section 53 applies and including an arbitration agreement, whether
referring to present or future differences, which is valid under that section and capable of being carried into
effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them or any person claiming through or under him to
the decision of the arbitrators and such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial authority in
case the agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed or becomes inoperative.

 Foreign Awards when Binding
Section 55 provides that any foreign award which would be enforceable under this Chapter shall be treated
as binding for all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and may accordingly be relied on
by any of those persons by way of defence, set off or otherwise in any legal proceedings in India and any
references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall be construed as including references to relying on
an award.

 Evidence
Section 56(1) provides that the party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of
application produce before the Court-

   a.      the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of the
           country in which it was made;

   b.      evidence proving that the award has become final; and

      c.   such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mentioned in clauses (a) and (c) of
           sub- section (1) of section 57 are satisfied.

Further Section 56(2) provides that where any document requiring to be produced under sub- section (1) is in a
foreign language, the party seeking to enforce the award shall produce a translation into English certified as
correct by a diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party belongs or certified as correct in
such other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.

Explanation 1

In this section and all the following sections of this Chapter, “Court” means the principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the award if the same had been the subject- matter of a suit, but does not
include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes.

Explanation 2

In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High Court having original
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the arbitral award if the same had been the
subject matter of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the High Court having jurisdiction to
hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such High Court.


384
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                  LESSON 10

 Conditions for Enforcement of Foreign Awards
Sub-section (1) of section 57 provides that in order that a foreign award may be enforceable under the Act, it
shall be necessary that,

 The award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under the law applicable
 thereto;


 The subject-matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India;


 The award has been made by the arbitral tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration or constituted
 in the manner agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law governing the arbitral procedure;


 The award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it will not be
 considered as such if it is open to opposition or appeal or if it is proved that any proceedings for the purpose
 of contesting the validity of the award are pending;


 The enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or the law of India.

Explanation 1
For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award is in conflict with the public policy of India, only
if,
    (i)    the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation of section 75
           or section 81; or
   (ii)    it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or
   (iii)   it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.
Explanation 2
For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian
law shall not entail a review on the merits of the dispute.
Further sub-section (2) provides that even if the conditions laid down in sub-section (1) are fulfilled, enforcement
of the award shall be refused if the Court is satisfied that,
    a.     the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made;
    b.     the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the arbitration proceedings
           in sufficient time to enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal incapacity, he was not
           properly represented;
    c.     the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms of the
           submission to arbitration or that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to
           arbitration:
Provided that if the award has not covered all the differences submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the Court may,
if it thinks fit, postpone such enforcement or grant it subject to such guarantee as the Court may decide.

As per sub-section (3) if the party against whom the award has been made proves that under the law governing
the arbitration procedure there is a ground, other than the grounds referred to in clauses (a) and of sub-section

                                                                                                                385
EP-JI&GL                                                           Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

(1) and clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) entitling him to contest the validity of the award, the Court may, if
it thinks fit, either refuse enforcement of the award or adjourn the consideration thereof, giving such party a
reasonable time within which to have the award annulled by the competent tribunal.

 Enforcement of Foreign Awards
Section 58 provides that where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is enforceable under this Chapter,
the award shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court.

 Appealable Orders
Sub-section (1) of section 59 provides that an appeal shall lie from the order refusing,
   a.   to refer the parties to arbitration under section 54; and
   b.   to enforce a foreign award under section 57, to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such
        order.
Further, sub-section (2) provides that no second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this
section, but nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.

 CONCILIATION
Conciliation is an informal process in which the conciliator (the third party) tries to bring the disputants to
agreement. He does this by lowering tensions, improving communications, interpreting issues, providing
technical assistance, exploring potential solutions and bringing about a negotiated settlement. Mediation is
a structured process in which the mediator assists the disputants to reach a negotiated settlement of their
differences. Mediation is usually a voluntary process that results in a signed agreement which defines the
future behaviour of the parties. The mediator uses a variety of skills and techniques to help the parties reach
the settlement, but is not empowered to render a decision.
Basically, these processes can be successful only if the personality of the conciliator or the mediator is such
that he is able to induce the parties to come to a settlement. The Act gives a formal recognition to conciliation
in India. Conciliation forces earlier and greater hold of the case. It can succeed only if the parties are willing
to re-adjust. According to current thinking conciliation is not an alternative to arbitration or litigation, but rather
complements arbitration or litigation.

 Application and Scope
Section 61(1) provides that save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force and unless the
parties have otherwise agreed, Part III of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall apply to conciliation
of disputes arising out of legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to all proceedings relating thereto.
As per Section 61 (2), Part III of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall not apply where by virtue of any
law for the time being in force certain disputes may not be submitted to conciliation.

 COMMENCEMENT OF CONCILIATION PROCEEDINGS
Sub-section (1) of section 62 provides that the party initiating conciliation shall send to the other party a written
invitation to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying the subject of the dispute.
Sub-section (2) states that Conciliation proceedings shall commence when the other party accepts in writing
the invitation to conciliate.
Further sub-section (3) states that if the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings.
Sub-section (4) provides that if the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from
the date on which he sends the invitation, or within such other period of time as specified in the invitation, he

386
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                   LESSON 10

may elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliate and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing
the other party accordingly.

 Number of Conciliators




There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there shall be two or three conciliators.
Where there is more than one conciliator, they ought, as a general rule, to act jointly.

 Appointment of Conciliators
Sub-section (1) of section 64 provides that subject to sub-section (2),
    a.   in conciliation proceedings with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the name of a sole conciliator;
    b.   in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator;
    c.   in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator and the
         parties may agree on the name of the third conciliator who shall act as the presiding conciliator.
Further sub-section (2) provides that parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institution or person in
connection with the appointment of conciliators, and in particular,-
    a.   a party may respect such an institution or person to recommend the names of suitable individuals to act
         as conciliator, or
    b.   the parties may agree that the appointment of one or more conciliators be made directly by such an
         institution or person: Provided that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the
         institution or person shall have regard to such considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of
         an independent and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or third conciliator, shall take into
         account the advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the
         parties.

 Submission of Statements to Conciliator
Sub-section (1) of section 65 provides that the conciliator, upon his appointment, may request each party to
submit to him a brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute and the points at issue. Each
party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party.
Further sub-section (2) provides that the conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written
statement of his position and the facts and grounds in support thereof, supplemented by any documents and
other evidence that such party deems appropriate. The party shall send a copy of such statement, documents
and other evidence to the other party.

                                                                                                                 387
EP-JI&GL                                                         Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

Sub-section (3) states that at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to
submit to him such additional information as he deems appropriate.
Explanation
In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term conciliator” applies to a sole conciliator, two
or, three conciliators, as the case may be.

 Conciliator not Bound by Certain Enactments
Section 66 provides that the conciliator is not bound by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872.

 Role of Conciliator
Sub-section (1) of section 67 provides that the conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial
manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute.
Further Sub-section (2) provides that the conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and
justice, giving consideration to, among other things, the rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of the
trade concerned and the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including any previous business practices
between the parties.
As per sub-section (3) the conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he considers
appropriate, taking into account the circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may express, including
any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral statements, and the need for a speedy settlement of the
dispute.
Sub-section (4) states that the conciliator may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals
for a settlement of the dispute. Such proposals need not be in writing and need not be accompanied by a
statement of the reasons therefor.

 Administrative Assistance
Section 68 provides that in order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the parties, or the
conciliator with the consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a suitable institution or
person.

 Communication between Conciliator and Parties
Sub-section (1) of section 69 provides that the conciliator may invite the parties to meet him or may communicate
with them orally or in writing. He may meet or communicate with the parties together or with each of them
separately.
Further sub-section (2) states that unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the
conciliator are to be held, such place shall be determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the parties,
having regard to the circumstances of the conciliation proceedings.

 Disclosure of Information
Section 70 provides that when the conciliator receives factual information concerning the dispute from a party,
he shall disclose the substance of that information to the other party in order that the other party may have the
opportunity to present any explanation which he considers appropriate:
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator, subject to a specific condition that it be kept
confidential, the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the other party.

388
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                  LESSON 10

 Co-operation of Parties with Conciliator
Section 71 provides that the parties shall in good faith co-operate with the conciliator and, in particular, shall
endeavour to comply with requests by the conciliator to submit written materials, provide evidence and attend
meetings.

 Suggestions by Parties for Settlement of Dispute
Section 72 provides that each party may, on his own initiative or at the invitation of the conciliator, submit to the
conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute.

 Settlement Agreement
Sub-section (1) of section 73 provides that when it appears to the conciliator that there exist elements of a
settlement which may be acceptable to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement and
submit them to the parties for their observations. After receiving the observations of the parties, the conciliator
may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such observations.
Further sub-section (2) provides that if the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may
draw up and sign a written settlement agreement. If requested by the parties, the conciliator may draw up, or
assist the parties in drawing up, the settlement agreement.
Sub-section (3) states that when the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be, final and binding on the
parties and persons claiming under them respectively.
As per sub-section (4) the conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy thereof to
each of the parties.

 Status and Effect of Settlement Agreement
Section 74 provides that the settlement agreement shall have the same status and effect as if it is an arbitral
award on agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by an arbitral tribunal under section 30.

 Confidentiality
Section 75 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time bring in force,
the conciliator and the parties shall keep confidential all matters relating to the conciliation proceedings.
Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement agreement, except where its disclosure is necessary for
purposes of implementation and enforcement.

 TERMINATION OF CONCILIATION PROCEEDINGS
The conciliation proceedings shall be terminated,
   (a)   by the signing of the settlement agreement by the parties, on the date of the agreement; or
   (b)   by a written declaration of the conciliator, after consultation with the parties, to the effect that further
         efforts at conciliation are no longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or
   (c)   by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the effect that the conciliation
         proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration; or
   (d)   by a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the effect that
         the conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration.
By a written declaration of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the effect that the
conciliation proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration.


                                                                                                                389
EP-JI&GL                                                          Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

 Resort to Arbitral or Judicial Proceedings
Section 77 provides that the parties shall not initiate, during the conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial
proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the subject- matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a
party may initiate arbitral or judicial proceedings where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for
preserving his rights.

 Costs
Sub-section (1) of section 78 states that upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix
the costs of the conciliation and give written notice thereof to the parties.

Further, sub-section (2) states that for the purpose of sub-section (1), “costs” means reasonable costs relating to,

   a.      the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witnesses requested by the conciliator, with the consent of
           the parties;
   b.      any expert advice requested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties;

      c.   any assistance provided pursuant to clause (b) of sub- section (2) of section 64 and section 68;

   d.      any other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings and the settlement
           agreement.

As per sub-section (3) the costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement provides
for a different apportionment. All other expenses incurred by a party shall be borne by that party.

 Deposits
Sub-section (1) of section 79 states that the conciliator may direct each party to deposit an equal amount as an
advance for the costs referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred.

Further, sub-section (2) states that during the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct
supplementary deposits in an equal amount from each party.

As per sub-section (3) if the required deposits under sub-sections (1) and (2) are not paid in full by both parties
within thirty days, the conciliator may suspend the proceedings or may make a written declaration of termination
of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of that declaration.

Sub-sections (4) provide that upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall render an
accounting to the parties of the deposits received and shall return any unexpended balance to the parties.

 ROLE OF CONCILIATOR IN OTHER PROCEEDINGS




390
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                     LESSON 10

 Admissibility of Evidence in other Proceedings
Section 81 provides that the parties shall not rely on or introduce as evidence in arbitral or judicial proceedings,
whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispute that is the subject of the conciliation proceedings,
    a.   views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a possible settlement of the
         dispute;
    b.   admissions made by the other party in the course, of the conciliation proceedings;
    c.   proposals made by the conciliator;
    d.   the fact that the other party had indicated his willingness to accept a proposal for settlement made by
         the conciliator.

 Removal of Difficulties
Sub-section (1) of section 83 provides that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement
of this Act.
Further sub-section (2) provides that every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

 Power to make Rules
Sub-section (1) of section 84 provides that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Further sub-section (2) provides that every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be, after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.

 MEDIATION
The adversarial method of dispute resolution is one in which the opposing claims of parties are presented to
a neutral third party for resolution. As opposed to the adversarial mode of dispute resolution, non-adversarial
Alternate Dispute Resolution mechanisms like mediation are informal, friendly to people, and simpler. They also
enable the parties to communicate with each another about the issues driving their conflict, identify their shared
interests, and concentrate on coming to a resolution on their own. Such non-adversarial conflict settlement
techniques aid in the parties’ time and financial savings.

 Definition and Meaning
According to the Civil Procedure ADR and Mediation Rules, 2003 - “Mediation” means the process by which a
mediator appointed by the parties or by the Court, as the case may be, mediates the disputes between them
by applying the provisions of the Mediation Rules contained in Part-II, and in particular by facilitating discussion


                                                                                                                   391
EP-JI&GL                                                        Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

between the parties directly or by communicating with each other through the mediator, by assisting the parties
in identifying the issues, reducing misunderstandings, clarifying priorities, exploring areas of compromise,
generating options in an attempt to solve the dispute and emphasizing that it is their own responsibility for
making decisions which affect them.
According to Section 4 of Mediation Bill, 2021 - Mediation shall be a process, whether referred to by the expression
mediation, pre-litigation mediation, online mediation, community mediation, conciliation or an expression of
similar import, whereby party or parties, request a third person referred to as mediator or mediation service
provider to assist them in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of a dispute.
Mediation is a voluntary, party-centred and structured negotiation process where a neutral third party assists
the parties in amicably resolving their dispute by using specialized communication and negotiation techniques.
Mediation encourages the active and direct participation of the parties in the resolution of their dispute. Though
the mediator, advocates, and other participants also have active roles in mediation, the parties play the key role
in the mediation process.
Mediation in essence is an assisted negotiation process. Mediation addresses both the factual/ legal issues
and the underlying causes of a dispute. Thus, mediation is broadly focused on the facts, law, and underlying
interests of the parties, such as personal, business/commercial, family, social and community interests. The
goal of mediation is to find a mutually acceptable solution that adequately and legitimately satisfies the needs,
desires and interests of the parties. Mediation provides an efficient, effective, speedy, convenient and less
expensive process to resolve a dispute with dignity, mutual respect and civility.

 Types of Mediation




      1.   Court- Referred Mediation - It applies to cases pending in Court and which the Court would refer for
           mediation under Sec. 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The courts have mediation centres where
           cases are referred, and following a preliminary investigation, the cases are assigned to skilled and
           qualified mediators from the Mediation Centres’ Panel of Mediators.

392
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                LESSON 10

		Court Annexed Mediation - In Court-Annexed Mediation the mediation services are provided by the
  court as a part and parcel of the same judicial system as against Court-Referred Mediation, wherein the
  court merely refers the matter to a mediator.
    2.   Statutory/Mandatory Mediation - Some disputes, like those involving labour and family laws, are
         required by law to go through the mediation procedure. Mandatory mediation simply refers to the act
         of attempting mediation rather than requiring parties to resolve their problems through mediation.
    3.   Private Mediation - In private mediation, qualified mediators offer their services on a private, fee-for-
         service basis to the Court, to members of the public, to members of the commercial sector and also
         to the governmental sector to resolve disputes through mediation. Private mediation can be used in
         connection with disputes pending in Court and pre-litigation disputes.
    4.   Online Mediation - Online mediation including pre-litigation mediation may be conducted at any stage
         of mediation under this Act, with the written consent of the parties including by the use of electronic
         form or computer networks.

 Merits of Mediation
Mediation is :
    –    Quick and responsive.
    –    Economical.
    –    There is no extra cost.
    –    Harmonious settlement.
    –    Creating solutions and remedies.
    –    Confidential and informal.
    –    Parties controlling the proceedings.

 Mediation Act, 2023
Mediation Act, 2023 has received the assent of the Hon’ble President of India on the 14th September, 2023.
The object of this law inter alia is to promote and facilitate mediation, resolution of disputes, enforce mediated
settlement agreements, provide for a body for registration of mediators, to encourage community mediation
and to make online mediation as acceptable and cost effective process. The provisions of this law will come into
force on such date(s) as the Central Government will notify. The following sections of the Mediation Act, 2013
has come into force w.e.f. 9th October, 2023.
These sections are as follows:
Section 1: Short title, extent and commencement
This Act may be called the Mediation Act, 2023. It shall extend to the whole of India. It shall come into force on
such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Section 3: Definitions
The important definitions provided in section 3 inter alia is as under:
   (a)   “commercial dispute” means a dispute defined in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
         Commercial Courts Act, 2015;

                                                                                                              393
EP-JI&GL                                                             Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

  (b)       “community mediator” means a mediator for the purposes of conduct of community mediation under
            Chapter X;
   (c)      “Council” means the Mediation Council of India established under section 31;
  (e)       “court-annexed mediation” means mediation including pre-litigation mediation conducted at the
            mediation centres established by any court or tribunal;
   (f)      “institutional mediation” means mediation conducted under the aegis of a mediation service provider;
  (g)       “international mediation” means mediation undertaken under this Act and relates to a commercial
            dispute arising out of a legal relationship, contractual or otherwise, under any law for the time being in
            force in India, and where at least one of the parties, is-
             (i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resides in, any country other than India; or
             (ii)   a body corporate including a Limited Liability Partnership of any nature, with its place of business
                    outside India; or
            (iii)   an association or body of individuals whose place of business is outside India; or
            (iv) the Government of a foreign country;
   (h)      “mediation” includes a process, whether referred to by the expression mediation, pre-litigation mediation,
            online mediation, community mediation, conciliation or an expression of similar import, whereby parties
            attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a third person referred
            to as mediator, who does not have the authority to impose a settlement upon the parties to the dispute;
      (i)   “mediator” means a person who is appointed to be a mediator, by the parties or by a mediation service
            provider, to undertake mediation, and includes a person registered as mediator with the Council.
            Explanation.—Where more than one mediator is appointed for a mediation, reference to a mediator
            under this Act shall be a reference to all the mediators;
   ( j)     “mediation agreement” means a mediation agreement referred to in sub-section (1) of section 4;
   (k)      “mediation communication” means communication made, whether in electronic form or otherwise,
            through—
             (i) anything said or done;
             (ii)   any document; or
            (iii)   any information provided,
		 for the purposes of, or in relation to, or in the course of mediation, and includes a mediation agreement
   or a mediated settlement agreement;
   (l)      “mediation institute” means a body or organisation that provides training, continuous education and
            certification of mediators and carries out such other functions under this Act;
  (m)       “mediation service provider” means a mediation service provider referred to in sub-section (1) of section
            40;
   (n)      “mediated settlement agreement” means mediated settlement agreement referred to in sub-section (1)
            of section 19;
  (q)       “online mediation” means online mediation referred to in section 30;
   (u)      “pre-litigation mediation” means a process of undertaking mediation, as provided under section 5, for

394
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                 LESSON 10

         settlement of disputes prior to the filing of a suit or proceeding of civil or commercial nature in respect
         thereof, before a court or notified tribunal under sub-section (2) of section 5;
   (y)   “specified” means specified by regulations made by the Council under this Act.
Section 31 to Section 38 relating to Mediation Council of India
The Central Government shall, by notification, establish for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be known as
the Mediation Council of India to perform the duties and discharge the functions under this Act. The composition
of Council shall be in accordance with provisions provided under section 32 of the Mediation Act, 2023. Other
provisions inter alia relates to Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council, Resignation, Removal,
Appointment of experts and constitution of Committees, Secretariat and Chief Executive Officer of Council and
Duties and functions of Council.
Section 45 to 47 relating to Mediation Fund, Accounts and Audits & Power of Central Government to issue
directions
Section 45 provides for creation of “Mediation Fund” and prescribes the amounts that may be credited to this
fund.
Further, the accounts of the Council are to be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any
expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
In exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, the Council shall be bound by
directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it and the decision of the
Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.
Section 50 to 54 relating to certain Protection, power of making rules, regulations and power of removal of
difficulties
Section 50 provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government
or a State Government or any officer of such Government, or the Member or Officer or employee of the Council
or a mediator, mediation institutes, mediation service providers, which is done or is intended to be done in good
faith under Mediation Act, 2023 or the rules or regulations made thereunder. This provision can aid and promote
the effective implementation of this Law.
The power of making the rules has been given to the Central Government and the regulations can be made by
the Mediation Council. Notification, Rules and Regulation made under this law is to be laid before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, rule
or regulation or both Houses agree that the notification, rule or regulation should not be issued or made, the
notification, rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that notification, rule or regulation.
If case of any difficulty, the Central Government may make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty. However, no such order shall be
made under this section after the expiry of a period of five years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Section 56 and 57 dealing with effect of this law on pending proceedings and transitory provisions
This Act does not apply to, or in relation to, any mediation or conciliation commenced before the coming into

                                                                                                                395
EP-JI&GL                                                          Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

force of this Act. The rules in force governing the conduct of court-annexed mediation shall continue to apply
until regulations are made under section 15(1). However, the rules shall continue to apply in all court-annexed
mediation pending as on the date of coming into force of the regulations.

 Mediation under Various Laws
There are various laws that provides for mediation as dispute redressal mechanism. An inclusive list of laws
along with the related provisions covering the subject matter is provided below:
      1.   The Companies Act, 2013
   2.      Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
   3.      Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
   4.      Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 read with Section 89 of CPC
   5.      Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Development Act, 2006
   6.      Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Special Marriage Act, 1954
      7.   Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016
   8.      Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and the Commercial Courts (Pre- Institution Mediation and Settlement)
           Rules, 2018
   9.      The Consumer Protection Act, 2019


 CASE LAWS
 Salem Advocate Bar Association v. Union of India (UOI) (25.10.2002 - SC) : (2005) 6 SCC 344
 In this case, writ petitions were filed seeking to challenge Amendments made to the Code of Civil Procedure
 (CPC) by the Amendment Act 46 of 1999 and Amendment Act 22 of 2002 especially Section 89 of CPC.
 Supreme Court emphasised on the need to promote the alternative dispute mechanisms. It stated that -
 it is quite obvious that the reason why Section 89 has been inserted to try and see that all the cases which
 are filed in court need not necessarily be decided by the court itself. Keeping in mind the laws delay and
 the limited number of Judges which are available, it has now become imperative that resort should be had
 to Alternative Dispute Resolution Mechanism with a view to bring to an end litigation between the parties
 at an early date. The Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanism as contemplated by Section 89 is
 arbitration or conciliation or judicial settlement including settlement through Lok Adalat or mediation. Sub-
 section (2) of Section 89 refer to different acts in relation to arbitration, conciliation or settlement through Lok
 Adalat, but with regard to mediation Section 89(2)(d) provides that the parties shall follow the procedure as
 may be prescribed. Section 89(2)(d), therefore, contemplates appropriate rules being framed with regard to
 mediation.
 In certain countries of the world where ADR has been successful to the extent that over 90 per cent of the
 cases are settled out of court, there is a requirement that the parties to the suit must indicate the form of ADR
 which they would like to resort to during the pendency of the trial of the suit. If the parties agree to arbitration,
 then the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 will apply and that case will go outside the
 stream of the court but resorting to conciliation or judicial settlement or mediation with a view to settle the
 dispute would not ipso facto take the case outside the judicial system. All that this means is that effort has to
 be made to bring about an amicable settlement between the parties but if conciliation or mediation or judicial
 settlement is not possible, despite efforts being made, the case will ultimately go to trial.


396
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                LESSON 10

 Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. and Ors. v. Cherian Varkey Construction Co. (P) Ltd. and Ors. (26.07.2010
 - SC) : [2010 (8) SCC 24]
 In this case, question arose to whether the section 89 of Civil Procedure Code empowers the court to refer
 the parties to a suit to arbitration without the consent of both parties and scope of the said section. Court
 held that
 “If the parties are not agreeable for either arbitration or conciliation, both of which require consent of all
 parties, the court has to consider which of the other three ADR processes (Lok Adalat, Mediation and Judicial
 Settlement) which do not require the consent of parties for reference, is suitable and appropriate and refer
 the parties to such ADR process. If mediation process is not available (for want of a mediation centre or
 qualified mediators), necessarily the court will have to choose between reference to Lok Adalat or judicial
 settlement. If facility of mediation is available, then the choice becomes wider. It the suit is complicated or
 lengthy, mediation will be the recognized choice. If the suit is not complicated and the disputes are easily
 sortable or could be settled by applying clear cut legal principles, Lok Adalat will be the preferred choice. If
 the court feels that a suggestion or guidance by a Judge would be appropriate, it can refer it to another Judge
 for dispute resolution. The court has to use its discretion in choosing the ADR process judiciously, keeping in
 view the nature of disputes, interests of parties and expedition in dispute resolution.”

Arbitration v. Mediation
Since both options looks appealing to resolve business disputes, there is a need to distinguish between the two:
    1.   Mediation is when a neutral third party aims to assist the parties in arriving at a mutually agreeable
         solution whereas arbitration is like litigation which is outside the court and which results in an award
         like an order.
    2.   Mediation is more collaborative; arbitration is more adversarial.
    3.   The process of mediation is more informal than that of arbitration.
    4.   The outcome in mediation is controlled by the parties whereas in arbitration it is controlled by the
         arbitrator.
    5.   In mediation, the dispute may or may not be resolved whereas in arbitration it is always settled in either
         party’s favour.

 Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
There is a growing awareness that courts will not be in a position to bear the entire burden of justice system. A
very large number of disputes lend themselves to resolution by alternative modes such as arbitration, mediation,
conciliation, negotiation, etc. The ADR processes provide procedural flexibility save valuable time and money
and avoid the stress of a conventional trial.
There is, therefore, an urgent need to establish and promote ADR services for resolution of both domestic and
international disputes in India.
These services need to be nourished on sound conceptions, expertise in their implementation and comprehensive
and modern facilities. The International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution (ICADR) is a unique centre in
this part of the world that makes provision for promoting teaching and research in the field of ADR as also
for offering ADR services to parties not only in India but also to parties all over the world. The ICADR is a
Society registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860, it is an independent non-profit making organisation. It
maintains panels of independent experts in the implementation of ADR processes.


                                                                                                               397
EP-JI&GL                                                         Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation

 Areas in which ADR Works
Almost all disputes including commercial, civil, labour and family disputes, in respect of which the parties are
entitled to conclude a settlement, can be settled by an ADR procedure. ADR techniques have been proven
to work in the business environment, especially in respect of disputes involving joint ventures, construction
projects, partnership differences, intellectual property, personal injury, product liability, professional liability,
real estate, securities, contract interpretation and performance and insurance coverage.



                                               LESSON ROUND-UP

   l The purpose of Arbitration Act is to provide quick redressal to commercial disputes by private arbitration.

   l The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 aims at streamlining the process of arbitration and facilitating
       conciliation in business matters.
   l The Act has been divided into four parts. Part one deals with Arbitration; Part two deals with enforcement
       of certain Foreign Awards; Part three deals with conciliation; and Part four contains supplementary
       provisions.
   l The present Act is based on model law drafted by United Nations Commission on International Trade
       Laws (UNCITRAL), both on domestic arbitration as well as international commercial arbitration, to
       provide uniformity and certainty to both categories of cases.
   l The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters
       upon the reference.
   l The award under fast track procedure shall be made within a period of six months from the date the
       arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.
   l Conciliation is an informal process in which the conciliator (the third party) tries to bring the disputants
       to agreement. He does this by lowering tensions, improving communications, interpreting issues,
       providing technical assistance, exploring potential solutions and bringing about a negotiated
       settlement. Mediation is a structured process in which the mediator assists the disputants to reach a
       negotiated settlement of their differences.
   l Mediation is usually a voluntary process that results in a signed agreement which defines the future
       behaviour of the parties. The mediator uses a variety of skills and techniques to help the parties reach
       the settlement, but is not empowered to render a decision.
   l The award shall be made within a period of twelve months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters
       upon the reference.
   l The award under fast track procedure shall be made within a period of six months from the date the
       arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.
   l Conciliation is an informal process in which the conciliator (the third party) tries to bring the disputants
       to agreement. He does this by lowering tensions, improving communications, interpreting issues,
       providing technical assistance, exploring potential solutions and bringing about a negotiated
       settlement. Mediation is a structured process in which the mediator assists the disputants to reach a
       negotiated settlement of their differences.
   l Mediation is usually a voluntary process that results in a signed agreement which defines the future
       behaviour of the parties. The mediator uses a variety of skills and techniques to help the parties reach
       the settlement, but is not empowered to render a decision.


398
Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation                                                LESSON 10

    l The Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) processes provide procedural flexibility save valuable time
        and money and avoid the stress of a conventional trial. The International Centre for Alternative Dispute
        Resolution (ICADR) is a unique centre in this part of the world that makes provision for promoting
        teaching and research in the field of ADR as also for offering ADR services to parties not only in India
        but also to parties all over the world.
    l   Supreme Court has made a Mediating Training Manual with regards to the benefits and/or suitability
        of ADR methods of dispute resolution. It aims at facilitating and help guiding mediation in growing
        not as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism, but as another effective mode of disputes
        resolution.


                                                          GLOSSARY

 Arbitration: Arbitration means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent arbitral institution.

 Arbitral Tribunal: Arbitral tribunal means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators.

 Arbitration agreement: Arbitration agreement means an agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration
 all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them in respect of a defined legal
 relationship, whether contractual or not. It may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the
 form of a separate agreement.

 International Commercial Arbitration: International commercial arbitration means an arbitration relating to
 disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under the
 law in force in India.

 Legal Representative: Legal representative means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased
 person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased, and, where a party acts
 in a representative character, the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so acting.

 Conciliation: Conciliation is an informal process in which the conciliator (the third party) tries to bring the
 disputants to agreement. He does this by lowering tensions, improving communications, interpreting issues,
 providing technical assistance, exploring potential solutions and bringing about a negotiated settlement.

 Mediation: Mediation is a voluntary, party-centred and structured negotiation process where a neutral
 third party assists the parties in amicably resolving their dispute by using specialized communication and
 negotiation techniques.


                                                    TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
    1. What are the grounds to challenge the appointment of an Arbitrator under the Arbitration and
       Conciliation Act, 1996? Discuss.
   2. What do you understand by an arbitration agreement?
   3. What are the grounds for setting aside of an arbitral award under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
      1996?



                                                                                                              399
EP-JI&GL                                                     Law relating to Arbitration, Mediation and Conciliation


  4. What are the provisions relating to settlement of the dispute under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
     1996?
  5. Part I of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 applicable only to all the arbitrations which take
     place within the territory of India. Comment.


                                       LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l Bare Act of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

   l Bare Act of Mediation Act, 2023

   l Alternative Disputes Resolution Rules, 2003

   l P.C. Markanda, LAW RELATING TO ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION, pp.1-8, (8th Edn. 2013) LexisNexis

   l Mediation and Conciliation Rules of Delhi High Court

   l Mediation Training Manual of India of Supreme Court



                      OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1978/3/a1996-26.pdf

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/19637/1/A2023-32.pdf

   l https://main.sci.gov.in/pdf/mediation/MT%20MANUAL%20OF%20INDIA.pdf




400
Right to Information Law
                                                                                                Lesson
                                                                                                  LESSON 11

Right to Information Law
                                                                                                  11
 KEY CONCEPTS
 n   Public Authority n Information n Request for obtaining Information n Chief Information Commissioner
 n Information Commissioners n Competent Authority




 Learning Objectives
 To understand:
         Citizen’s Right to Information
         Procedure for obtaining information under Right to Information Act (RTI Act)
         Authorities under RTI Act and their roles and responsibilities
         Information exempted from disclosure
         Powers of Information commission(s)
         Appellate authorities under RTI Act
         Role of Central/State Government



 Lesson Outline
         Introduction                                           Powers of Information Commissions
         Right to Know                                          Appellate Authorities
         The Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005               Penalties
         Salient features of the Act                            Jurisdiction of Courts
         Definitions                                            Lesson Round-Up
         Obligations of Public Authority                        Glossary
         Designation of Public Information Officers             Test Yourself
          (PIO)
                                                                 List of Further Readings and References
         Request for obtaining Information
         Duties of a PIO
         Exemption from disclosure
         Partial disclosure allowed
         Who is excluded?
         Information Commissions

                                                                                                            401
EP-JI&GL                                                                                        Right to Information Law


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 The Right to Information Act, 2005 is an Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to
 information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order
 to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution
 of a Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions and for matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l   The Right to Information Act, 2005

 INTRODUCTION
Throughout the world, RTI is seen by many as the key to strengthening participatory democracy and ensuring
more people-centred development. Nearly 70 countries around the world have now adopted comprehensive
Freedom of Information Acts to facilitate access to records held by government bodies and another fifty have
pending efforts. In India also, the Government enacted Right to Information (RTI) Act in 2005 which came into
force w.e.f. October 12, 2005.

 RIGHT TO KNOW
Before dwelling on the RTI Act, 2005, mention should be made that case Reliance Petrochemicals Limited v.
Indian Express Newspapers, 1989 AIR 90 in which the Supreme Court read into Article 21 the right to know.
The Supreme Court held that right to know is a necessary ingredient of participatory democracy. In view of
transnational developments when distances are shrinking, international communities are coming together for
cooperation in various spheres and they are moving towards global perspective in various fields including
Human Rights, the expression “liberty” must receive an expanded meaning. The expression cannot be limited
to mere absence of bodily restraint. It is wide enough to expand to full range of rights including right to hold
a particular opinion and right to sustain and nurture that opinion. For sustaining and nurturing that opinion it
becomes necessary to receive information. Article 21 confers on all persons a right to know which include a right
to receive information.
It may be pointed out that the right to impart and receive information is a species of the right to freedom of
speech and expression. Article 19(1) (a) of our Constitution guarantees to all citizens freedom of speech and
expression. At the same time, Article 19(2) permits the State to make any law in so far as such law imposes
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights conferred by Article 19(1) (a) of the Constitution in the interest
of sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency, morality, contempt of court, defamation and incitement of offence.
Thus, a citizen has a right to receive information and that right is derived from the concept of freedom of
speech and expression comprised in Article 19(1) (a). The State is not only under an obligation to respect the
Fundamental Rights of the citizens, but it is equally under an obligation to ensure conditions under which these
rights can meaningfully and effectively be enjoyed by one and all.
Right to freedom of speech and expression in Article 19 (1)(a) carries with it the right to propagate and circulate
one’s views and opinions subject to reasonable restrictions as mentioned above. The prerequisite for enjoying
this right is knowledge and information. Information adds something “new to our awareness and removes
vagueness of our ideas”.

402
Right to Information Law                                                                                   LESSON 11

 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (RTI) ACT, 2005
The Right to Information Act, 2005 provides an effective framework for effectuating the right to information recognized
under Article 19 of the Constitution. It may be pointed out that the Right to Information Bill was passed by the Lok
Sabha on May 11, 2005 and by the Rajya Sabha on May 12, 2005 and received the assent of the President on June
15, 2005. The Act considered as watershed legislation, is the most significant milestone in the history of Right to
Information movement in India allowing transparency and autonomy and access to accountability.
 SALIENT FEATURES OF THE ACT




 Objective
As stated above, the RTI Act confers on all citizens a right to information. The Act provides for setting out the
practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information held by public authorities to
promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority.


 CASE LAW
 In the case of Anjali Bhardwaj and Others Vs. Union of India and Others in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 436 of 2018
 Judgement dated February 15, 2019 the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Paragraph 18, 19 and 68 observed
 that there is a definite link between right to information and good governance. In fact, the RTI Act itself lays
 emphasis on good governance and recognises that it is one of the objective which the said Act seeks to achieve.
 The RTI Act would reveal that four major elements/objectives required to ensure good governance are:
      (i)   greater transparency in functioning of public authorities;


                                                                                                                  403
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Right to Information Law


      (ii)     informed citizenry for promotion of partnership between citizens and the Government in decision
               making process;
      (iii)    improvement in accountability and performance of the Government; and
      (iv)     reduction in corruption in the Government departments.

The right to information, therefore, is not only a constitutional right of the citizens but there is now a legislation
in the form of RTI Act which provides a legal regime for people to exercise their fundamental right to information
and to access information from public authorities. The very preamble of the Act captures the importance of this
democratic right which reads as “democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information
which are vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their instrumentalities
accountable to the governed.”
This Act is enacted not only to sub-serve and ensure freedom of speech. On proper implementation, it has the
potential to bring about good governance which is an integral part of any vibrant democracy. Attaining good
governance is also one of the visions of the Constitution.

  Question: Which of the given is provided with the Right to know under RTI Act, 2005?

  Options: (A) Residents

  (B) Peoples

  (C) All persons having age of atleast 21 years

  (D) Citizens

  Answer: (D)

 DEFINITIONS
The meaning of important terms has been incorporated under section 2 of the RTI Act. These have been
discussed herein below:
Public Authority
“Public authority” means any authority or body or institution of self-government established or constituted –
      –       By or under the Constitution;
      –       By any other law made by Parliament;
      –       By and other law made by State Legislature;
      –       By notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government,
and includes any–
      –       body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
      –       non-Government organisation substantially financed,
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government [Section 2(h)]




404
Right to Information Law                                                                                       LESSON 11

Record
“Record” includes–
   (a)     any document, manuscript and file;
   (b)     any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document;
   (c)     any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or not); and
   (d)     any other material produced by a computer or any other device; [Section 2(i)]
Information
“Information” means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices,
press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in
any electronic form and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public authority
under any other law for the time being in force. [Section 2(f)]
Right to Information
“Right to information” means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or under the
control of any public authority and includes the right to–
    (i)    taking notes, extracts, or certified copies of documents or records;
   (ii)    inspection of work, documents, records;
   (iii)   taking certified samples of material;
   (iv)    obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic
           mode or through printouts where such information is stored in a computer or in any other device;
           [Section 2( j)]
Section 3 of the Act provides that subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to information.
Third Party
“Third party” means a person other than the citizen making a request for information and includes a public
authority. [Section 2(n)]

 OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITY
Every public authority under the Act has been entrusted with a duty to maintain records and publish manuals,
rules, regulations, instructions, etc. in its possession as prescribed under the Act. [Section 4(1)(a)]
According to Section 4(1)(a), every public authority shall maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed
in a manner and the form which facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records
that are appropriate to be computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to availability of resources,
computerised and connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to such
records is facilitated.
As per Section 4(1)(b), every public authority has to publish within one hundred and twenty days of the enactment
of this Act:
     –     The particulars of its organization, functions and duties;
     –     The powers and duties of its officers and employees;
     –     the procedure followed in its decision making process, including channels of supervision and
           accountability;
     –     the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions;

                                                                                                                      405
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Right to Information Law

      –   the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records used by its employees for discharging its
          functions;
      –   a statement of the categories of the documents held by it or under its control;
      –   the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or representation by the members
          of the public, in relation to the formulation of policy or implementation thereof;
      –   a statement of the boards, councils, committees and other bodies consisting of two or more persons
          constituted by it. Additionally, information as to whether the meetings of these are open to the public,
          or the minutes of such meetings are accessible to the public;
      –   a directory of its officers and employees;
      –   the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the system of
          compensation as provided in its regulations;
      –   the budget allocated to each of its agency, indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed expenditures
          and reports on disbursements made;
      –   the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and the details and
          beneficiaries of such programmes;
      –   particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorizations granted by it;
      –   details of the information available to, or held by it, reduced in an electronic form;
      –   the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtaining information, including the working hours of
          a library or reading room, if maintained for public use;
      –   the names, designations and other particulars of the Public Information Officers;
      –   Such other information as may be prescribed; and thereafter update the publications every year.
and thereafter update these publications every year.
According to section 2(1)(c) of the Act, every public authority shall publish all relevant facts while formulating
important policies or announcing the decisions which affect public.
According to section 2(1)(d) of the Act, every public authority shall provide reasons for its administrative or quasi-
judicial decisions to affected persons.

 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC INFORMATION OFFICERS (PIO)
Every public authority has to–
      –   Designate in all administrative units or offices Central or State Public Information Officers to provide
          information to persons who have made a request for the information.
      –   Designate at each sub-divisional level or sub-district level Central Assistant or State Assistant Public
          Information Officers to receive the applications for information or appeals for forwarding the same to
          the Central or State Public Information Officers.
      –   No reason to be given by the person making request for information except those that may be necessary
          for contacting him. (Section 5)

 REQUEST FOR OBTAINING INFORMATION
The Act specifies the manner in which requests may be made by a citizen to the authority for obtaining the
information. It also provides for transferring the request to the other concerned public authority who may hold
the information.

406
Right to Information Law                                                                                  LESSON 11

Application is to be submitted in writing or electronically, with prescribed fee, to Public Information Officer (PIO).




Note:
   —      Time taken for calculation and intimation of fees excluded from the time frame.
   —      No action on application for 30 days is a deemed refusal.
   —      No fee for delayed response.

 Example: A public authority received RTI application from H. The information sought for concerns the life or
 liberty of J. How much time is provided for providing information to this RTI application?
 Answer: If the information sought for concerns the life or liberty of a person, the same shall be provided
 within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the request.

 DUTIES OF A PIO
PIO shall deal with requests from persons seeking information and where the request cannot be made in writing,
to render reasonable assistance to the person to reduce the same in writing. If the information requested for
is held by or its subject matter is closely connected with the function of another public authority, the PIO shall
transfer, within 5 days, the request to that other public authority and inform the applicant immediately.
PIO may seek the assistance of any other officer for the proper discharge of his/her duties. PIO, on receipt
of a request, shall as expeditiously as possible, and in any case within 30 days of the receipt of the request,
either provide the information on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the
reasons specified in Section 8 or Section 9.
Where the information requested for concerns the life or liberty of a person, the same shall be provided within
forty-eight hours of the receipt of the request. If the PIO fails to give decision on the request within the period
specified, he shall be deemed to have refused the request.
Where a request has been rejected, the PIO shall communicate to the requester –
    (i)   the reasons for such rejection,
   (ii)   the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be preferred, and

                                                                                                                 407
EP-JI&GL                                                                                       Right to Information Law

  (iii)   the particulars of the Appellate Authority.
PIO shall provide information in the form in which it is sought unless it would disproportionately divert the
resources of the Public Authority or would be detrimental to the safety or preservation of the record in question.
If allowing partial access, the PIO shall give a notice to the applicant, informing:
      –   that only part of the record requested, after severance of the record containing information which is
          exempt from disclosure, is being provided;
      –   the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any material question of fact, referring to the
          material on which those findings were based;
      –   the name and designation of the person giving the decision;
      –   the details of the fees calculated by him or her and the amount of fee which the applicant is required to
          deposit; and
      –   his or her rights with respect to review of the decision regarding non-disclosure of part of the information,
          the amount of fee charged or the form of access provided.
If information sought has been supplied by third party or is treated as confidential by that third party, the PIO
shall give a written notice to the third party within 5 days from the receipt of the request.
Third party must be given a chance to make a representation before the PIO within 10 days from the date of
receipt of such notice. (Sections 5,7,10 &11)


 CASE LAW
 Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Central Board of Secondary Education and Anr vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay
 and Ors., (Civil Appeal No.6454 of 2011, Judgment dated August 9, 2011) observed that “Indiscriminate and
 impractical demands or directions under RTI Act for disclosure of all and sundry information (unrelated to
 transparency and accountability in the functioning of public authorities and eradication of corruption) would
 be counterproductive as it will adversely affect the efficiency of the administration and result in the executive
 getting bogged down with the non-productive work of collecting and furnishing information. The Act should
 not be allowed to be misused or abused, to become a tool to obstruct the national development and
 integration, or to destroy the peace, tranquillity and harmony among its citizens. Nor should it be converted
 into a tool of oppression or intimidation of honest officials striving to do their duty.
 Further, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India observed that the RTI Act provides access to all information that
 is available and existing. If a public authority has any information in the form of data or analysed data, or
 abstracts, or statistics, an applicant may access such information, subject to the exemptions in section 8 of
 the Act. But where the information sought is not a part of the record of a public authority, and where such
 information is not required to be maintained under any law or the rules or regulations of the public authority,
 the Act does not cast an obligation upon the public authority, to collect or collate such non-available
 information and then furnish it to an applicant. A public authority is also not required to furnish information
 which require drawing of inferences and/or making of assumptions. It is also not required to provide ‘advice’
 or ‘opinion’ to an applicant, nor required to obtain and furnish any ‘opinion’ or ‘advice’ to an applicant.
 Furthermore, the Supreme Court inter alia has observed that the right to access information does not extend
 beyond the period during which the examining body is expected to retain the answer-books. In the case of
 CBSE, the answer-books are required to be maintained for a period of three months and thereafter they are
 liable to be disposed of/destroyed. Some other examining bodies are required to keep the answer- books for a
 period of six months. The fact that right to information is available in regard to answer-books does not mean that
 answer-books will have to be maintained for any longer period than required under the rules and regulations of
 the public authority. The obligation under the RTI Act is to make available or give access to existing information
 or information which is expected to be preserved or maintained. If the rules and regulations governing the


408
Right to Information Law                                                                                LESSON 11

 functioning of the respective public authority require preservation of the information for only a limited period,
 the applicant for information will be entitled to such information only if he seeks the information when it is
 available with the public authority.

 EXEMPTION FROM DISCLOSURE
Certain categories of information have been exempted from disclosure under the Act. These are:




                                                                                                               409
EP-JI&GL                                                                                  Right to Information Law

Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministers, the reasons thereof, and the material on the basis of which
the decisions were taken shall be made public after the decision has been taken, and the matter is complete,
or over:
Provided further that those matters which come under the exemptions specified in this section shall not be
disclosed;
Provided that the information which cannot be denied to the Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be
denied to any person.

 Example
 In case of a war or invasion, revealing or giving out information about strategically placed troops and related
 information, will be treated as information protected under section 8 of the Act. Such disclosure prejudicially
 affects the sovereignty and integrity of India.


 Example
 A, blows a whistle against sand corruption. His identity should be kept a secret since there is an increased
 risk to his safety and chances of violence against him increases. Such disclosure endangers his life and
 physical safety.


 Example
 A court while passing an order states that a particular information in that order shall not be disclosed. Such
 information shall fall under the disclosure by way of court order and would lead to contempt if not adhered to.


 CASE LAW
           Kayalvizhi vs. CPIO, Office of the Income Tax Officer, Ward-1 (19.10.2022 - CIC) : (2022)
 In this case, the application was filed since the Appellant has sought income related details of her brother
 and her mother in response to averred RTI Application(s) which impinges on the privacy of the concerned
 third parties and therefore, the information has been denied to her under Section 8(1)( j) of RTI Act. Further,
 the other issue raised by the Appellant in the instant Appeal pertains to her family dispute which cannot be
 redressed from the RTI platform. The appeal was denied and it was observed that -
 “....in our opinion, would indicate that personal records, including name, address, physical, mental
 and psychological status, marks obtained, grades and answer sheets, are all treated as personal
 information……”
 “…….Such personal information is entitled to protection from unwarranted invasion of privacy and conditional
 access is available when stipulation of larger public interest is satisfied.....”



  Question: NCLT forbids an information to be shared under RTI Act, 2005.
  Is the information exempted under Right to Information Act, 2005?
  Answer: Yes, Information which has been expressly forbidden by any court or tribunal or the disclosure of
  which may constitute contempt of court are exmepted.



410
Right to Information Law                                                                                  LESSON 11

 Rejection of Request
The Public Information Officer has been empowered to reject a request for information where an infringement
of a copyright subsisting in a person would be involved. (Section 9)

 PARTIAL DISCLOSURE ALLOWED
Under Section 10 of the RTI Act, only that part of the record which does not contain any information which is
exempt from disclosure and which can reasonably be severed from any part that contains exempt information,
may be provided.
As per Section 10 of the Act if the request for access to information is rejected on the ground that it is in relation
to the information which is exempt from disclosure, in that event access may be provided to that part of the
record which does not contain any information which is exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can be
reasonably severed from any part that contains exempt information.

 CASE LAW
  Chief Information Commissioner vs. High Court of Gujarat and Ors. (04.03.2020 - SC) : (2020)4SCC702
 In this case, an appeal was filed with regards to the right of a third party to apply for certified copies to
 be obtained from the High Court by invoking the provisions of Right to Information Act without resorting to
 Gujarat High Court Rules prescribed by the High Court. Court observed that-
  “We do not find any merit in the above submission and that such cumbersome procedure has to be adopted
 for furnishing the information/certified copies of the documents. When there is an effective machinery for
 having access to the information or obtaining certified copies which, in our view, is a very simple procedure i.e.
 filing of an application/affidavit with requisite court fee and stating the reasons for which the certified copies
 are required, we do not find any justification for invoking Section 11 of the RTI Act and adopt a cumbersome
 procedure. This would involve wastage of both time and fiscal resources which the preamble of the RTI Act
 itself intends to avoid.”

 WHO IS EXCLUDED?
The Act excludes Central Intelligence and Security agencies specified in the Second Schedule like IB, R&AW,
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, Directorate of Enforcement,
Narcotics Control Bureau, Aviation Research Centre, Special Frontier Force, BSF, CRPF, ITBP, CISF, NSG, Assam
Rifles, Special Service Bureau, Special Branch (CID), Andaman and Nicobar, the Crime Branch-CID- CB, Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Special Branch, Lakshadweep Police. Agencies specified by the State Governments
through a Notification will also be excluded.
The exclusion, however, is not absolute and these organizations have an obligation to provide information
pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violations. Further, information relating to allegations
of human rights violation shall be given only with the approval of the Central Information Commission within
forty- five days from the date of the receipt of request. (Section 24)

 INFORMATION COMMISSIONS
The Act envisages constitution of Central Information Commission and the State information Commissions.

 Central Information Commission
The Central Information Commission is to be constituted by the Central Government through a Gazette
Notification. The Central Information Commission consists of the Chief Information Commissioner and Central
Information Commissioners not exceeding 10. These shall be appointed by the President of India on the

                                                                                                                  411
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Right to Information Law

recommendations of a committee consisting of Prime Minister who is the Chairman of the Committee; the leader
of Opposition in the Lok Sabha; and a Union Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.
The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be persons of eminence in public life
with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social service, management, journalism,
mass media or administration and governance. CIC/IC shall not be a Member of Parliament or Member of the
Legislature of any State or Union Territory. He shall not hold any other office of profit or connected with any
political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any profession.
The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Commission vests in the Chief
Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the Information Commissioners. Commission shall have its
Headquarters in Delhi. Other offices may be established in other parts of the country with the approval of the
Central Government. Commission will exercise its powers without being subjected to directions by any other
authority. (Section 12)

 Term of office and conditions of service of Central Information Commission
   (1)   The Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by the Central
         Government and shall not be eligible for reappointment:
		 Provided that no Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained the age
   of sixty-five years.
   (2)   Every Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by the Central
         Government or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be eligible
         for reappointment as such Information Commissioner:
		 Provided that every Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub-section be
   eligible for appointment as the Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified in section 12:
		 Provided further that where the Information Commissioner is appointed as the Chief Information
   Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the Information
   Commissioner and the Chief Information Commissioner.
   (3)   The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall before he enters upon his
         office make and subscribe before the President or some other person appointed by him in that behalf,
         an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.
   (4)   The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may, at any time, by writing under
         his hand addressed to the President, resign from his office:
		 Provided that the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may be removed in
   the manner specified under section 14.
   (5)   The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
         Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by
         the Central Government:
		 Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Information
   Commissioner or the Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their
   appointment:
		       Provided further that the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners appointed
         before the commencement of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall continue to be
         governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder as if the Right to Information
         (Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.
  (6)    The Central Government shall provide the Chief Information Commissioner and the Information
         Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of


412
Right to Information Law                                                                               LESSON 11

         their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions
         of service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as
         may be prescribed.
		 Provided also that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Information
   Commissioner and the Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their
   appointment.

 State Information Commission
The State Information Commission will be constituted by the State Government through a Gazette notification.
The State Information Commission consists of one State Chief Information Commissioner (SCIC) and not more than
10 State Information Commissioners (SIC). These shall be appointed by the Governor on the recommendations
of a committee consisting of the Chief Minister who is the Chairman of the committee. Other members include
the Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly and one Cabinet Minister nominated by the Chief
Minister.

 Term of office and conditions of service of State Information Commission
   (1)   The State Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by the
         Central Government and shall not be eligible for reappointment:
		 Provided that no State Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained
   the age of sixty-five years.
   (2)   Every State Information Commissioner shall hold office for such term as may be prescribed by the
         Central Government or till he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be
         eligible for reappointment as such State Information Commissioner:
		 Provided that every State Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this subsection,
   be eligible for appointment as the State Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified in
   section 15(3):
		 Provided further that where the State Information Commissioner is appointed as the State Chief
   Information Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the State
   Information Commissioner and the State Chief Information Commissioner.
   (3)   The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, shall before he enters
         upon his office make and subscribe before the Governor or some other person appointed by him in that
         behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.
   (4)   The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may, at any time, by
         writing under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign from his office:
		 Provided that the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may be
   removed in the manner specified under section 17.
   (5)   The salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the State Chief
         Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed
         by the Central Government:
		 Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the State Chief Information
   Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after
   their appointment:
		       Provided further that the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners
         appointed before the commencement of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 shall continue
         to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under as if the Right to Information
         (Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.

                                                                                                               413
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Right to Information Law

   (6)   The State Government shall provide the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information
         Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of
         their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions
         of service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as
         may be prescribed.

 POWERS OF INFORMATION COMMISSIONS
The Central Information Commission/State Information Commission has a duty to receive complaints from any
person–




If the Commission feels satisfied, an enquiry may be initiated and while initiating an enquiry the Commission has
same powers as vested in a Civil Court.
The Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission during the inquiry of any complaint
under this Act may examine any record which is under the control of the public authority, and no such record
may be withheld from it on any grounds. (Section 18)

 Example
 ‘A’ wants to seek the information pertaining to the functioning of a public welfare fund such as who is its head,
 appointment of such head, expenses incurred by that particular authority in last financial year. ‘A’ received
 a reply containing information about the functioning, the appointment of head and his name but not the
 expenses incurred without and reasonable explanation.
 ‘A’ shall have the right to make complaint against incomplete information given to him .


 Example
 ‘A’ seeks the information pertaining the constitution of a committee. Such information was denied to him
 without any reasonable justifications.
 ‘A’ has right to file a complaint against such unreasonable and unjustified refusal of information.

414
Right to Information Law                                                                                    LESSON 11

 CASE LAW
 Central Information Commission v. D.D.A. & Anr. 2024 INSC 513 decided by Supreme Court on 10.07.2024
 The principle of purposive interpretation supports the view that the CIC’s powers under Section 12(4) of the
 RTI Act include all necessary measures to manage and direct the Commission’s affairs effectively.
 Facts of the Case/Background
 The present appeal challenges the judgment and order, passed by the High Court of Delhi. The High Court,
 by the impugned order, quashed the Central Information Commission (Management) Regulations, 2007
 framed by the Chief Information Commissioner and held that the CIC has no power to constitute Benches of
 the Commission. This appeal is confined to the issue of the validity of the Regulations and the powers of the
 CIC under Section 12(4) of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
 Key Issues/Allegations
 Whether the CIC, under the provisions of Section 12(4) of the Right to Information Act, 2005 has the authority
 to constitute benches of the CIC and frame Regulations for the effective management and allocation of work
 within the Commission, including the issuance of orders and the formation of committees?
 Observations, Findings and Decision
 In the present case, the RTI Act should be interpreted purposively, taking into account the broader objectives
 of the legislation. The purpose of the RTI Act is to promote transparency and accountability in the functioning of
 public authorities, ensuring citizens’ right to information. To achieve these objectives effectively, it is essential
 that the Central Information Commission operates efficiently and without undue procedural constraints. The
 principle of purposive interpretation supports the view that the CIC’s powers under Section 12(4) of the RTI
 Act include all necessary measures to manage and direct the Commission’s affairs effectively. This includes
 the ability to form benches to handle the increasing volume of cases. The formation of Benches allows for
 the efficient allocation of work and ensures the timely disposal of cases, which is crucial for upholding the
 right to information.

 APPELLATE AUTHORITIES
Any person who does not receive a decision within the specified time or is aggrieved by a decision of the PIO
may file an appeal under the Act.




                                                                                                                   415
EP-JI&GL                                                                                    Right to Information Law

Burden of proving that denial of information was justified lies with the PIO. First Appeal shall be disposed of
within 30 days from the date of its receipt or within such extended period not exceeding a total of forty-five days
from the date of filing thereof, for reasons to be recorded in writing. Time period could be extended by 15 days
if necessary. (Section 19)

 Example
 An application by B, seeking information regarding a particular matter was denied by PIO. B filed an appeal
 with the officer in rank to PIO regarding such rejection/denial of information. It is upon PIO to justify such
 non-disclosure.


 CASE LAW
 N.N. Dhumane vs. PIO, Department of Posts (10.04.2018 - CIC) 2018 SCC OnLine CIC 21
 In this case, the appellant was told that her pension for month of March 2017 was held up for want of
 Aadhaar linking up along with 55 other pensioners who were former employees of this public authority; she
 filed RTI application about ‘linking-up of Aadhaar number to pension accounts’; that they had no authority to
 link up the Aadhaar Card to her pension account all of sudden without any notice and stop payment for that
 reason. In the judgement, it was stated that:
 “In the name of linking to Aadhaar or other such conditions, the public authority cannot delay the payment
 of pensions to the senior citizens and retired employees in view of their post retirement requirements. The
 pensioners might mainly depend upon the pension for their livelihood and delaying it will be inhumane and
 also amounts to denial of their fundamental right to life. Even if linking with Aadhaar is necessary, it should
 not result in delaying the payment of pension or denial of information regarding pension.”

 PENALTIES
Section 20 of the Act imposes stringent penalty on a Public Information Officer (PIO) for failing to provide
information. Every PIO will be liable for fine of Rs.250 per day, up to a maximum of Rs.25,000/-, for -
 l Not accepting an application;

 l Delaying information release without reasonable cause;

 l Malafidely denying information;

 l Knowingly giving incomplete, incorrect, misleading information;

 l Destroying information that has been requested; and

 l Obstructing furnishing of information in any manner.

The Information Commission (IC) at the Centre and at the State levels will have the power to impose this penalty.
They can also recommend disciplinary action for violation of the law against the PIO for persistently failing to
provide information without any reasonable cause within the specified period.

 JURISDICTION OF COURTS
As per Section 23, lower Courts are barred from entertaining suits or applications against any order made under
this Act.

 Role of Central/State Governments
Section 26 contemplates the Role of Central/State Governments. It authorizes the Central/State Governments
to:

416
Right to Information Law                                                                             LESSON 11




 CASE LAWS
 HN Malviya vs. CPIO, Department of Personnel and Training on 31st October, 2022 (Central Information
 Commission)
 The Appellant filed an RTI application dated 27.01.2021 seeking the information related to seniority of
 employees .
 The Chief Information Commission in Second Appeal decided that the Commission based on a perusal of
 the facts on record observes that the information sought for in the RTI Application is in the form of mere
 conjecture and even futuristic query, neither of which conforms to Section 2(f) of the RTI Act, yet the CPIO &
 FAA have tried to facilitate the Appellant adequately in keeping with the spirit of the RTI Act. The Appellant
 shall note that outstretching the interpretation of Section 2(f) of the RTI Act to include deductions and
 inferences to be drawn by the CPIO is unwarranted as it casts immense pressure on the CPIOs to ensure that
 they provide the correct deduction/inference to avoid being subject to penal provisions under the RTI Act.
 Mr. Raj Kumar vs. CPIO Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital dated 31st October, 2022 (Central Information
 Commission)
 The Complainant vide his RTI application sought information relating to salary records and DA implementation.
 The CPIO furnished a pointwise reply to the Complainant. Dissatisfied with the reply received from the PIO,
 the Complainant filed a First Appeal, which was not adjudicated by the First Appellate Authority. Thereafter,
 the Complainant filed a Complaint before the Commission.
 The Complainant remained absent during the hearing despite notice. The Respondent present during the
 hearing submitted that a suitable response in accordance with the provisions of the RTI Act, 2005, had
 already been furnished to the Complainant. The respondent further stated that the information sought in
 respect of point no. 01 will be furnished in due course.



                                                                                                            417
EP-JI&GL                                                                                  Right to Information Law


 The Central Information Commission decided that Keeping in view the facts of the case and the submissions
 made by the respondent and after perusal of the documents available on record, the Commission directs the
 Respondent to furnish complete and correct information to the Complainant, in accordance with the spirit of
 transparency and accountability as enshrined in the RTI Act, 2005 within a period of 21 days from the date
 of receipt of this order under the intimation to the Commission. The Commission cautions the then CPIO to
 be more careful in the future while dealing with the RTI application so that no such lapse would recur and
 the provisions of the RTI Act are complied with in letter and spirit.




                                             LESSON ROUND-UP

   l Right to know is a necessary ingredient of participatory democracy. The Government enacted Right to
      Information (RTI) Act, 2005 which came into force on October 12, 2005.
   l The RTI Act provides for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure
      access to information held by public authorities to promote transparency and accountability in the
      working of every public authority. Every public authority under the Act has been entrusted with a
      duty to maintain records and publish manuals, rules, regulations, instructions, etc. in its possession as
      prescribed under the Act. Further, it is obligatory on every public authority to publish the information
      about various particulars prescribed under the Act within one hundred and twenty days of the enactment
      of this Act.
   l Every public authority has to designate in all administrative units or offices, Central or State Public
      Information Officers to provide information to persons who have made a request for the information.
      The Public Information Officers/Assistant Public Information Officers will be responsible to deal with the
      requests for information and also to assist persons seeking information.
   l The Act specifies the manner in which requests may be made by a citizen to the authority for obtaining
      the information. It also provides for transferring the request to the other concerned public authority who
      may hold the information.
   l Certain categories of information have been exempted from disclosure under Section 8 and 9 of the
      Act.
   l Intelligence and security agencies specified in Schedule II to the Act have been exempted from the
      ambit of the Act, subject to certain conditions.
   l The Public Information Officer has been empowered to reject a request for information where an
      infringement of a copyright subsisting in a person would be involved.
   l Only that part of the record which does not contain any information which is exempt from disclosure and
      which can reasonably be severed from any part that contains exempt information, may be provided.
   l The Act envisages constitution of Central Information Commission and the State Information
      Commissions.
   l The Central Information Commission is to be constituted by the Central Government through a Gazette
      Notification. The Central Information Commission consists of: (i) The Chief Information Commissioner;
      (ii) Central Information Commissioners not exceeding 10.
   l The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be persons of eminence
      in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, social service,
      management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance.


418
Right to Information Law                                                                               LESSON 11

   l CIC shall be appointed for a term of 5 years from date on which he enters upon his office or till he
       attains the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. CIC is not eligible for reappointment.
   l The State Information Commission will be constituted by the State Government through a Gazette
       notification. The State Information Commission consists of: (i) One State Chief Information Commissioner
       (SCIC) and (ii) Not more than 10 State Information Commissioners (SIC).
   l The Central /State Commission have been authorized to receive and enquire into a complaint from
       any person who has been denied information by the concerned authorities due to various reasons
       as specified under the Act. If the Commission feels satisfied, an enquiry may be initiated and while
       initiating an enquiry the Commission has same powers as vested in a Civil Court.
   l Any person who does not receive a decision within the specified time or is aggrieved by a decision of
       the PIO may file an appeal under the Act.
   l Stringent penalty may be imposed on a Public Information Officer for failing to provide information. The
       Information Commission (IC) at the Centre and at the State levels will have the power to impose this
       penalty.
   l The Act also stipulates the role of the Central/State Governments.



                                                   GLOSSARY

 CIC : Central Information Commission means the Central Information Commission constituted under sub-
 section (1) of section 12.
 SIC : State Information Commission means the State Information Commission constituted under sub-section
 (1) of section 15
 CPIO : Central Public Information Officer means the Central Public Information Officer designated under sub-
 section (1) and includes a Central Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such under sub-section
 (2) of section 5.


                                                TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
    1. The right to impart and receive information is a species of the right to freedom of speech and expression.
       Discuss
   2. The RTI Act confers on all citizens a right to information. Enumerate the salient features of the Act.
   3. Describe the constitution and powers of the Central Information Commission under the Act.
   4. Can a person who does not receive a decision within the specified time or is aggrieved by the decision
      of the PIO file an appeal under the Act?
   5. Specify the categories of information that have been exempted from disclosure under the Act.
   6. Explain the provisions of Section 20 of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
   7. On what grounds can a complaint be filed with Central Information Commission/State Information
      Commission?
   8. Write a short note on:
            l   Central Information Commission (CIC)
            l    State Information Commission (SIC)


                                                                                                               419
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Right to Information Law


                                      LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l Bare Act of the Right to Information Act, 2005

   l Articles by the professionals and Firms

   l Right to Information and Jurisprudence by M. L Sharma


                       OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2065/5/a2005-22.pdf

   l https://rti.gov.in/index.asp




420
Law relating to                                                                                   Lesson
Information Technology                                                                              12
KEY CONCEPTS
n Criminal Intention n Search n Abetting n Mens Rea n Actus Reus n Congnizable Offence n Non-Congnizable
Offence n Criminal conspiracy n Misappropriation n Criminal breach of Trust n Accusation n Defamation
n Grievous hurt n Attempt n Accomplishment n Presumption of Innocence n Burden of Proof n Mutiny n Personation




Learning Objectives
To understand:
       Ingredients of Crime and law dealing with the menace of Crime
       Structure of judicial system dealing with criminal cases
       The provisions relating to Bail
       Provisions relating to Compounding of Offences
       Offences relating to the property
       Criminal Breach of Trust
       Offences relating to documents and property marks
       Defamation
       Difference between fine and penalty



Lesson Outline
       Introduction                                          Certifying authorities
       Definitions of basic expressions                      Electronic Signature Certificate
       Digital signature                                     Penalties & Adjudications
       Electronic signature & Electronic governance          Appellate tribunal
       Retention of information                              Offences
       Audit of documents maintained in electronic form      Rules relating to sensitive personal data
       Validity of contracts formed through electronic       Development & Law of data protection
        means                                                 Lesson Round-Up
       Attribution and dispatch of electronic records        Glossary
       Time and place of dispatch                            Test Yourself
       Secure electronic records                             List of Further Readings and References


    Information Technology Act, 2000 provides legal framework for electronic governance by giving
                       recognition to electronic records and digital signatures.


                                                                                                           421
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Law relating to Information Technology


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.


 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
 l The Information Technology Act, 2000
 l Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023

 INTRODUCTION
“Information technology”, most commonly termed as IT is the use of computers or computer system to create,
process, store, retrieve, and exchange all kinds of data and information. The term IT is typically used within
the context of business operations as opposed to personal or entertainment technologies. An information
technology system (IT system) is a communications system, or, more specifically speaking, a computer system
— including all hardware, software, and peripheral equipment — operated by a limited group of IT users .
United Nations General Assembly by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated the January 30, 1997 has adopted the
Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law.
This is referred to as the UNCITRAL Model Law on E-Commerce. Subsequent to the adoption of this Resolution,
Indian government has passed the Information Technology Act, 2000 on 17th October 2000. Indian Information
Technology Act 2000 has tried to adopt legal principles, relating to information technology, enacted earlier
by several other countries, as also various guidelines pertaining to information technology law. The Act is
supplemented by a number of rules which includes rules for cyber cafes, electronic service delivery, data
security, blocking of websites. It also has rules for observance of due diligence by internet intermediaries (ISP’s,
network service providers, cyber cafes, etc.). Any person affected by data theft, hacking, spreading of viruses
can apply for compensation.
With the changing needs and requirement of the information technology and communication, the Information
Technology Act 2000 has been substantially amended through the Information Technology (Amendment) Act
2008 which was passed by the Indian Parliament on December 24, 2008 and received the Presidential assent
on February 5, 2009. The Amendment Act came into force on October 27, 2009.
The Information Technology Act, 2000, was enacted to make, in the main, three kinds of provisions, as under:
   (a)     It provides legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and
           other means of electronic communication, usually referred to, as “electronic Commerce”.
   (b)     It facilitates the electronic filing of documents with the Government agencies, (and also with the
           publication of rules etc., in the electronic form).
   (c)     It amends the, Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the Bankers’ Book Evidence Act, 1891,
           and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, so as to bring in electronic documentation within the purview
           of the respective enactments.

 DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY
According to Section 1 (4) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 nothing in Information Technology Act,
2000, shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule. The documents or transactions
mentioned in first schedule are as under:
      1.   Negotiable Instruments with exceptions: A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque, a Demand
           Promissory Note or a Bill of Exchange issued in favour of or endorsed by an entity regulated by the
           Reserve Bank of India, National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance

422
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                   LESSON 12

        Regulatory and Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
        Authority) as defined in Section 13 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881.
   2.   Power of Attorney with exceptions: A power-of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers-of-
        Attorney Act, 1882 but excluding those power-of-attorney that empower an entity regulated by the
        Reserve Bank of India, National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance
        Regulatory and Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
        Authority to act for, on behalf of, and in the name of the person executing them.
   3.   Trusts: A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882.
   4.   Wills: A will as defined in section 2(h) of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, including any other testamentary
        disposition by whatever name called.

 DEFINITIONS OF BASIC EXPRESSIONS
Section 2(1) of the Information Technology Act, 2000, contains definitions of various expressions. Some of the
definitions are important, for understanding the detailed provisions of the Act and are quoted below:
“Access” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, instructing or
communicating with the logical, arithmetical, or memory function resources of a computer, computer system or
computer network. [Section 2(1)(a)]
“Addressee” means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record, but does not
include any intermediary. [Section 2(1)(b)]
“Adjudicating Officer” means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 46.
“Affixing electronic signature” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means adoption of
any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an electronic record by means
of digital signature.[Section 2(1)(d)]
“Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1) of section 48. [Section 2(1) (da)]
“Asymmetric crypto system” means a system of a secure key pair consisting of a private key for creating a
digital signature and a public key to verify the digital signature. [Section 2(1)(f)]
“Certification practice statement” means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to specify the practices
that the Certifying Authority employs in issuing electronic signature Certificates. [Section 2(1) (h)]
“Communication device” means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of both or any other
device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image.[Section 2(1) (ha)]
“Computer” means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high-speed data processing device or system
which performs logical, arithmetic, and memory functions, by manipulations of electronic, magnetic or optical
impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software, or communication facilities
which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or computer network. [Section 2(1)(i)]


 CASE LAW
 Syed Asifuddin and Ors. vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. Andhra Pradesh High Court, 2006 (1)
 ALD Cri 96, 2005 Cri. LJ 4314
 In this case it was contended that Insofar as the offence under Section 65 of Information Technology Act is
 concerned, a telephone handset is not a computer nor a computer system containing a computer programme.
 Alternatively, in the absence of any law which is in force requiring the maintenance of “computer source
 code”, the allegation that the petitioners concealed, destroyed or altered any computer source code, is
 devoid of any substance and therefore the offence of hacking is absent.



                                                                                                                423
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Information Technology


 It was observed by the court that the essential functions in the use of cell phone, which are performed by
 the MTSO, is the central antenna/central transmitter and other transmitters in other areas well coordinated
 with the cell phone functions in a fraction of a second. All this is made possible only by a computer, which
 simultaneously receives, analyses and distributes data by way of sending and receiving radio/electrical
 signals.

“Computer network” means the interconnection of one or more computers through -
      (i)   the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line or other communication media; and
   (ii)     terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers, whether or not the
            interconnection is continuously maintained. [Section 2(1)( j)]
“Computer resource” means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer database or
software. [Section 2(1)(k)]
“Computer system” means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support devices and
excluding calculators which are not programmable and capable of being used in conjunction with external files,
which contain computer programmes, electronic instructions, input data, and output data, that performs logic,
arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication control and other functions. [Section 2(1)(l)]
“Cyber cafe” means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person in the ordinary
course of business to the members of the public.[Section 2(1)(na)]
“Cyber security” means protecting information, equipment, devices, computer, computer resource,
communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, disclosure, disruption,
modification or destruction.[Section 2(1)(nb)]
“Digital signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of an electronic
method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of Section 3. [Section 2(1)(p)]
“Electronic form” with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, received or stored
in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, microfilm, computer generated micro fiche or similar device.
[Section 2(1)(r)]
“Electronic record” means data, recorded or data generated, image or sound stored, received or sent in an
electronic form or microfilm or computer generated micro fiche. [Section 2(1)(t)]
“Electronic signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of the electronic
technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature.[Section 2(1)(ta)]
“Electronic Signature Certificate” means an Electronic Signature Certificate issued under section 35 and
includes Digital Signature Certificate.[Section 2(1)(tb)]
“Information” includes data, message, text, images, sound, voice, codes, computer programmes, software and
data bases or micro film or computer generated micro fiche. [Section 2(1)(v)]
“Intermediary” with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on behalf of another
person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect to that record and includes
telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service providers, web-hosting service providers,
search engines, online payment sites, online-auction sites, online-market places and cyber cafes. [Section 2(1)
(w)]
“Key pair” in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its mathematically related public key,
which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature created by the private key. [Section 2(1) (x)]
“Originator” means a person who sends, generates, stores or transmits any electronic message or causes any
electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person, but does not include an
intermediary. [Section 2(1)(za)]


424
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                   LESSON 12

“Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. [Section 2(1)(zb)]
“Private Key” means the key of a key pair, used to create a digital signature. [Section 2(1)(zc)]
“Public Key” means the key of a key pair, used to verify a digital signature and listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate. [Section 2(1)(zd)]
“Secure system” means computer hardware, software, and procedure that–
   (a)   are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;
   (b)   provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;
   (c)   are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and
   (d)   adhere to generally accepted security procedures.
“Security Procedure” means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central Government.
[Section 2(1)(zf)]
“Subscriber” means a person in whose name the 1 [electronic signature] Certificate is issued. [Section 2(1)(zf)]
“Verify” in relation to a digital signature, or electronic record or its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, means to determine whether -
   (a)   the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by the use of private key corresponding
         to the public key of the subscriber;
   (b)   the initial electronic record is retained intact, or has been altered since such electronic record was so
         affixed with the digital signature. [Section 2(1)(zh)]

 DIGITAL SIGNATURE AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE
As per section 2(1)(ta) of the Information Technology Act, 2000, “electronic signature” means authentication of
any electronic record by a subscriber by means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule
and includes digital signature.
Electronic Signature Certificate are issued under section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate and
Digital Signature Certificate are issued under section 35 (4) of the Act.
Digital signature (i.e. authentication of an electronic record by a subscriber, by electronic means) is recognised
as a valid method of authentication. The authentication is to be effected by the use of “asymmetric crypto
system and hash function”, which envelop and transform electronic record into another electronic record.
[Sections 3(1), 3(2)].
  Example
  A driver’s license identifies someone who can legally drive in a particular country. Likewise, a digital
  certificate can be presented electronically to prove one’s identity, to access information or services on the
  Internet or to sign certain documents digitally.

  Example
  Physical documents are signed manually, similarly, electronic documents, for example e-forms are
  required to be signed digitally using a Digital Signature Certificate.
  Verification of the electronic record is done by the use of a public key of the subscriber. [Section 3(3)] The
  private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning “key pair”.


                                                                                                                425
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Information Technology

Section 3A deals with electronic signature. Section 3A(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
section 3(1), but subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record
by such electronic signature or electronic authentication technique which—
   (a)   is considered reliable; and
   (b)   may be specified in the Second Schedule.
For the purposes of above any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique shall be considered
reliable if—
   (a)   the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are used,
         linked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person;
   (b)   the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the control of
         the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and of no other person;
   (c)   any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable;
   (d)   any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is detectable; and
   (e)   it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed.
Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether electronic signature
is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated.

 ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE (LEGAL RECOGNITION OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS)
The Act grants legal recognition to electronic records by laying down that where (by any law) “information” or
any other matter is to be in:
   (a)   writing or
   (b)   typewritten form or
   (c)   printed form, then, such requirement is satisfied, if such information or matter is:
           (i) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and
           (ii)   accessible, so as to be usable for a subsequent reference. (Section 4)
It may be pointed out that “information”, as defined in Section 2(1) (v) of the Act, includes data, text, images,
sound, voice, codes, computer programmes, software and data-bases or micro-film or computer-generated
“micro-fiche”.
Examples of e-governance include Digital India initiative, National Portal of India, Aadhaar Portal, filing and
payment of taxes online, digital land management systems, Common Entrance Test etc.

 Private transactions
Thus, Section 4 of the Information Technology Act, practically equates electronic record with a manual or typed
or printed record. Section 5 deals with legal recognition of electronic signatures. It states that where any law
provides that information or any other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document
shall be signed or bear the signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such
requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of
electronic signature affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
It may be noted that “signed”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall, with reference
to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on any document and the expression
“signature” shall be construed accordingly.


426
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                  LESSON 12

 Public records
Above provisions are primarily intended for private transactions. The Act then proceeds to bring in the regime
of electronic records and electronic signature in public records, by making an analogous provision which grants
recognition to electronic records and electronic record signatures, in cases where any law provides for:
   (a)   the filing of any form, application or any other document with a Governmental office or agency; or
   (b)   the grant of any licence, permit etc.; or
   (c)   the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner. (Section 6)

 Delivery of services by service provider
According to Section 6A the appropriate Government may, for the purposes of this Chapter and for efficient
delivery of services to the public through electronic means authorise, by order, any service provider to set
up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and perform such other services as it may specify, by
notification in the Official Gazette.
It may be noted that service provider so authorised includes any individual, private agency, private company,
partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body or agency which has been granted permission by
the appropriate Government to offer services through electronic means in accordance with the policy governing
such service sector.
  Example
  A portal for Ministry of Corporate affairs, MCA 21, has been maintained and operated by Infosys. Earlier
  it was operated by Tata Consultancy Services. Likewise Income tax portal has also been operated by
  Infosys. So Infosys is service provider for this purpose.

 RETENTION OF INFORMATION
The Act also seeks to permit the retention of information in electronic form, where any law provides that certain
documents, records or information shall be retained for any specific period. Certain conditions as to accessibility,
format etc. are also laid down. (Section 7)

 AUDIT OF DOCUMENTS MAINTAINED IN ELECTRONIC FORM
Where in any law for the time being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information,
that provision shall also be applicable for audit of documents, records or information processed and maintained
in the electronic form.(Section 7A)

 PUBLICATION OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION IN ELECTRONIC GAZETTE
Subordinate legislation is also authorised, by the Act, to be published in the Official Gazette or the electronic
Gazette, and the date of its first publication in either of the two Gazette shall be deemed to be the date of
publication. (Section 8)
  Example
  A subordinate legislation was published by the authority in official gazette on 02.01.2020 and in electronic
  Gazette on 31.12.2019.
  The date 31.12.2019 shall be deemed to be the date of publication.

But the provisions summarised above shall not confer any right upon any person to insist, that any Government
agency shall accept, issue etc. any document in electronic form or effect any monetary transaction in electronic
form. (Section 9)

                                                                                                                427
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Information Technology

 VALIDITY OF CONTRACTS FORMED THROUGH ELECTRONIC MEANS
The 2008 amendment to the IT Act introduced Sec 10A which provides for a greater acceptance to the electronic
contract, establishing without question its validity in the eyes of the law. As more and more businesses and
organizations are realizing the effectiveness and efficiency gained by e-commerce, electronic contracts, and
e-signatures, we see an increase in legislation supporting it.

As per section 10A of the Act, where in a contract formation, the communication of proposals, the acceptance
of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances, as the case may be, are expressed in electronic
form or by means of an electronic records, such contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on
the ground that such electronic form or means was used for that purpose.

 CASE LAW
 The Supreme Court in the 2010 case of Trimex International FZE Ltd. Dubai vs. Vedanta Aluminium Ltd., India.
 (“Trimex Case”) provided this clarity with regard to contracts concluded on emails. In the Trimex Case the
 Supreme Court, held that inference can be drawn from documents exchanged on telegram, emails etc. (“Tele
 communication”) that a valid contract subsists given that intention of the party to be bound by the terms of
 such Tele-communications and essential elements of a valid contract are present.

 ATTRIBUTION AND DISPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS
Since, in an electronic record, the maker remains behind the curtain, it was considered desirable to make a
provision for “attribution” of the record. An electronic record is attributed to the “originator”. [Defined in Section
2(1)(za)]

Broadly, the “originator” is the person at whose instance it was sent in the following cases -

   (a)   if it was sent by the originator himself; or

   (b)   if it was sent by a person authorised to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that electronic
         record; or

   (c)   if it was sent by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate
         automatically. (Section 11)

  Example
  An Automatic email is received from or on behalf of a XYZ Ltd. confirming an order placed in online
  platform.
  This electronic record shall be attributed to the said company.


Regarding acknowledgement of receipt of electronic records, the Act provides that where there is no agreement
that the acknowledgment be given in a particular form etc. then the acknowledgement may be given by:

   (a)   any communication by the addressee (automated or otherwise); or

   (b)   any conduct of the addressee which is sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record
         has been received. [Section 12(1)]

Special provisions have been made for cases where the originator has stipulated for receipt of acknowledgment,
[Section 12 (b)] or where the acknowledgement is not received by the originator in time. [Section 12(2), 12(3)]


428
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                LESSON 12

Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of an
acknowledgment of such electronic record by him, then unless acknowledgment has been so received, the
electronic record shall he deemed to have been never sent by the originator.[Section 12(2)]

Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of such
acknowledgment, and the acknowledgment has not been received by the originator within the time specified
or agreed or, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the originator may give
notice to the addressee stating that no acknowledgment has been received by him and specifying a reasonable
time by which the acknowledgement must be received by him and if no acknowledgment is received within the
aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to the addressee, treat the electronic record as though it has
never been sent. [Section 12(2)]

These provisions emphasize on the need of acknowledgements for making electronic record binding.

 TIME AND PLACE OF DISPATCH ETC.
After these provisions, there follows a provision which is of considerable significance for the law of contracts.
The date of offer and the date of acceptance are crucial, in determining whether and which contract has come
into existence. The two terminal points - despatch and receipt, are dealt with, in detail. Subject to agreement
between the parties, the dispatch of an electronic record occurs, when it enters a “computer resource” outside
the control of the originator. [Section 13 (1)]

“Computer resource”, as defined in Section 2 (k), means a computer, computer system, computer network, data,
computer database or software.

 Time of receipt
As regards the time of receipt of electronic records, two situations are dealt with, separately. Subject to
agreement, if the addressee has designated a computer resource for receipt, then receipt occurs when the
electronic record enters the designated resource. However, if the record is sent to a computer resource of the
addressee which is not the designated resource, then receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is
retrieved by the addressee. [Section 13(2)(a)]

If the addressee has not designated a computer resource (with or without specified timings), then receipt is
deemed to occur, when the electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee. [Sections 13(1),
13(2)] Above provisions apply, even where the place of location of the computer is different from the deemed
place of receipt.

The Act also contains provisions as to the place of dispatch and receipt. [Section 13(3)]

 SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SIGNATURES
The Central Government may prescribe the security procedures and practices for the purposes of sections 14
dealing with secure electronic records and 15 dealing with secure electronic signature.

While prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Government shall have regard
to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it may consider
appropriate.

When the procedure has been applied to an electronic record at a specific point of time, then such record is
deemed to be a secure electronic record, from such point of time to the time of verification. (Section 14)


                                                                                                             429
EP-JI&GL                                                                          Law relating to Information Technology

An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic signature, if—
      (i)   the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of signatory
            and no other person; and
    (ii)    the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be prescribed.
            (Section 15)
   Example

   If the signature creation data such as codes or private cryptographic keys are in control of 2 or more
   persons. The electronic signature cannot be deemed to be a secure electronic signature.


 CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES
The Act contains detailed provisions as to “Certifying Authorities” (Sections 17-34). A Certifying Authority is
expected to reliably identify persons applying for “signature key certificates”, reliably verify their legal capacity
and confirm the attribution of a public signature key to an identified physical person by means of a signature
key certificate. To regulate the Certifying Authorities, there is a Controller of Certifying Authorities. (Section 17)
Obligations of Certifying Authorities are also set out, in the Act. (Sections 30-34)

The Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCA) has been appointed by the Central Government under section 17
of the Information Technology Act, 2000. It aims at promoting the growth of E-Commerce and E- Governance
through the wide use of digital signatures.

The CCA certifies the public keys of Certifying Authorities (CAs) using its own private key, which enables users
in the cyberspace to verify that a given certificate is issued by a licensed CA. For this purpose it operates, the
Root Certifying Authority of India (RCAI). The CCA also maintains the Repository of Digital Certificates, which
contains all the certificates issued to the CAs in the country.

                                             Licenced Certifying Authorities1




1. https://cca.gov.in/licensed_ca.html

430
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                    LESSON 12

 ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES
Sections 35-39 of the Act deal with Electronic Signature Certificates. As per section 35 of the Act, Certifying
authority to issue electronic signature Certificate. Followings are the procedure of obtaining electronic signature
Certificate:
   (1)   Any person may make an application in prescribed form to the Certifying Authority for the issue of
         electronic signature Certificate in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
   (2)   Every such application shall be accompanied by prescribed fees.
   (3)   Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is no
         such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulations.
   (4)   On receipt of an application , the Certifying Authority may, after consideration of the certification
         practice statement or the other statement and after making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the
         electronic signature Certificate or for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the application.
It may be noted that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed rejection.
Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate (DSC)
The Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature
Certificate,–
   (a)   on receipt of a request to that effect from–
          (i) the subscriber listed in the Digital Signature Certificate; or
          (ii)   any person duly authorised to act on behalf of that subscriber;
   (b)   if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest.
A Digital Signature Certificate should not be suspended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless the subscriber
has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate, the Certifying Authority shall communicate the same to the
subscriber.
Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate (DSC)
A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate issued by it in the following circumstances:
   (a)   where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him makes a request to that effect; or
   (b)   upon the death of the subscriber; or
   (c)   upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm or a
         company.
Further, a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued by it at any
time, if it is of opinion that
   (a)   a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed;
   (b)   a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature Certificate was not satisfied;
   (c)   the Certifying Authority’s private key or security system was compromised in a manner materially
         affecting the Digital Signature Certificate’s reliability;
   (d)   the subscriber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a firm or a company, which
         has been dissolved, wound-up or otherwise ceased to exist.

                                                                                                               431
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Information Technology

However, a Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an opportunity
of being heard in the matter. On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate, the Certifying Authority shall
communicate the same to the subscriber.
Control of Private Key
Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of the private key corresponding to the public
key listed in his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps to prevent its disclosure.
If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has been compromised,
then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying Authority in such manner
as may be specified by the regulations.
The subscriber is liable till he has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised.

 PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATIONS
The Act contemplates a dual scheme in regard to wrongful acts concerning computers etc. Certain acts are
vested with (so called) “penalties”, which are however, adjudicated, not before courts, but before adjudication
officers. (Sections 43-47)
In fact, however, though the heading of Section 43 speaks of “penalty and compensation for damage to
computer, computer system”.
Section 43 provides that if any person without permission of the owner or any other person who is in charge of
a computer, computer system or computer network,–
   (a)      accesses or secures access to such computer, computer system or computer network or computer
            resource;
   (b)      downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such computer,
            computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any removable
            storage medium;
   (c)      introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or computer virus into any computer,
            computer system or computer network;
   (d)      damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data,
            computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or computer
            network;
   (e)      disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network;
   (f)      denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer, computer
            system or computer network by any means;
   (g)      provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer, computer system or computer
            network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder;
   (h)      charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with or
            manipulating any computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (i)   destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its value or
            utility or affects it injuriously by any means;
   ( j)     steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any computer
            source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage;
he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.

432
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                   LESSON 12

For the purposes of Section 43,–

    (i)    “Computer contaminant” means any set of computer instructions that are designed–

           (a)   to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer, computer
                 system or computer network; or

           (b)   by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer
                 network.

   (ii)    “computer data-base” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions
           in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner or
           have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are intended for use in
           a computer, computer system or computer network;

   (iii)   “Computer virus” means any computer instruction, information, data or programme that destroys,
           damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches itself to
           another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or some
           other event takes place in that computer resource;

  (iv)     “Damage” means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by any
           means;

   (v)     “Computer source code” means the listing of programme, computer commands, design and layout and
           programme analysis of computer resource in any form.

 COMPENSATION FOR FAILURE TO PROTECT DATA
Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or handling any sensitive personal data or information in a
computer resource which it owns, controls or operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable
security practices and procedures and thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body
corporate shall be liable to pay damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.(Section 43A)
It may be noted that:
    (i)    “body corporate” means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other association of
           individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;
   (ii)    “reasonable security practices and procedures” means security practices and procedures designed
           to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure or
           impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any
           law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable
           security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
           with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit;
   (iii)   “sensitive personal data or information” means such personal information as may be prescribed by the
           Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit.

 Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc. (Section 44)
If any person who is required under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to–
   (a)     furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to furnish the
           same, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifteen lakh rupees for each such failure;
   (b)     file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified therefor in

                                                                                                                 433
EP-JI&GL                                                                         Law relating to Information Technology

         the regulations fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in the regulations,
         he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty thousand rupees for every day during which such
         failure continues;
   (c)   maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty not
         exceeding one lakh rupees for every day during which the failure continues.
This section has been amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 w.e.f. 30.11.2023.
By way of the amendment, the penalty under this section has now increased to 10 times of penalties provided
before the amendment.

 Residuary Penalty (Section 45)
Whoever contravenes any rules, regulations, directions or orders made under this Act, for the contravention
of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding one lakh
rupees, in addition to compensation to the person affected by such contravention not exceeding—
   (a)   ten lakh rupees, by an intermediary, company or body corporate; or
   (b)   one lakh rupees, by any other person.
This section has been amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 w.e.f. 30.11.2023.
By way of the amendment, the penalty has now increased from INR 25,000 to INR 1,00,000, and compensation
(which was earlier an alternative to the penalty) has also been extended to (i) INR 10,00,000 for a contravention
by an intermediary, company or body corporate, or (ii) INR 1,00,000 for a contravention by a person.

 Power to adjudicate (Section 46)
According to section 46(1), for the purpose of adjudging under this Act whether any person has committed a
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, direction or order made thereunder
which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation, the Central Government shall, subject to the provisions
of section 46(3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to the Government of India or an equivalent
officer of a State Government to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by
the Central Government.
The adjudicating officer appointed under section 46(1) can exercise jurisdiction to adjudicate matters in which
the claim for damage does not exceed rupees five crore and the jurisdiction in respect of the claim for damage
exceeding rupees five crores is vested with the competent court.
Adjudicatory Process: According to section 46(2), the adjudicating officer can, after giving the person referred
to in section 46(1) a reasonable opportunity for making representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry,
he is satisfied that the person has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such
compensation as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of that section.
Qualification for Adjudicating Officer: According to section 46(3), no person shall be appointed as an
adjudicating officer unless he possesses such experience in the field of Information Technology and legal or
judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Powers of Adjudicating Officer: Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are
conferred on the Appellate Tribunal under section 58(2), and–
   (a)   all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193
         and 228 of the Indian Penal Code;


434
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                    LESSON 12

   (b)   shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure, 1973;
   (c)   shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
This section has been amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 w.e.f. 30.11.2023.
By way of the amendment, the scope of adjudication through a central government appointed officer under
section 46 has also been expanded to the entire Act. Earlier, it was restricted to Chapter IX of the Act, that is, the
chapter related to penalties, compensation, and adjudication.

 CYBER REGULATION APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
Chapter X of the Act provides for the establishment of Appellate Tribunal. (Sections 48-62). The Telecom
Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 1997 , shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of
2017), be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.
The Central Government shall specify, by notification the matters and places in relation to which the Appellate
Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.
In the same Chapter, there are provisions regarding the compounding of offences and recovery of penalties.
(Sections 63 and 64).
Any person aggrieved by an order of the Controller of Certifying Authorities or of the adjudicator can appeal to
the Appellate Tribunal, within 45 days. (Section 57)
Any person aggrieved by “any decision or order” of the Appellate Tribunal may appeal to the High Court,
within 60 days. Jurisdiction of Civil Courts is barred, in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer or the
Appellate Tribunal has power to determine.

 OFFENCES
Chapter XI of the Act, (Sections 65-78) deals with offences relating to computers etc. and connected matters.

 Tampering with computer source documents
Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another
to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer
system or computer network, when the computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for
the time being in force, shall be punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend
up to two lakh rupees, or with both.
It may be noted that “computer source code” means the listing of programmes, computer commands, design
and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in any form.(Section 65)

 Computer related offences
If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to in section 43, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or
with both. (Section 66)
The offences listed in the Act are the following –
        Dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device
        Identity theft
        Cheating by personation by using computer resource


                                                                                                                 435
EP-JI&GL                                                                          Law relating to Information Technology

         Violation of privacy
         Cyber terrorism
         Publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic form
         Publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act, etc., in electronic form
         Misrepresentation
         Breach of confidentiality and privacy
         Disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract
         Publishing electronic signature Certificate false in certain particulars
         Publication for fraudulent purpose.
Chapter XI of the I T Act also contains certain provisions empowering the Controller of Certifying Authorities to
issue certain directions to certifying Authorities (Section 68).
Before the Amendment, any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under section
68(1) were liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding one
lakh rupees or with both.
However, after the enactment of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023, any person who
intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under section 68(1) are guilty of an offence and are
liable to penalty which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
The quantum of fine has been increased substantially and punishment relating to Imprisonment has now been
done away with.
Further, as per section 69 where the Central Government or a State Government or any of its officers specially
authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in this behalf may, if
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of the sovereignty or integrity of India, defence
of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to
the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for investigation of any offence, it may subject to
the provisions of safeguard and procedure as may be prescribed , for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order,
direct any agency of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or cause to be intercepted or
monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.

 CASE STUDY
 Shreya Singhal v. Union of India (2015) 5 SCC 1
 In this case, petitions were filed arguing that Section 66A of the Information Technology Act of 2000 raises
 very important and far-reaching questions relating primarily to the was violation of fundamental right of free
 speech and expression guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) and Right to Equality under Article 14 of the Constitution
 of India. Court observed that:
 “Information that may be grossly offensive or which causes annoyance or inconvenience are undefined
 terms which take into the net a very large amount of protected and innocent speech….
 We have already held that Section 66A creates an offence which is vague and overbroad, and, therefore,
 unconstitutional under Article 19(1)(a) and not saved by Article 19(2). We have also held that the wider range
 of circulation over the internet cannot restrict the content of the right under Article 19(1)(a) nor can it justify its
 denial…..


436
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                  LESSON 12

 We find, therefore, that the challenge on the ground of Article 14 must fail… Section 66A of the Information
 Technology Act, 2000 is struck down in its entirety being violative of Article 19(1)(a) and not saved under
 Article 19(2).”
 Section 66A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 which penalised people for sending “offensive”
 messages through any communication services, has also now formally been removed from the Act through
 the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023.

 Extraterritorial operation
Extra-territorial operation of the Act is provided for, by enacting that the provisions of the Act apply to any
offence or contravention committed outside India by any person, irrespective of his nationality, if the act or
conduct in question involves a computer, computer system or computer network located in India. (Section 75)

 EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY OF INTERMEDIARY IN CERTAIN CASES
According to section 79(1) of the Act, an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or
communication link made available or hosted by him. However, this provision is subject to section 79 (2) & (3)
of the Act provided below.
According to section 79(2), the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply if:
   (a)   the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system over which
         information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or
   (b)   the intermediary does not:
          (i) initiate the transmission,
          (ii)   select the receiver of the transmission, and
         (iii)   select or modify the information contained in the transmission.
   (c)   the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also observes
         such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.
According to section 79(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if:
   (a)   the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise or
         otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;
   (b)   upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its agency that
         any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer resource controlled
         by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary fails to expeditiously
         remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the evidence in any manner.

 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (REASONABLE SECURITY PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES AND
 SENSITIVE PERSONAL DATA OR INFORMATION) RULES, 2011
In this section, the expression “third party information” means any information dealt with by an intermediary in
his capacity as an intermediary.
Data privacy and protection in today’s world has become a matter of Individual rights. The right to privacy is
recognized as a fundamental right under Article 21 of the Indian constitution which was held in the historic verdict
by the Supreme Court in the case of Justice KS Puttaswamy v. Union of India. India’s digital transformation
requires the law to transform as well. Information Technology Act, 2000 (‘the IT Act’) and Information Technology
(Reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information) Rules, 2011,
commonly known as SPDI Rules, is one of the key legislations in this area.

                                                                                                                437
EP-JI&GL                                                                    Law relating to Information Technology

Under Section 87(2) read with Section 43 – A of the IT Act, “SPDI Rules” were issued on 13th of April 2011 which
govern the Sensitive Personal Data or information and apply to body corporate or any person located in India.
The rules define sensitive personal data under the Rule 3 that the following types of data or information shall
be considered as personal and sensitive:
      l    Passwords,
      l    Bank Account details,
      l    Credit/debit card details,
      l    Present and past health records,
      l    Sexual orientation,
      l    Biometric data
An information provider is a person who provides information to the body corporate and under these rules,
he has certain rights over the sensitive personal information, this information cannot be collected without the
providers’ consent and he or she has the right to abstain from giving consent and can withdraw the consent by
writing to the body corporate.
      i.   Privacy Policy
		 Rule 4 requires a body corporate to provide a privacy policy on their website, which is easily accessible,
   provides for the type and purpose of personal, sensitive personal information collected and used, and
   Reasonable security practices and procedures.
   ii.     Consent
		 Rule 5 requires that prior to the collection of sensitive personal data, the body corporate must obtain
   consent, either in writing or through fax regarding the purpose of usage before collection of such
   information.
   iii.    Collection Limitation
		 Rule 5 (2) requires that a body corporate should only collect sensitive personal data if it is connected
   to a lawful purpose and is considered necessary for that purpose.
   iv.     Notice
		 Rule 5(3) requires that while collecting information directly from an individual, the body corporate must
   provide the following information:
            l   The fact that information is being collected
            l   The purpose for which the information is being collected
            l   The intended recipients of the information
            l   The name and address of the agency that is collecting the information
            l   The name and address of the agency that will retain the information
      v.   Retention Limitation
		 Rule 5(4) requires that body corporate must retain sensitive personal data only for as long as it takes
   to fulfil the stated purpose or otherwise required under law.
   vi.     Purpose
		 Limitation Rule 5(5) requires that information must be used for the purpose that it was collected for.

438
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                 LESSON 12

  vii.    Right to Access and Correct
		 Rule 5(6) requires a body corporate to provide individuals with the ability to review the information they
   have provided and access and correct their personal or sensitive personal information.
  viii.   Right to ‘Opt Out’ and Withdraw Consent
		 Rule 5(7) requires that the individual must be provided with the option of ‘opting out’ of providing data
   or information sought by the body corporate. Also, they must have the right to withdraw consent at any
   point of time.
   ix.    Grievance Officer
		 Rule 5(9) requires that body corporate must designate a grievance officer for redressal of grievances,
   details of which must be posted on the body corporate’s website and grievances must be addressed
   within a month of receipt.
    x.    Disclosure with Consent, Prohibition on Publishing and Further Disclosure
		 Rule 6 requires that body corporate must have consent before disclosing sensitive personal data to
   any third person or party, except in the case with Government agencies for the purpose of verification
   of identity, prevention, detection, investigation, on receipt of a written request. Also, the body corporate
   or any person on its behalf shall not publish the sensitive personal information and the third party
   receiving the sensitive personal information from body corporate or any person on its behalf shall not
   disclose it further.
   xi.    Requirements for Transfer of Sensitive Personal Data
		 Rule 7 requires that body corporate may transfer sensitive personal data into another jurisdiction only
   if the country ensures the same level of protection and may be allowed only if it is necessary for
   the performance of the lawful contract between the body corporate or any person on its behalf and
   provider of information or where such person has consented to data transfer.
  xii.    Security of Information
		 Rule 8 requires that the body corporate must secure information in accordance with the ISO 27001
   standard or any other best practices notified by Central Government, which must be audited annually
   or when the body corporate undertakes a significant up gradation of its process and computer resource.

 LAW OF PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION
Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 got the assent of the Hon’ble President of India on 11th August,
2023. The law creates a full framework for the protection of digital personal data in India. It explains what
organisations must do when they collect or use such data.
The purpose of this law is to provide the law relating to the processing of digital personal data in a manner that
recognises both the right of individuals to protect their personal data and the need to process such personal
data for lawful purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
The Act follows the SARAL approach. This means it is Simple, Accessible, Rational and Actionable. Further,
the Government of India has also notified the Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Rules, 2025 on 14th
November 2025. This marks the operationalisation of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP
Act).
Together, the Act and the Rules form a clear and citizen-centred framework for the responsible use of digital
personal data. They place equal weight on individual rights and lawful data processing.


                                                                                                              439
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Law relating to Information Technology

In addition to the objectives outlined under the Act, the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025
operationalise the Act by prescribing practical obligations for Data Fiduciaries, timelines for compliance,
formats for notices, consent requirements, processing conditions, security safeguards, and detailed procedures
for breach notification.
Following the notification of the DPDP Rules, 2025, the Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023,
is being implemented in a three-phase, 18-month rollout. The DPDP Rules provide an 18-month phased
compliance timeline, allowing organisations time for smooth transition. They also require Data Fiduciaries to
issue standalone, clear and simple consent notices that transparently explain the specific purpose for which
personal data is being collected and used. Consent Managers—entities that help individuals manage their
permissions—must be Indian companies. Phases and their corresponding timelines are as follows:

Phase 1: Immediate Effect (November 13, 2025)
This phase focuses on the institutional and foundational legal framework. Key provisions that are now active
include the establishment of the Data Protection Board of India (DPBI) and its operational procedures, definitions
within the Act and Rules, and the government’s rule-making powers. The regulator is now operational.

Phase 2: After One Year (November 12, 2026)
This intermediate phase is dedicated to the Consent Manager ecosystem. Provisions relating to the registration
and obligations of Consent Managers will come into force, allowing these entities time to meet the required
standards and register with the DPBI.

Phase 3: After Eighteen Months (May 12, 2027)
The final phase activates the majority of the core operational compliance obligations for all Data Fiduciaries.
This is the time limit for businesses to implement comprehensive changes across their systems. Key requirements
effective from this date include:
      –   Mandatory notice and consent mechanisms.
      –   Implementing security safeguards and data breach notification procedures.
      –   Processing personal data of children with verifiable parental consent.
      –   Establishing systems for Data Principal rights (access, correction, erasure) and grievance redressal.
      –   Adhering to data retention and automated erasure requirements.
      –   Complying with additional obligations for Significant Data Fiduciaries (e.g., Data Protection Impact
          Assessments, audits).

 Important Definitions under the DPDP Act, 2023
      l   “Board” means the Data Protection Board of India established by the Central Government.
		 Under Rules 14 to 17 of the DPDP Rules 2025, the Board is constituted as a ‘Digital-First Adjudicatory
   Body’. All filings, notices, hearings, replies, and orders will occur through an online portal to ensure
   speed and transparency. The Board will consist of four Members and will function entirely through
   digital mechanisms for inquiry, adjudication, and grievance redressal. Appeals from the Board’s orders
   shall lie before the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT).
      l   “Data” means a representation of information, facts, concepts, opinions or instructions in a manner
          suitable for communication, interpretation or processing by human beings or by automated means.


440
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                    LESSON 12

    l    “Data Principal” means the individual to whom the personal data relates and where such individual is—
          (i) a child, includes the parents or lawful guardian of such a child;
          (ii)   a person with disability, includes her lawful guardian, acting on her behalf.
    l    “Data Processor” means any person who processes personal data on behalf of a Data Fiduciary.
    l    “Personal data” means any data about an individual who is identifiable by or I n relation to such data;
    l    “Personal data breach” means any unauthorised processing of personal data or accidental disclosure,
         acquisition, sharing, use, alteration, destruction or loss of access to personal data, that compromises
         the confidentiality, integrity or availability of personal data;
    l    “Processing” in relation to personal data, means a wholly or partly automated operation or set of
         operations performed on digital personal data, and includes operations such as collection, recording,
         organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation, retrieval, use, alignment or combination, indexing,
         sharing, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, restriction, erasure
         or destruction;
    l    “Data Fiduciary” means any person who alone or in conjunction with other persons determines the
         purpose and means of processing of personal data; and “person” includes—
          (i) an individual;
          (ii)   a Hindu undivided family;
         (iii)   a company;
         (iv) a firm;
          (v)    an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not; (vi) the State; and
         (vii) every artificial juristic person, not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses.
    l    Consent Manager: An entity that provides a single, transparent and interoperable platform through
         which a Data Principal may give, manage, review or withdraw consent.
    l    Appellate Tribunal: The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT), which hears
         appeals against decisions of the Data Protection Board.

 Application of the Act
According to section 3, subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall-
   (a)   apply to the processing of digital personal data within the territory of India where the personal data is
         collected–
          (i) in digital form; or
          (ii)   in non-digital form and digitised subsequently;
   (b)   also apply to processing of digital personal data outside the territory of India, if such processing is
         in connection with any activity related to offering of goods or services to Data Principals within the
         territory of India;
   (c)   not apply to—
          (i) personal data processed by an individual for any personal or domestic purpose; and

                                                                                                                 441
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Information Technology

           (ii)   personal data that is made or caused to be made publicly available by—
                  (A)   the Data Principal to whom such personal data relates; or
                  (B)   any other person who is under an obligation under any law for the time being in force in
                        India to make such personal data publicly available.
Rule 4 of the DPDP Rules 2025 introduces a phased compliance schedule extending up to eighteen months
from the date of notification of the Rules. During this period, Data Fiduciaries may progressively implement
consent mechanisms, breach reporting systems, data retention policies, and user rights redressal systems. Full
compliance becomes mandatory for all Data Fiduciaries upon completion of the eighteen-month window.
Rule 12 provides operational clarity for exempted categories by requiring Data Fiduciaries to maintain limited logs
even in respect of data categories that are partially exempt or processed for domestic purposes. Government-
notified exemptions under the Act must comply with proportionality safeguards, and the processing must remain
consistent with the principles of purpose limitation and data minimisation.



                                                 LESSON ROUND-UP

   l The Information Technology Act has been passed to give effect to the UN resolution and to promote
       efficient delivery of Government services by means of reliable electronic records. The Act came into
       effect on 17.10.2000.

   l The purpose of the Act is (a) to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic
       data interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as“electronic
       commerce”, which involve the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of communication
       and storage of information and (b) to facilitate electronic filing of documents with the Government
       agencies.

   l Any subscriber may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his electronic signature.

   l “Digital Signature” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of an
       electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of the Act.

   l The digital signature will be certified by ‘Certifying Authority’. The ‘certified authority’ will be licensed,
       supervised and controlled by ‘Controller of Certifying Authorities’.

   l The Act contemplates a dual scheme in regard to wrongful acts concerning computers, etc. Certain
       acts are visited with (so called) “penalties”, which are however, adjudicated, not before courts, but
       before adjudication officers.

   l The Act provides for the establishment of one or more Appellate Tribunal and lays down various
       provisions regarding its jurisdiction, composition, powers and procedure.

   l Any person aggrieved by an order of the Controller of Certifying Authorities or of the adjudicator can
       appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.

   l Chapter XI of the Act spells out provisions regarding offences relating to computers, etc. This chapter
       also contains provisions empowering the Controller of Certifying Authorities to issue certain directions
       to Certifying Authorities and to subscribers. There is also a provision for confiscation.



442
Law relating to Information Technology                                                                 LESSON 12

   l A committee led by former Supreme Court Justice B.N. Srikrishna, constituted in August 2017, submitted
       the draft Personal Data Protection(PDP) Bill 2018. But, the bill that was designed to protect the privacy
       of Indians, the Personal Data Protection Bill 2019, was withdrawn by the government with an assurance
       that a new bill will soon be tabled.


                                                  GLOSSARY

 Affixing electronic Signature: Affixing electronic signature with its grammatical variations and cognate
 expressions means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating
 an electronic record by means of digital signature.

 Biometrics : Biometrics means the technologies that measure and analyse human body characteristics,
 such as ‘fingerprints’, ‘eye retinas and irises’, ‘voice patterns’, “facial patterns’, ‘hand measurements’ and
 ‘DNA’ for authentication purposes.

 Cyber incidents: Cyber incidents means any real or suspected adverse event in relation to cyber security
 that violates an explicitly or implicitly applicable security policy resulting in unauthorised access, denial of
 service or disruption, unauthorised use of a computer resource for processing or storage of information or
 changes to data, information without authorisation.

 Cyber Security: Cyber security means protecting information, equipment, devices, computer, computer
 resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, disclosure,
 disruption, modification or destruction.

 Electronic Record: Electronic record means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received
 or sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche.

 Electronic Signature: Electronic signature means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by
 means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature.


                                               TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
    1. Summaries the main provisions contained in the Information Technology Act, 2000.
   2. What is the significance of electronic records under the Information Technology Act, 2000?
   3. State very briefly the gist of the concepts of “computer network”, “electronic form” and “key pair”, under
      the Information Technology Act, 2000.
   4. What are the offences provided in the Information Technology Act, 2000, for various kinds of misuse of
      computer?
   5. State, in brief, about the Appellate Tribunal, under the Information Technology Act, 2000.
   6. Enumerate the offences punishable under section 66 of Information Technology Act, 2000.




                                                                                                              443
EP-JI&GL                                                                 Law relating to Information Technology


                                      LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l Bare Act of the Information Technology Act, 2000

   l Articles by the professionals and Firms

   l Kamath Nandan, Law Relating to Computers Internet & E-commerce - A Guide to Cyber laws & The
      Information Technology Act, Rules, Regulations and Notifications along with Latest Case Laws (2012)
   l Karnika Seth, Computers Internet and New Technology Laws (2013)

   l Law of Information Technology (Cyber Law) — D.P. Mittal.



                      OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1999/1/A2000-21%20%281%29.pdf




444
                                                                                                 Lesson
Contract Law
                                                                                                   13
KEY CONCEPTS
n   Agreement n Contract n Void Agreement n Quantum Meruit n Contingent Contract n Quasi Contract
n Bailment and Pledge n E-Contract




Learning Objectives
To understand:
        General Principles relating to the formation and Enforceability of Contracts
        Types of Contracts
        Offer and Acceptance
        Consideration
        Capacity to Contract
        Free Consent
        Termination of Contract
        Remedies for breach of Contract
        Indemnity and Guarantee
        Bailment and Pledge
        Agency and types of Agents
        E-Contracts
        Joint Venture Agreements



Lesson Outline
        Formation of an Agreement, intention to              Remedies for Breach of Contract
         create legal relationship                            Contract of Indemnity and Guarantee
        Essential elements of a Valid Contract                (sections 124 to 147)
        Kinds of offer, communication, acceptance            Contract of Bailment and Pledge
         and revocation of offer and acceptance               Law of Agency
        Consideration                                        Joint venture/ foreign collaboration/
        Exceptions of Consideration                           multinational agreement
        Void, Voidable & Illegal Contracts: Flaws in         E-contracts
         Contract and Free Consent                            Lesson Round-Up
        Certain relations resembling those of                Glossary
         contract (Quasi Contracts)                           Test Yourself
        Discharge or Termination of Contracts                List of Further Readings and References

                                                                                                         445
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
  l   Indian Contract Act, 1872

 FORMATION OF AN AGREEMENT, INTENTION TO CREATE LEGAL RELATIONSHIP

 Meaning and Nature of Contract

The law relating to contract is governed by the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
                                                                                  The Indian Contract Act has
The Act came into force on the first day of September, 1872. The preamble
                                                                                  defined contract in Section 2(h)
to the Act says that it is an Act “to define and amend certain parts of the
                                                                                  as “an agreement enforceable
law relating to contract”. The Act is by no means exhaustive on the law of
                                                                                  by law”.
contract. It does not deal with all the branches of the law of contract. Thus,
contracts relating to partnership, sale of goods, negotiable instruments,
insurance etc. are dealt with by separate Acts.

The Indian Contract Act mostly deals with the general principles and rules governing contracts. The Act is
divisible into two parts. The first part (Section 1-75) deals with the general principles of the law of contract, and
therefore applies to all contracts irrespective of their nature. The second part (Sections 124-238) deals with
certain special kinds of contracts, namely contracts of Indemnity and Guarantee, Bailment, Pledge, and Agency.

These definitions indicate that a contract essentially consists of two distinct parts. First, there must be an
agreement. Secondly, such an agreement must be enforceable by law. To be enforceable, an agreement must
be coupled with an obligation.

A contract therefore, is a combination of the two elements: (1) an agreement and (2) an obligation.

 Example
 A orally agreed to supply goods to B and to receive payment against it. Is it an agreement?
 Yes, it is an oral agreement.


 Agreement
An agreement gives birth to a contract. As per Section 2(e) of the Indian Contract Act “every promise and every
set of promises, forming the consideration for each other, is an agreement. It is evident from the definition given
above that an agreement is based on a promise. What is a promise? According to Section 2(b) of the Indian
Contract Act “when the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is said to
be accepted. A proposal, when accepted, becomes a promise. An agreement, therefore, comes into existence
when one party makes a proposal or offer to the other party and that other party signifies his assent thereto. In
nutshell, an agreement is the sum total of offer and acceptance.”



446
Contract Law                                                                                                 LESSON 13

An analysis of the definition given above reveals the following characteristics of an agreement:

                                                    Agreement


                           Plurality of persons                          Consensus ad idem



                   There must be two or more persons to      The meeting of the minds is called consensus-
                   make an agreement beause one person          ad-idem. It means bot the parties to an
                    cannot enter into an agreement with        agreement must agree about the subject
                                   himself                    matter of the agreement in the same sense
                                                                         and at the same time.


 Obligation
An obligation is the legal duty to do or abstain from doing what one has promised to do or abstain from
doing. A contractual obligation arises from a bargain between the parties to the agreement who are called
the promisor and the promisee. Section 2(b) says that when the person to whom the proposal is made signifies
his assent thereto, the proposal is said to be accepted; and a proposal when accepted becomes a promise.
In broad sense, therefore, a contract is an exchange of promises by two or more persons, resulting in an
obligation to do or abstain from doing a particular act, where such obligation is recognised and enforced by
law.


 Rights and Obligations
 Where parties have made a binding contract, they have created rights and obligations between themselves.
 The contractual rights and obligations are correlative, e.g., A agrees with B to sell his car for Rs. 10,000 to
 him. In this example, the following rights and obligations have been created:
     (i)    A is under an obligation to deliver the car to B. B has a corresponding right to receive the car.
     (ii)   B is under an obligation to pay Rs. 10,00,000 to A. A has a correlative right to receive Rs. 10,00,000.


 Agreements which are not Contracts
Agreements in which the idea of bargain is absent and there is no intention to create legal relations are not
contracts. These are:




                                                                                                                  447
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                        Contract Law

  (a)         Agreements relating to social matters: An agreement between two persons to go together to the
              cinema, or for a walk, does not create a legal obligation on their part to abide by it. Similarly, if I promise
              to take you for a dinner and break that promise, I do not expect to be liable to legal penalties. There
              cannot be any offer and acceptance to hospitality.
  (b)         Domestic arrangements between husband and wife: In Balfour v. Balfour (1919) 2 KB 571, a husband
              working in Ceylone, had agreed in writing to pay a housekeeping allowance to his wife living in
              England. On receiving information that she was unfaithful to him, he stopped the allowance. Held, he
              was entitled to do so. This was a mere domestic arrangement with no intention to create legally binding
              relations. Therefore, there was no contract.

 Three consequences follow from the above discussion:
        (i)    To constitute a contract, the parties must intend to create legal relationship.
      (ii)     The law of contract is the law of those agreements which create obligations, and those obligations
               which have their source in agreement.
      (iii)    Agreement is the genus of which contract is the specie and, therefore, all contracts are agreements
               but all agreements are not contracts.

 Intention to Create Legal Relations
Intention to Create Legal Relations is an essential element of a valid contract is that there must be an intention
among the parties that the agreement should be attached by legal consequences and create legal obligations.
If there is no such intention on the part of the parties, there is no contract between them. Agreements of a social
or domestic nature do not contemplate legal relationship. As such they are not contracts.
A proposal or an offer is made with a view to obtain the assent to the other party and when that other party
expresses his willingness to the act or abstinence proposed, he accepts the offer and a contract is made
between the two. But both offer and acceptance must be made with the intention of creating legal relations
between the parties. The test of intention is objective. The Courts seek to give effect to the presumed intention
of the parties. Where necessary, the Court would look into the conduct of the parties, for much can be inferred
from the conduct. The Court is not concerned with the mental intention of the parties, but rather with what a
reasonable man would say, was the intention of the parties, having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
For example, if two persons agree to assist each other by rendering advice, in the pursuit of virtue, science or
art, it cannot be regarded as a contract. In commercial and business agreements, the presumption is usually
that the parties intended to create legal relations. But this presumption is rebuttable which means that it must
be shown that the parties did not intend to be legally bound.

 Other Important Types of Contracts
Contingent Contract (section 31)
As per Section 31, a contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do something, if some event collateral to
such contract, does or does not happen. For example, A contracts to sell B 10 bales of cotton for Rs. 20,000, if
the ship by which they are coming returns safely. This is a contingent contract.
Contract of insurance and contracts of indemnity and guarantee are popular instances of contingent contracts.

 Example
 A contracts to sell B, 10 bales of cotton for Rs. 20,000, if the ship by which they are coming returns safely.
 This is a contingent contract.


448
Contract Law                                                                                          LESSON 13

Rules regarding contingent contracts
The following rules are contained in Section 32-36:
   (a)   Contracts contingent upon the happening of a future uncertain event cannot be enforced by law unless
         and until that event has happened. If the event becomes impossible, the contract becomes void -
         Section 32.
          (i) A makes a contract to buy B’s house if A survives C. This contract cannot be enforced by law
              unless and until C dies in A’s lifetime.
          (ii)   A contracts to pay B a sum of money when B marries C, C dies without being married to B. The
                 contract becomes void.
   (b)   Contracts contingent upon the non-happening of an uncertain future event can be enforced when the
         happening of that event becomes impossible and not before - Section 33.
		 A contracts to pay B a certain sum of money if a certain ship does not return. The ship is sunk. The
   contract can be enforced when the ship sinks.
   (c)   If a contract is contingent upon how a person will act at an unspecified time, the event shall be
         considered to become impossible when such person does anything which renders it impossible that he
         should so act within any definite time or otherwise than under further contingencies - Section 34.
   (d)   Contracts contingent on the happening of an event within a fixed time become void if, at the expiration
         of the time, such event has not happened, or if, before the time fixed, such event becomes impossible -
         Section 35.
   (e)   Contracts contingent upon the non-happening of an event within a fixed time may be enforced by law
         when the time fixed has expired and such event has not happened or before the time fixed has expired,
         if it becomes certain that such event will not happen - Section 35.
   (f)   Contingent agreements to do or not to do anything if an impossible event happens, are void, whether
         the impossibility of the event is known or not known to the parties to the agreement at the time when it
         is made- Section 36.

 Law relating Other Important Types of Contracts
There are some special type of contracts. These are:
    1.   Indemnity
   2.    Guarantee
   3.    Bailment
   4.    Pledge
   5.    Joint Ventures, Collaborations and Multinational Agreements
It is necessary to understand these concepts for complete understanding of Contract Law. However, before
understanding these topics basic understanding of contract law is beneficial. Therefore, these topics are
covered later in the study material for proper understanding.

 ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS OF A VALID CONTRACT
Section 10 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides that “all agreements are contracts if they are made by the
free consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not
hereby expressly declared to be void”.

                                                                                                             449
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Contract Law

Therefore, the essential elements of a valid contract are:

      (i)   An offer or proposal by one party and acceptance of that offer by another party resulting in an
            agreement – consensus-ad-idem.

   (ii)     An intention to create legal relations or an intent to have legal consequences.

  (iii)     The agreement is supported by a lawful consideration.

  (iv)      The parties to the contract are legally capable of contracting.

   (v)      Genuine consent between the parties.

  (vi)      The object and consideration of the contract is legal and is not opposed to public policy.

  (vii)     The terms of the contract are certain.

 (viii)     The agreement is capable of being performed i.e., it is not impossible of being performed.

Therefore, to form a valid contract there must be (1) an agreement, (2) based on the genuine consent of the
parties, (3) supported by a lawful consideration, (4) made for a lawful object, and (5) between the competent
parties.

  Question: Can an agreement on ambiguous terms be valid?
  No, The agreement shall be on valid terms.


  Question: A & B, entered into contract in which A will send goods to B free of cost and B is not required to
  do anything against it. Is the contract valid?
  No, a valid contract must have consideration unless falls into in to exempted category.


 KINDS OF OFFER, COMMUNICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND REVOCATION OF OFFER AND
 ACCEPTANCE

 Offer or Proposal and Acceptance
One of the early steps in the formation of a contract lies in arriving at an agreement between the contracting
parties by means of an offer and acceptance. Thus, when one party (the offeror) makes a definite proposal
to another party (the offeree) and the offeree accepts it in its entirety and without any qualification, there is a
meeting of the minds of the parties and a contract comes into being, assuming that all other elements are also
present.

 What is an Offer or a Proposal?
A proposal is also termed as an offer. The word ‘proposal’ is synonymous with the English word “offer”. An
offer is a proposal by one person, whereby he expresses his willingness to enter into a contractual obligation
in return for a promise, act or forbearance. The person making the proposal or offer is called the proposer or
offeror and the person to whom the proposal is made is called the offeree.

 1st Definition - Proposal: When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing
 anything, with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence, he is said to make a
 proposal. Section 2(a)



450
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

 Kinds of Offers
There are generally 7 type of Offers with difference as to type of offers and their parties. They are as
under:
   1.   Particular offer/Specific Offer: The offer is made and addressed to a certain person only. It can only be
        accepted by person to whom it has been made or its authorized person.

         Example
         A offers to sell his car to B on a consideration of Rs. 1,00,000/-. This is a type of particular offer.

   2.   General Offer: In general offers, the Offer are made to public at large and may be accepted by any
        one. Tickets are one such example of general offer. Tickets purchased for entrance into places
        of amusement, or tickets issued by railways or bus companies, clock- room tickets, and many
        other contracts set out in printed documents contain numerous terms, of many of which the party
        receiving the ticket or document is ignorant. If a passenger on a railway train receives a ticket on
        the face of which is printed “this ticket is issued subject to the notices, regulations and conditions
        contained in the current time-tables of the railway”, the regulations and conditions referred to are
        deemed to be communicated to him and he is bound by them whether or not he has read them. He
        is bound even if he is illiterate and unable to read them. But it is important that the notice of the
        conditions is contemporaneous with the making of the contract and not after the contract has been
        made.

         Example
         Participation in Lottery, Purchasing the ticket of performance etc.

   3.   Cross Offers: When two parties gives offers to each other. This is not material that the counter offers are
        made with similar terms of different terms. Even when two offers were made with similar terms and no
        offer was accepted, there can be no concluded contract.

         Example
         A offers to sell his old mobile phone to B at a price of Rs. 10,000/-. B offers to purchase A’s old mobile
         phone at a price of Rs. 10,000/-. There is no concluded contract.

   4.   Open/Continuing/Standing Offer: Where a person offers to another to supply specific goods, up to a
        stated quantity or in any quantity which may be required, at a certain rate, during a fixed period, he
        makes a standing offer. Thus, a tender to supply goods as and when required, amounts to a standing
        offer.
		A standing offer or a tender is of the nature of a continuing offer. An acceptance of such an offer merely
  amounts to intimation that the offer will be considered to remain open during the period specified and
  that it will be accepted from time to time by placing order for specified quantities. Each successive
  order given, while the offer remains in force, is an acceptance of the standing offer as to the quantity
  ordered, and creates a separate contract. It does not bind either party unless and until such orders
  are given.
		 Where P tendered to supply goods to L upto a certain amount and over a certain period, L’s order did
   not come up to the amount expected and P sued for breach of contract Held: Each order made was a
   separate contract and P was bound to fulfill orders made, but there was no obligation on L to make any
   order to all [Percival Ltd. vs. L.C.C. (1918)].

                                                                                                                   451
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Contract Law


            Example
            A tender was floated to obtain raw coffee beans by a Company. The coffee beans were required to
            be provided as and when the order is placed. The tender was awarded to a partnership firm. There
            is no concluded contract. Contract will be concluded on placing of the order.

   5.      Counter offer: An offer made against an offer already made. In these offers, the contracts can be made
           only after acceptance of counter offer.

            Example
            A offers to sell his old mobile phone to B at a price of Rs. 10,000/-. B made a counter offer to
            purchase the said phone at a price of Rs. 9500/-. There is a situation of counter offer.

   6.      Contracts by Post: Contracts by post are subject to the same rules as others, but because of their
           importance, these are stated below separately:
           (a)   An offer by post may be accepted by post, unless the offeror indicates anything to the contrary.
           (b)   An offer is made only when it actually reaches the offeree and not before, i.e., when the letter
                 containing the offer is delivered to the offeree.
           (c)   An acceptance is made as far as the offeror is concerned, as soon as the letter containing the
                 acceptance is posted, to offerors correct address; it binds the offeror, but not the acceptor.
		 An acceptance binds the acceptor only when the letter containing the acceptance reaches the
   offeror. The result is that the acceptor can revoke his acceptance before it reaches the offeror.
           (d)   An offer may be revoked before the letter containing the acceptance is posted. An acceptance
                 can be revoked before it reaches the offeror.
      7.   Contracts over the Telephone: Contracts over the telephone are regarded the same in principle as
           those negotiated by the parties in the actual presence of each other. In both cases an oral offer is made
           and an oral acceptance is expected. It is important that the acceptance must be audible, heard and
           understood by the offeror. If during the conversation the telephone lines go “dead” and the offeror does
           not hear the offerees word of acceptance, there is no contract at the moment. If the whole conversation
           is repeated and the offeror hears and understands the words of acceptance, the contract is complete
           [Kanhaiyalal v. Dineshwarchandra (1959) AIR, M.P. 234].

 Rules Governing Offers
A valid offer must comply with the following rules:
   (a)     An offer must be clear, definite, complete and final. It must not be vague. For example, a promise to pay
           an increased price for a horse if it proves lucky to promisor, is too vague and is not binding.
   (b)     An offer must be communicated to the offeree. An offer becomes effective only when it has been
           communicated to the offeree so as to give him an opportunity to accept or reject the same.
   (c)     The communication of an offer may be made by express words-oral or written-or it may be implied by
           conduct. A offers his car to B for Rs. 10,000. It is an express offer. A bus plying on a definite route goes
           along the street. This is an implied offer on the part of the owners of the bus to carry passengers at the
           scheduled fares for the various stages.
The communication of the offer may be general or specific. Where an offer is made to a specific person it is
called specific offer and it can be accepted only by that person. But when an offer is addressed to an uncertain

452
Contract Law                                                                                               LESSON 13

body of individuals i.e. the world at large, it is a general offer and can be accepted by any member of the
general public by fulfilling the condition laid down in the offer.

 CASE LAWS

 The leading case on the subject is Carlill v. Carbolic Smoke Ball Co. The company offered by advertisement,
 a reward of `100 to anyone who contacted influenza after using their smoke ball in the specified manner. Mrs.
 Carlill did use smoke ball in the specified manner, but was attacked by influenza. She claimed the reward
 and it was held that she could recover the reward as general offer can be accepted by anybody. Since this
 offer is of a continuing nature, more than one person can accept it and can even claim the reward. But if
 the offer of reward is for seeking some information or seeking the restoration of missing thing, then the offer
 can be accepted by one individual who does it first of all. The condition is that the claimant must have prior
 knowledge of the reward before doing that act or providing that information.
 In India also, in the case of HarbhajanLal v. HarcharanLal (AIR 1925 All. 539), the same rule was applied.
 In this case, a young boy ran away from his fathers home. The father issued a pamphlet offering a reward
 of `500 to anybody who would bring the boy home. The plaintiff saw the boy at a railway station and sent
 a telegram to the boys father. It was held that the handbill was an offer open to the world at large and
 was capable to acceptance by any person who fulfilled the conditions contained in the offer. The plaintiff
 substantially performed the conditions and was entitled to the reward offered.


 Example
 A advertises in the newspapers that he will pay rupees one thousand to anyone who brings to him his lost
 cat. B without knowing of this reward finds A’s lost cat and restore him to A. In this case since B did not know
 of the reward, he cannot claim it from A even though he finds A’s lost cat and brings him to A.

 Offer and invitation to offer
Invitation to offer is a communication to invite certain person(s) or public for making offer. The same may be
understood from below mentioned examples:
   (a)   An invitation to treat or an invitation to make an offer: e.g., an auctioneers request for bids (which are
         offered by the bidders), the display of goods in a shop window with prices marked upon them, or the
         display of priced goods in a self- service store or a shopkeepers catalogue of prices are invitations to
         an offer.
   (b)   A mere statement of intention: e.g., an announcement of a coming auction sale. Thus, a person who
         attended the advertised place of auction could not sue for breach of contract if the auction was
         cancelled [Harris v. Nickerson (1873) L.R. 8 QB 286].
   (c)   A mere communication of information in the course of negotiation: e.g., a statement of the price at which
         one is prepared to consider negotiating the sale of piece of land [Harvey v. Facey (1893) A.C. 552].
An offer that has been communicated properly continues as such until it lapses, or until it is revoked by the
offeror, or rejected or accepted by the offeree.

 Lapse of Offer
Section 6 deals with various modes of lapse of an offer. It states that an offer lapses if—
   (a)   it is not accepted within the specified time (if any) or after a reasonable time, if none is specified;


                                                                                                                   453
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Contract Law

   (b)   it is not accepted in the mode prescribed or if no mode is prescribed in some usual and reasonable
         manner, e.g., by sending a letter by mail when early reply was requested;
   (c)   the offeree rejects it by distinct refusal to accept it;
   (d)   either the offeror or the offeree dies before acceptance;
   (e)   the acceptor fails to fulfill a condition precedent to an acceptance;
   (f)   the offeree makes a counter offer, it amounts to rejection of the offer and an offer by the offeree may
         be accepted or rejected by the offeror.

 Revocation of Offer by the Offeror
An offer may be revoked by the offeror at any time before acceptance.
Like any offer, revocation must be communicated to the offeree, as it does not take effect until it is actually
communicated to the offeree. Before its actual communication, the offeree, may accept the offer and create a
binding contract. The revocation must reach the offeree before he sends out the acceptance. An offer to keep
open for a specified time (option) is not binding unless it is supported by consideration.

 Mode of Revocation
A proposal may revoked in different ways. Revocation may revoked either by act or by omission. Section 6
provides the following modes for revocation:
   (1)   by the communication of notice of revocation by the proposer to the other party.
   (2)   by the lapse of the time prescribed in such proposal for its acceptance, or, if no time is so prescribed,
         by the lapse of a reasonable time, without communication of the acceptance.
   (3)   by the failure of the acceptor to fulfil a condition precedent to acceptance.
   (4)   by the death or insanity of the proposer, if the fact of his death or insanity comes to the knowledge of
         the acceptor before acceptance.
Point no. 1 of the above is revocation by an act and 2 to 3 are revocation by omission.

 Acceptance
A contract emerges from the acceptance of an offer. Acceptance is the act of assenting by the offeree to an
offer. Under Section 2(b) of the Contract Act when a person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent
thereto, the proposal is said to be accepted. A proposal, when accepted becomes a promise.

 Rules Governing Acceptance
   (a)   Acceptance may be express i.e. by words spoken or written or implied from the conduct of the parties.
   (b)   If a particular method of acceptance is prescribed, the offer must be accepted in the prescribed manner.
   (c)   Acceptance must be unqualified and absolute and must correspond with all the terms of the offer.
   (d)   A counter offer or conditional acceptance operates as a rejection of the offer and causes it to lapse,
         e.g., where a horse is offered for Rs. 1,000 and the offeree counter-offers Rs. 990, the offer lapses by
         rejection.
   (e)   Acceptance must be communicated to the offeror, for acceptance is complete the moment it is
         communicated. Where the offeree merely intended to accept but does not communicate his intention
         to the offeror, there is no contract. Mere mental acceptance is not enough.

454
Contract Law                                                                                               LESSON 13

   (f)   Mere silence on the part of the offeree does not amount to acceptance.
		 Ordinarily, the offeror cannot frame his offer in such a way as to make the silence or inaction of the
   offeree as an acceptance. In other words, the offeror can prescribe the mode of acceptance but not the
   mode of rejection.
   (g)   If the offer is one which is to be accepted by being acted upon, no communication of acceptance to the
         offeror
		 is necessary, unless communication is stipulated for in the offer itself.
		 Thus, if a reward is offered for finding a lost dog, the offer is accepted by finding the dog after reading
   about the offer, and it is unnecessary before beginning to search for the dog to give notice of acceptance
   to the offeror.
   (h)   Acceptance must be given within a reasonable time and before the offer lapses or is revoked. An offer
         becomes irrevocable by acceptance.
An acceptance never precedes an offer. There can be no acceptance of an offer which is not communicated.
Similarly, performance of conditions of an offer without the knowledge of the specific offer, is no acceptance.
Thus in Lalman Shukla v. Gauri Dutt (1913), where a servant brought the boy without knowing of the reward, he
was held not entitled to reward because he did not know about the offer.

 CONSIDERATION

 Need for Consideration
Consideration is one of the essential elements of a valid contract. The requirement of consideration stems from
the policy of extending the arm of the law to the enforcement of mutual promises of parties. A mere promise is
not enforceable at law. For example, if A promises to make a gift of Rs. 500 to B, and subsequently changes his
mind, B cannot succeed against A for breach of promise, as B has not given anything in return. It is only when a
promise is made for something in return from the promisee, that such promise can be enforced by law against
the promisor. This something in return is the consideration for the promise.

 Definition of Consideration
Sir Fredrick Pollock has defined consideration “as an act or forbearance of one party, or the promise thereof is
the price for which the promise of the other is bought”.
It is “some right, interest, profit, or benefit accruing to one party or some forbearance, detriment, loss or
responsibility, given, suffered or undertaken by the other” [Currie v. Misa (1875) L.R. 10 Ex. 153].
Section 2(d) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 defines consideration thus: “when at the desire of the promisor, the
promisee or any other person has done or abstained from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises
to do or to abstain from doing something, such act or abstinence or promise is called a consideration for the
promise”.
The fundamental principle that consideration is essential in every contract, is laid down by both the definitions
but there are some important points of difference in respect of the nature and extent of consideration and
parties to it under the two systems:
  (a)    Consideration at the desire of the promisor: Section 2(d) of the Act begins with the statement that
         consideration must move at the desire or request of the promisor. This means that whatever is done
         must have been done at the desire of the promisor and not voluntarily or not at the desire of a third
         party. If A rushes to B’s help whose house is on fire, there is no consideration but a voluntary act. But if A
         goes to B’s help at B’s request, there is good consideration as B did not wish to do the act gratuitously.


                                                                                                                  455
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

  (b)       Consideration may move from the promisee or any other person: In English law, consideration must
            move from the promisee, so that a stranger to the consideration cannot sue on the contract. A person
            seeking to enforce a simple contract must prove in court that he himself has given the consideration in
            return for the promise he is seeking to enforce.

In Indian law, however, consideration may move from the promisee or any other person, so that a stranger to
the consideration may maintain a suit. In Chinnaya v. Ramaya, (1882) 4 Mad. 137, a lady by a deed of gift
made over certain property to her daughter directing her to pay an annuity to the donors brother as had been
done by the donor herself before she gifted the property. On the same day, her daughter executed in writing
in favour of the donors brother agreeing to pay the annuity. Afterwards the donee (the daughter) declined to
fulfil her promise to pay her uncle saying that no consideration had moved from him. The Court, however, held
that the uncle could sue even though no part of the consideration received by his niece moved from him. The
consideration from her mother was sufficient consideration.

 Doctrine of Privity of Contract and of Consideration
Privity of Contract

A stranger to a contract cannot sue both under the English and Indian law for want of privity of contract. The
following illustration explains this point.

In Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. v. Selfridge Ltd. (1915) A.C. 847, D supplied tyres to a wholesaler X, on condition
that any retailer to whom X re-supplied the tyres should promise X, not to sell them to the public below Ds list
price. X supplied tyres to S upon this condition, but nevertheless S sold the tyres below the list price. Held:
There was a contract between D and X and a contract between X and S. Therefore, D could not obtain damages
from S, as D had not given any consideration for Ss promise to X nor was he party to the contract between D
and X.

Thus, a person who is not a party to a contract cannot sue upon it even though the contract is for his benefit. A,
who is indebted to B, sells his property to C, and C the purchaser of the property, promises to pay off the debt
to B. In case C fails to pay B, B has no right to sue C for there is no privity of contract between B and C.

The leading English case on the point is Tweddle v. Atkinson (1861) 1B and Section 393. In this case, the father
of a boy and the father of a girl who was to be married to the boy, agreed that each of them shall pay a sum
of money to the boy who was to take up the new responsibilities of married life. After the demise of both
the contracting parties, the boy (the husband) sued the executors of his father-in-law upon the agreement
between his father-in-law and his father. Held: the suit was not maintainable as the boy was not a party to the
contract.

Exception to the doctrine of privity of contract: Both the Indian law and the English law recognize certain
exceptions to the rule that a stranger to a contract cannot sue on the contract. In the following cases, a person
who is not a party to a contract can enforce the contract:

      (i)   A beneficiary under an agreement to create a trust can sue upon the agreement, though not a party to
            it, for the enforcement of the trust so as to get the trust executed for his benefit. In Khawaja Muhammad
            v. Hussaini Begum, (1910) 32 All. 410, it was held that where a Mohammedan lady sued her father-in-
            law to recover arrears of allowance payable to her by him under an agreement between him and her
            own father in consideration of her marriage, she could enforce the promise in her favour in so far as she
            was a beneficiary under the agreement to make a settlement in her favour, and she was claiming as
            beneficiary under such settlement.


456
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

   (ii)   An assignee under an assignment made by the parties, or by the operation of law (e.g. in case of death
          or insolvency), can sue upon the contract for the enforcement of his rights, tittle and interest. But a mere
          nominee (i.e., the person for whose benefit another has insured his own life) cannot sue on the policy
          because the nominee is not an assignee.

  (iii)   In cases of family arrangements or settlements between male members of a Hindu family which provide
          for the maintenance or expenses for marriages of female members, the latter though not parties to the
          contract, possess an actual beneficial right which place them in the position of beneficiaries under the
          contract, and can therefore, sue.

  (iv)    In case of acknowledgement of liability, e.g., where A receives money from B for paying to C, and
          admits to C the receipt of that amount, then A constitutes himself as the agent of C.

   (v)    Whenever the promisor is by his own conduct estopped from denying his liability to perform the promise,
          the person who is not a party to the contract can sue upon it to make the promisor liable.

  (vi)    In cases where a person makes a promise to an individual for the benefit of third party and creates a
          charge on certain immovable property for the purpose, the third party can enforce the promise though,
          he is stranger to the contract.

Privity of consideration

In India privity of consideration is not strictly applicable. It means that consideration may be paid by parties
or any other person. The doctrine of privity of contract provides that a contract cannot confer rights or impose
obligations upon any person who is not a party to the contract. It is applicable in India with certain exception
like trust, covenant running with land, family settlements etc.

 Kinds of Consideration




Consideration may be:
   (a)    Executory or future which means that it makes the form of promise to be performed in the future, e.g.,
          an engagement to marry someone; or
   (b)    Executed or present in which it is an act or forbearance made or suffered for a promise. In other words,
          the act constituting consideration is wholly or completely performed, e.g., if A pays today Rs. 100 to a

                                                                                                                 457
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Contract Law

         shopkeeper for goods which are promised to be supplied the next day, A has executed his consideration
         but the shopkeeper is giving executory consideration—a promise to be executed the following day. If
         the price is paid by the buyer and the goods are delivered by the seller at the same time, consideration
         is executed by both the parties.

   (c)   Past which means a past act or forbearance, that is to say, an act constituting consideration which took
         place and is complete (wholly executed) before the promise is made.

According to English law, a consideration may be executory or executed but never past. The English law is that
past consideration is no consideration. The Indian law recognizes all the above three kinds of consideration.

 Rules Governing Consideration
   (a)   Every simple contact must be supported by valuable consideration otherwise it is formally void subject
         to some exceptions.

   (b)   Consideration may be an act of abstinence or promise.

   (c)   There must be mutuality i.e., each party must do or agree to do something. A gratuitous promise as
         in the case of subscription for charity, is not enforceable. For example, where A promises to subscribe
         Rs. 5,000 for the repair of a temple, and then refuses to pay, no action can be taken against him.

   (d)   Consideration must be real, and not vague, indefinite, or illusory, e.g., a son’s promise to “stop being a
         nuisance” to his father, being vague, is no consideration.

   (e)   Although consideration must have some value, it need not be adequate i.e., a full return for the promise.
         Section 25 (Exp. II) clearly provides that “an agreement to which the consent of the promisor is freely
         given is not void merely because the consideration is inadequate”. It is upon the parties to fix their own
         prices. For example, where A voluntarily agreed to sell his motor car for Rs. 500 to B, it became a valid
         contract despite the inadequancy of the consideration.

   (f)   Consideration must be lawful, e.g., it must not be some illegal act such as paying someone to commit
         a crime.

		 If the consideration is unlawful, the agreement is void.

   (g)   Consideration must be something more than the promisee is already bound to do for the promisor.
         Thus, an agreement to perform an existing obligation made with the person to whom the obligation is
         already owed, is not made for consideration. For example, if a seaman deserts his ship so breaking his
         contract of service and is induced to return to his duty by the promise for extra wages, he cannot later
         sue for the extra wages since he has only done what he had already contracted for: Stilk v. Myrick
         (1809).

 EXCEPTIONS OF CONSIDERATION

 When Consideration not Necessary
The general rule is that an agreement made without consideration is void. But Section 25 of the Indian Contract
Act lays down certain exceptions which make a promise without consideration valid and binding.




458
Contract Law                                                                                            LESSON 13

Thus, an agreement without consideration is valid:




The requirements in the above exceptions are noteworthy. The first one requires written and registered promise.
The second may be oral or in writing and the third must be in writing.

  Illustrations
  A, for natural love and affection, promises to give his son B Rs. 10,000. A put his promise to B into writing
  and registered it. This is a contract.
  A registered agreement between a husband and his wife to pay his earnings to her is a valid contract,
  as it is in writing, is registered, is between parties standing in near relation, and is for love and affection
  [Poonoo Bibi v. FyazBuksh, (1874) 15 Bom L.R. 57].
  But where a husband by a registered document, after referring to quarrels and disagreement between
  himself and his wife, promised to pay his wife a sum of money for her maintenance and separate residence,
  it was held that the promise was unenforceable, as it was not made for love and affection [Rajluckhy Deb v.
  Bhootnath (1900) 4 C.W.N. 488].


 Whether Gratuitous Promise can be Enforced

A gratuitous promise to subscribe to a charitable cause cannot be enforced, but if the promisee is put to some
detriment as a result of his acting on the faith of the promise and the promisor knew the purpose and also knew
that on the faith of the subscription an obligation might be incurred, the promisor would be bound by promise
(KedarNath v. Gorie Mohan 64).
It may be noted that it is not necessary that the promisor should benefit by the consideration, it is sufficient if
the promisee does some act from which a third person is benefited and he would not have done that act but for
the promise of the promisor.


                                                                                                               459
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Contract Law



  For example, Y requests X for loan, who agrees to give loan to Y if S gives guarantee of repayment
  of the loan. S gives such a guarantee of repayment by Y. Thereupon X gives loan to Y. Here S will
  be promisor and X the promisee, but from X’s action, benefit is derived by Y and not by S. X would
  not have given the loan to Y had S not given the guarantee of repayment of loan. Thus, the benefit
  conferred on Y by X at the request of S is a sufficient consideration on the part of X as against the
  promise of S to repay the loan. Alternatively, it may be said that the detriment which X suffered by
  giving loan to Y at the request of S is sufficient consideration on the part of X in respect of the promise
  of S to repay the loan.

Consideration therefore, is some detriment to the promisee or some benefit to the promisor. Detriment to one
person and benefit to the other are the same things looked from two angles. Ordinarily a promisor is not bound
by his promise, unless some consideration is offered by the promisee.

 Terms Must be Certain
It follows from what has been explained in relation to offer, acceptance and consideration that to be binding, an
agreement must result in a contract. That is to say, the parties must agree on the terms of their contract. They
must make their intentions clear in their contract. The Court will not enforce a contract the terms of which are
uncertain. Thus, an agreement to agree in the future (a contract to make a contract) will not constitute a binding
contract e.g., a promise to pay an actress a salary to be “mutually agreed between us” is not a contract since
the salary is not yet agreed: Loftus v. Roberts (1902).

Similarly, where the terms of a final agreement are too vague, the contract will fail for uncertainty. Hence, the
terms must be definite or capable of being made definite without further agreement of the parties.

 The legal maxim, therefore, is “a contract to contract is not a contract”. If you agree “subject to contract”
 or “subject to agreement”, the contract does not come into existence, for there is no definite or unqualified
 acceptance.

Thus, a contract is always based upon:

      (i)   Agreement (consensus ad idem) an unqualified acceptance of a definite offer;

   (ii)     An intent to create legal obligations; and

  (iii)     Consideration.

 VOID, VOIDABLE & ILLEGAL CONTRACTS: FLAWS IN CONTRACT AND FREE CONSENT
There may be the circumstances under which a contract made under these rules may still be bad, because
there is a flaw, vice or error somewhere. As a result of such a flaw, the apparent agreement is not a real
agreement. Where there is no real agreement, the law has three remedies:

  Firstly: The agreement may be treated as of no effect and it will then be known as void agreement.
  Secondly: The law may give the party aggrieved the option of getting out of his bargain, and the contract
  is then known as voidable.
  Thirdly: The party at fault may be compelled to pay damages to the other party.



460
Contract Law                                                                                                LESSON 13

 (a) Void Agreement
A void agreement is one which is destitute of all legal effects. It cannot be enforced and confers no rights
on either party. It is really not a contract at all, it is non-existent. Technically the words ‘void contract’ are a
contradiction in terms. But the expression provides a useful label for describing the situation that arises when a
‘contract’ is claimed but in fact does not exist. For example, a minor’s contract is void.

 (b) Voidable Contract
A voidable contract is one which a party can put to an end. He can exercise his option, if his consent was not
free. The contract will, however be binding, if he does not exercise his option to avoid it within a reasonable
time. The consent of a party is not free and so he is entitled to avoid the contract, if he has given his consent
due to misrepresentation, fraud, coercion or undue influence.

 (c) Illegal Agreement
An illegal agreement is an unlawful agreement. The law prohibits agreements made with unlawful object or
consideration. Such an agreement, like the void agreement has no legal effects as between the immediate
parties. Further, transactions collateral to it also become tainted with illegality and are, therefore, not enforceable.
Parties to an unlawful agreement cannot get any help from a Court of law, for no polluted hands shall touch
the pure fountain of justice. On the other hand, a collateral transaction can be supported by a void agreement..

 Example
 A & B entered into contract in which A will steal a Diamond from a museum and B will give him Rs. 5,00,000/-.
 Is it a valid contract?
 No, the consideration should not be illegal.

The chief flaws in contract are:




 Capacity to contract
Flaw in Capacity – Capacity and Persons
In law, persons are either natural or artificial. Natural persons are human beings and artificial persons are
corporations. Contractual capacity or incapacity is an incident of personality.
The general rule is that all natural persons have full capacity to make binding contracts. But the Indian Contract
Act, 1872 admits an exception in the case of:
    (i)    minors,
   (ii)    lunatics, and
   (iii)   persons disqualified from contracting by any law to which they are subject.


                                                                                                                   461
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Contract Law

These persons are not competent to contract. Section 11 provides that every “person is competent to contract
who is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject, and who is of sound mind, and is not
disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject”. A valid agreement requires that both the parties
should understand the legal implications of their conduct. Thus, both must have a mature mind. The legal
yardstick to measure maturity according to the law of contract is, that both should be major and of sound mind
and if not, the law would presume that the maturity of their mind has not reached to the extent of visualising the
pros and cons of their acts, hence, a bar on minors and lunatics competency to contract.
The contractual capacity of a corporation depends on the manner in which it was created.
Minor’s Contract
According to the Indian Majority Act, 1875, a minor is a person, male or female, who has not completed the age
of 18 years. In case a guardian has been appointed to the minor or where the minor is under the guardianship
of the Court of Wards, the person continues to be a minor until he completes his age of 21 years. According to
the Indian Contract Act, no person is competent to enter into a contract who is not of the age of majority. It was
finally laid down by the Privy Council in the leading case of Mohori Bibi v. DharmodasGhose, (1903) 30 Cal.
539, that a minor has no capacity to contract and minors contract is absolutely void. In this case, X, a minor
borrowed Rs. 20,000 from Y, a money lender. As a security for the money advanced, X executed a mortgage
in Y’s favour. When sued by Y, the Court held that the contract by X was void and he cannot be compelled to
repay the amount advanced by him.
Indian Courts have applied this decision to those cases where the minor has incurred any liability or where the
liabilities on both sides are outstanding. In such cases, the minor is not liable. But if the minor has carried out his
part of the contract, then, the Courts have held, that he can proceed against the other party. The rationale is to
protect minors interest. According to the Transfer of Property Act, a minor cannot transfer property but he can
be a transferee (person accepting a transfer). This statutory provision is an illustration of the above principle.
The following points must be kept in mind with respect to minors contract:
   (a)   A minor’s contract is altogether void in law, and a minor cannot bind himself by a contract. If the minor
         has obtained any benefit, such as money on a mortgage, he cannot be asked to repay, nor can his
         mortgaged property be made liable to pay.
   (b)   Since the contract is void ab initio, it cannot be ratified by the minor on attaining the age of majority.
   (c)   Estoppel is an important principle of the law of evidence. To explain, suppose X makes a statement to Y
         and intends that the latter should believe and act upon it. Later on, X cannot resile from this statement
         and make a new one.
		 In other words, X will be estopped from denying his previous statement. But a minor can always plead
   minority and is not estopped from doing so even where he had produced a loan or entered into some
   other contract by falsely representing that he was of full age, when in reality he was a minor.
		 But where the loan was obtained by fraudulent representation by the minor or some property was sold
   by him and the transactions are set aside as being void, the Court may direct the minor to restore the
   property to the other party.

           Example
           A minor fraudulently overstates his age and takes delivery of a motor car after executing a promissory
           note in favour of the trader for its price. The minor cannot be compelled to pay the amount to the
           promissory note, but the Court on equitable grounds may order the minor to return the car to the
           trader, if it is still with the minor.


462
Contract Law                                                                                           LESSON 13

		 Thus, according to Section 33 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 the Court may, if the minor has received
   any benefit under the agreement from the other party require him to restore, so far as may be such
   benefit to the other party, to the extent to which he or his estate has been benefited thereby.
   (d)   A minors estate is liable to pay a reasonable price for necessaries supplied to him or to anyone whom
         the minor is bound to support (Section 68 of the Act).
		 The necessaries supplied must be according to the position and status in life of the minor and must be
   things which the minor actually needs. The following have also been held as necessaries in India.
		 Costs incurred in successfully defending a suit on behalf of a minor in which his property was in
   jeopardy; costs incurred in defending him in a prosecution; and money advanced to a Hindu minor to
   meet his marriage expenses have been held to be necessaries.
   (e)   An agreement by a minor being void, the Court will never direct specific performance of the contract.
   (f)   A minor can be an agent, but he cannot be a principal nor can he be a partner. He can, however, be
         admitted to the benefits of a partnership.
   (g)   Since a minor is never personally liable, he cannot be adjudicated as an insolvent.
   (h)   An agreement by a parent or guardian entered into on behalf of the minor is binding on him provided
         it is for his benefit or is for legal necessity. For, the guardian of a minor, may enter into contract for
         marriage on behalf of the minor, and such a contract would be good in law and an action for its breach
         would lie, if the contract is for the benefit of the minor (Rose Fernandez v. Joseph Gonsalves, 48 Bom.
         L. R. 673) e.g., if the parties are of the community among whom it is customary for parents to contract
         marriage for their children. The contract of apprenticeship is also binding.
However, it has been held that an agreement for service, entered into by a father on behalf of his daughter who
is a minor, is not enforceable at law (Raj Rani v. PremAdib, (1948) 51 Bom. L.R. 256).
Lunatics Agreement
A person of unsound mind is a lunatic. That is to say for the purposes of making contract, a person is of unsound
mind if at the time when he makes the contract, he is incapable of understanding it and of forming rational
judgment as to its effect upon his interests.
A person of unsound mind cannot enter into a contract. A lunatics agreement is therefore void. But if he makes
a contract when he is of sound mind, i.e., during lucid intervals, he will be bound by it.
A sane man who is delirious from fever, or who is so drunk that he cannot understand the terms of a contract,
or form a rational judgement as to its effect on his interests cannot contract whilst such delirium or state of
drunkenness lasts. A person under the influence of hypnotism is temporarily of unsound mind. Mental decay
brought by old age or disease also comes within the definition.
Agreement by persons of unsound mind are void. But for necessaries supplied to a lunatic or to any member of
his family, the lunatics estate, if any, will be liable. There is no personal liability incurred by the lunatic.
If a contract entered into by a lunatic or person of unsound mind is for his benefit, it can be enforced (for the
benefit) against the other party but not vice-versa [Jugal Kishore v. Cheddu, (1903) l All. L.J 43].
Other Persons qualified and disqualified from contracting
Some statues disqualify certain persons governed by them, to enter into a contract. For example, Oudh Land
Revenue Act provides that where a person in Oudh is declared as a ‘disqualified proprietor under the Act, he is
incompetent to alienate his property.


                                                                                                               463
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Contract Law

Alien Enemies
A person who is not an Indian citizen is an alien. An alien may be either an alien friend or a foreigner whose
sovereign or State is at peace with India, has usually contractual capacity of an Indian citizen. On the declaration
of war between his country and India he becomes an alien enemy. A contract with an alien enemy becomes
unenforceable on the outbreak of war.
For the purposes of civil rights, an Indian citizen of the subject of a neutral state who is voluntarily resident in
hostile territory or is carrying on business there is an alien enemy. Trading with an alien enemy is considered
illegal, being against public policy.
Foreign Sovereigns and Ambassadors
Foreign sovereigns and accredited representatives of foreign states, i.e., Ambassadors, High Commissioners,
enjoy a special privilege in that they cannot be sued in Indian Courts, unless they voluntarily submit to the
jurisdiction of the Indian Courts. Foreign Sovereign Governments can enter into contracts through agents
residing in India. In such cases the agent becomes personally responsible for the performance of the contracts.
Professional Persons
In England, barristers-at law are prohibited by the etiquette of their profession from suing for their fees. So also
are the Fellow and Members of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons. But they can sue and be sued
for all claims other than their professional fees. In India, there is no such disability and a barrister, who is in the
position of an advocate with liberty both to act and plead, has a right to contract and to sue for his fees [Nihal
Chand v. Dilawar Khan, 1933 All. L.R. 417].
Corporations
A corporation is an artificial person created by law, e.g., a company registered under the Companies Act, public
bodies created by statute, such as Municipal Corporation of Delhi. A corporation exists only in contemplation of
law and has no physical shape or form.
The Indian Contract Act does not speak about the capacity of a corporation to enter into a contract. But if
properly incorporated, it has a right to enter into a contract. It can sue and can be sued in its own name. There
are some contracts into which a corporation cannot enter without its seal, and others not at all. A company,
for instance, cannot contract to marry. Further, its capacity and powers to contract are limited by its charter or
memorandum of association. Any contract beyond such power in ultra vires and void.
Married Women
In India there is no difference between a man and a woman regarding contractual capacity. A woman married
or single can enter into contracts in the same ways as a man. She can deal with her property in any manner she
likes, provided, of course, she is a major and is of sound mind.
Under the English law, before the passing of the Law Reform (Married Women and Tortfeasors) Act, 1935, a
husband was responsible for his wifes contracts but since 1935 this liability no longer arises unless the wife is
acting as the husbands agent. Now, therefore, even in England a married woman has full contractual capacity,
and can sue and be sued in her own name.
Free Consent: Flaw in Consent
The basis of a contract is agreement, i.e., mutual consent. In other words, the parties should mean the something
in the same sense and agree voluntarily. It is when there is consent, that the parties are said to be consensus
ad idem i.e. their minds have met. Not only consent is required but it must be a free consent. Consent is not free
when it has been caused by coercion, undue influence, misrepresentation, fraud or mistake. These elements if
present, may vitiate the contract.

464
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

When this consent is wanting, the contract may turn out to be void or voidable according to the nature of the
flaw in consent. Where there is no consent, there can be no contract as in the case of mutual mistake. Where
there is consent, but it is not free, a contract is generally voidable at the option of the party whose consent is
not free. In the case of misrepresentation, fraud, coercion, undue influence, the consent of one of the parties is
induced or caused by the supposed existence of a fact which did not exist.
Mistake (Sections 20 and 21)
The law believes that contracts are made to be performed. The whole structure of business depends on this as
the businessmen depend on the validity of contracts. Accordingly, the law says that it will not aid any one to
evade consequences on the plea that he was mistaken.
On the other hand, the law also realises that mistakes do occur, and that these mistakes are so fundamental
that there may be no contract at all. If the law recognises mistake in contract, the mistake will render the
contract void.
Effect of Mistake
A mistake in the nature of miscalculation or error of judgement by one or both the parties has no effect on the
validity of the contract. For example, if A pays an excessive price for goods under a mistake as to their true
value, the contract is binding on him [Leaf v. International Galleries (1950) 1 All E.R. 693].
Therefore, mistake must be a “vital operative mistake”, i.e. it must be a mistake of fact which is fundamental to
contract. To be operative so as to render the contract void, the mistake must be:
   (a)   of fact, and not of law or opinion;
   (b)   the fact must be essential to agreement, i.e., so fundamental as to negative the agreement; and
   (c)   must be on the part of both the parties.
Thus, where both the parties to an agreement are under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to agreement,
the agreement is void (Section 20). Such a mistake prevents the formation of any contract at all and the Court
will declare it void. For example, A agrees to buy from B a certain horse. It turns out that the horse was dead at
the time of bargain though neither party was aware of the fact. The agreement is void.
Mistake of Law and Mistake of Fact
Mistakes are of two kinds: (i) mistake of law, and (ii) mistake of fact. If there is a mistake of law of the land, the
contract is binding because everyone is deemed to have knowledge of law of the land and ignorance of law is
no excuse (ignorantia juris non-excusat).
But mistake of foreign law and mistake of private rights are treated as mistakes of fact and are execusable.
The law of a foreign country is to be proved in Indian Courts as ordinary facts. So mistake of foreign law makes
the contract void. Similarly, if a contract is made in ignorance of private right of a party, it would be void, e.g.,
where A buys property which already belongs to him.
Mutual or Unilateral Mistake
Mistake must be mutual or bilateral, i.e., it must be on the part of both parties. A unilateral mistake, i.e., mistake
on the part of only one party, is generally of no effect unless (i) it concerns some fundamental fact and (ii) the
other party is aware of the mistake. For this reason, error of judgement on the part of one of the parties has no
effect and the contract will be valid.
Mutual or Common Mistake as to Subject-matter
A contract is void when the parties to it assume that a certain state of things exist which does not actually exist
or in their ignorance the contract means one thing to one and another thing to the other, and they contract


                                                                                                                 465
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Contract Law

subject to that assumption or under that ignorance. There is a mistake on the part of both the parties. Such a
mistake may relate to the existence of the subject matter, its identity, quantity or quality.
  (a)    Mistake as to existence of the subject matter: Where both parties believe the subject matter of the
         contract to be in existence but in fact, it is not in existence at the time of making the contract, there is
         mistake and the contract is void.
		 In Couturier v. Hastie (1856), there was a contact to buy cargo described as shipped from port A to
   port B and believed to be at sea which in fact got lost earlier unknown to the parties and hence not in
   existence at the time of the contract. Held, the contract was void due to the parties mistake.
  (b)    Mistake as to identity of the subject matter: Where the parties are not in agreement to the identity of
         the subject matter, i.e., one means one thing and the other means another thing, the contract is void;
         there is no consensus ad idem.
		 In Raffles v. Wichelhhaks (1864), A agreed to buy from B a cargo of cotton to arrive “ex Peerless
   from Bombay”. There were two ships called “Peerless” sailing from Bombay, one arriving in October
   and the other in December. A meant the earlier ship and B the latter. Held, the contract was void for
   mistake.
   (c)   Mistake as to quantity of the subject matter: There may be a mistake as to quantity or extent of the
         subject matter which will render the contract void even if the mistake was caused by the negligence of
         a third-party.
		 In Henkel v. Pape (1870), P wrote to H inquiring the price of rifles and suggested that he might buy as
   many as fifty. On receipt of a reply he wired send three rifles. Due to the mistake of the telegraph clerk
   the message transmitted to H was send the rifles. H despatched 50 rifles. Held, there was no contract
   between the parties.
  (d)    Mistake as to quality of the subject-matter or promise: Mistake as to quality raises difficult questions.
         If the mistake is on the part of both the parties the contract is void. But if the mistake is only on the part
         of one party difficulty arises.
The general rule is that a party to a contract does not owe any duty to the other party to discloses all the
facts in his possession during negotiations. Even if he knows that the other party is ignorant of or under some
misapprehension as to an important fact, he is under no obligation to enlighten him. Each party must protect
his own interests unaided. In contract of sale of goods, this rule is summed up in the maxim caveat emptor (Let
the buyer beware.) The seller is under no duty to reveal the defects of his goods to the buyer, subject to certain
conditions.
Unilateral Mistake as to Nature of the Contract
The general rule is that a person who signs an instrument is bound by its terms even if he has not read it. But a
person who signs a document under a fundamental mistake as to its nature (not merely as to its contents) may
have it avoided provided the mistake was due to either-
   (a)   the blindness, illiteracy, or senility of the person signing, or
   (b)   a trick or fraudulent misrepresentation as to the nature of the document.
Unilateral Mistake as to the Identity of the Person Contracted With
It is a rule of law that if a person intends to contract with A, B cannot give himself any right under it. Hence,
when a contract is made in which personalities of the contracting parties are or may be of importance, no other
person can interpose and adopt the contract. For example, where M intends to contract only with A but enters
into contract with B believing him to be A, the contract is vitiated by mistake as there is no consensus ad idem.

466
Contract Law                                                                                                     LESSON 13

Mistake as to the identity of the person with whom the contract is made will operate to nullify the contract only
if:
   (i)          the identity is for material importance to the contracts; and
   (ii)         the mistake is known to the other person, i.e., he knows that it is not intended that he should become a
                party to the contract.

  In Cundy vs. Lindsay (1878) 3 A.C. 459, one Blenkarn posing as a reputed trader Blankiron, placed an
  order forsome goods with M/s Lindsay and Co. The company, thought that it is dealing with Blankiron and
  supplied the goods. Blenkarn sold the goods to Cundy and did not pay to Lindsay. The latter sued Cundy.
  The Court held that there was no contract between Lindsay and Blenkarn and therefore Cundy has no title
  to the goods.


 Misrepresentation (Section 18)
The term “misrepresentation” is ordinarily used to connote both “innocent misrepresentation” and “dishonest
misrepresentation”. Misrepresentation may, therefore, be either (i) Innocent misrepresentation, or (ii) Wilful
misrepresentation with intent to deceive and is called fraud.
Innocent Misrepresentation
If a person makes a representation believing what he says is true he commits innocent misrepresentation. Thus,
any false representation, which is made with an honest belief in its truth is innocent. The effect of innocent
misrepresentation is that the party misled by it can avoid the contract, but cannot sue for damages in the normal
circumstances.

 But in order to avoid a contract on the ground of misrepresentation, it is necessary to prove that:
          (i)    there was a representation or assertion.
      (ii)       such assertion induced the party aggrieved to enter into the contract.
     (iii)       the assertion related to a matter of fact ( and not of law as ignorance of law is no excuse).
     (iv)        the statement was not a mere opinion or hearsay, or commendation (i.e., reasonable praise). For
                 example an advertisement saying, “washes whiter than the whitest”.
      (v)        the statement which has become or turned out to be untrue, was made with an honest belief in its
                 truth. Damages for Innocent Misrepresentation.

Damages for Innocent Misrepresentation
Generally the injured party can only avoid the contract and cannot get damages for innocent misrepresentation.
But in the following cases, damages are obtainable:
   (i)          From a promoter or director who makes innocent misrepresentation in a company prospectus inviting
                the public to subscribe for the shares in the company;
   (ii)         Against an agent who commits a breach of warranty of authority:
  (iii)         From a person who (at the Courts discretion) is estopped from denying a statement he has made where
                he made a positive statement intending that it should be relied upon and the innocent party did rely
                upon it and thereby suffered damages;
  (iv)          Negligent representation made by one person to another between whom a confidential relationship,
                like that of a solicitor and client exists.

                                                                                                                      467
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                       Contract Law

 Wilful Misrepresentation or Fraud (Section 17)
Fraud is an untrue statement made knowingly or without belief in its truth or recklessly, carelessly, whether it
be true or false with the intent to deceive. The chief ingredients of a fraud are:
      (i)        a false representation or assertion,
   (ii)          of fact (and not a mere opinion),
  (iii)          made with the intention that it should be acted upon,
  (iv)           the representation must have actually induced the other party to enter into the contract and so deceived
                 him,
   (v)           the party deceived must thereby be indemnified, for there is no fraud without damages, and
  (vi)           the statement must have been made either with the knowledge that it was false or without belief in its
                 truth or recklessly without caring whether it was true or false.
It is immaterial whether the representation takes effect by false statement or with concealment. The party
defrauded can avoid the contract and also claim damages.
Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to enter into a contract is not fraud, unless
silence is in itself equivalent to speech, or where it is the duty of the person keeping silent to speak as in the
cases of contracts uberrimaefidei- (contracts requiring utmost good faith).

 Contracts Uberrimae Fidei
 There are contracts in which the law imposes a special duty to act with the utmost good faith i.e., to disclose
 all material information. Failure to disclose such information will render the contract voidable at the option
 of the other party.

Contracts uberrimae fidei are:
   (a)           Contract of insurance of all kinds: The assured must disclose to the insurer all material facts and
                 whatever he states must be correct and truthful.
   (b)           Company prospectus: When a company invites the public to subscribe for its shares, it is under
                 statutory obligation to disclose truthfully the various matters set out in the Companies Act. Any person
                 responsible for non-disclosure of any of these matters is liable to damages. Also, the contract to buy
                 shares is voidable where there is a material false statement or non- disclosure in the prospectus.
   (c)           Contract for the sale of land: The vendor is under a duty to the purchaser to show good title to the land
                 he has contracted to sell.
   (d)           Contracts of family arrangements: When the members of a family make agreements or arrangements
                 for the settlement of family property, each member of the family must make full disclosure of every
                 material fact within his knowledge.

 Difference between Fraud and Innocent Misrepresentation
            1.    Fraud implies an intent to deceive, which is lacking if it is innocent misrepresentation.
        2.        In case of misrepresentation and fraudulent silence, the defendant can take a good plea that the
                  plaintiff had the means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence. This argument is not available
                  if there is fraud (Section 19- exception).
        3.        In misrepresentation the plaintiff can avoid or rescind the contract. In fraud, the plaintiff can
                  claim damages as well.
        4.        If there is fraud, it may lead to prosecution for an offence of cheating under the Bharatiya Nyaya
                  Sanhita.

468
Contract Law                                                                                                 LESSON 13

 Coercion
Coercion as defined in Section 15 means “the committing or threatening to commit any act forbidden by the Indian
Penal Code, or unlawful detaining or threatening to detain, any property to the prejudice of any person whatever
with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement”. Simply stated, the doing of any act forbidden
by the Indian Penal Code is coercion even though such an act is done in a place where the Indian Penal Code is
not in force. If A at the point of a pistol asks B to execute a promissory note in his favour and B to save his life does
so he can avoid this agreement as his consent was not free. Even a threat to third-party, e.g., where A compels B
to sign a document threatening to harm C, in case B does not sign would also amount to coercion.
It has been held that mere threat by one person to another to prosecute him does not amount to coercion. There
must be a contract made under the threat and that contract should be one sought to be avoided because of
coercion (Ramchandra v. Bank of Kohlapur, 1952 Bom. 715). It may be pointed out that coercion may proceed
from any person and may be directed against any person, even a stranger and also against goods, e.g., by
unlawful detention of goods.

 Undue Influence
Under Section 16 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, a contract is said to be produced by undue influence “where
the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the will
of the other and uses that position to obtain an unfair advantage over the other”.
The elements of undue influence are (i) a dominant position, and (ii) the use of it to obtain an unfair advantage.
The words “unfair advantage” do not limit the jurisdiction to cases where the transaction would be obviously
unfair as between persons dealing on an equal footing. In the words of Lord Kingston, “the principle applies to
every case where influence is acquired and abused where confidence is reposed and betrayed”.
Sub-section (2) of Section 16 provides that a person is deemed to be in a position to dominate the will of
another—
   (a)   Where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other or where he stands in a fiduciary relation to
         the other, e.g., minor and guardian; trustee and beneficiary; solicitor and client. There is, however, no
         presumption of undue influence in the relation of creditor and debtor, husband and wife (unless the wife
         is a parda-nishin woman) and landlord and tenant. In these cases the party has to prove that undue
         influence has been exercised on him, there being no presumption as to existence of undue influence.
   (b)   Where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily or permanently affected
         by reason of age, illness or mental or bodily distress e.g., doctor and patient.


  Illustration
  A, having advanced money to his son B, during his minority, upon B’s coming of age obtains, by misuse
  of parental influence a bond upon B for a greater amount than the sum due in respect of the advance. A
  employs undue influence.
  A, a man enfeebled by disease or age is induced by B’s influence over him as his medical attendant, to
  agree to pay B an unreasonable sum for his professional services. B employs undue influence.
  A parent stands in a fiduciary relation towards his child and any transaction between them by which any
  benefit is procured by the parent to himself or to a third party, at the expense of the child will be viewed
  with jealousy by Courts of Equity and the burden will be on the parent or third-party claiming the benefit
  of showing that the child while entering into the transaction had independent advice, that he thoroughly
  understood the nature of transaction and that he was removed from all undue influence when the gift was
  made [Marim Bibi v. Cassim Ebrahim (1939) 184 I.C. 171 (1939) A.I.R. 278].


                                                                                                                    469
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                  Contract Law

Where there is a presumption of undue influence, the presumption can be rebutted by showing that
      (i)         full disclosure of all material facts was made,
   (ii)           the consideration was adequate, and
  (iii)           the weaker party was in receipt of independent legal advice.

 Transaction with parda-nishin women
The expression ‘parda-nishin denotes complete seclusion. Thus, a woman who goes to a Court and gives
evidence, who fixes rents with tenants and collects rents, who communicates when necessary, in matters
of business, with men other than members of her own family, could not be regarded as a parda-nishin
woman [Ismail Musafee v. Hafiz Boo (1906) 33 Cal. LR 773 and 33 I.A. 86]. The principles to be applied
to transactions with parda-nishin woman are founded on equity and good conscience and accordingly a
person who contracts with parda-nishin woman has to prove that no undue influence was used and that
she had free and independent advice, fully understood the contents of the contract and exercised her free
will. “The law throws around her a special cloak of protection” [Kali Baksh v. Ram Gopal (1914) L.R. 41 I.A.
23, 28-29, 36 All 81, 89].
Unconscionable transactions: An unconscionable transaction is one which makes an exorbitant profit of the
others distress by a person who is in a dominant position. Merely the fact that the rate of interest is very high in
a money lending transaction shall not make it unconscionable. But if the rate of interest is very exorbitant and
the Court regards the transaction unconscionable, the burden of proving that no undue influence was exercised
lies on the creditor. It has been held that urgent need of money on the part of the borrower does not itself place
the lender in a position to dominate his will within the meaning of this Section [Sunder Koer v. Rai Sham Krishen
(1907) 34 Cal. 150, C.R. 34 I.A. 9].

 Legality of Object
One of the requisites of a valid contract is that the object should be lawful. Section 10 of the Indian Contract Act,
1872, provides, “All agreements are contracts if they are made by free consent of parties competent to contract
for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object...” Therefore, it follows that where the consideration or object
for which an agreement is made is unlawful, it is not a contract.

 Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides that the consideration or object of an agreement is
            (i)    lawful unless it is forbidden by law; or
        (ii)       it is of such nature that if permitted it would defeat the provisions of law; or
       (iii)       is fraudulent; or
       (iv)        involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or
        (v)        the Court regards it an immoral or opposed to public policy.

In each of these cases the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every agreement of
which the object or consideration is unlawful is void.


  Illustration
      (i)         X, Y and Z enter into an agreement for the division among them of gains acquired by them by fraud.
                  The agreement is void as its object is unlawful.



470
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

   (ii)    X promises to obtain for Y an employment in the Government service and Y promises to pay Rs.
           1,500 to X. The agreement is void, as the consideration for it is unlawful.
  (iii)    X promises to Y to drop a prosecution which he has instituted against Y for robbery, and Y promises
           to restore the value of the things taken. The agreement is void as its object is unlawful.
  (iv)     A who is B’s mukhtr promises to exercise his influence, as such, with B in favour of C and C promises
           to pay Rs. 1,000 to A. The agreement is void because it is immoral.
   (v)     An agreement by the proprietors of a newspaper to indemnify the printers against claims arising
           from libels printed in the newspaper is void as it implies or involves injury to the person of another.


 Void and Illegal Contracts
A void contract is one which is destitue of legal effects altogether. An illegal contract too has no legal effect
as between the immediate parties to the contract, but has the further effect of tainting the collateral contracts
also with illegality. For instance A borrows from B Rs. 1,000 for lending to C a minor. The contract between
A and C is void, but B can nevertheless recover the money from A, On the other hand, if A had borrowed Rs.
1,000 from B to buy a pistol to shoot C, the question whether B can recover the money hinges on whether B
was aware of the purpose for which money was borrowed. If B had knowledge of the illegal purpose, he cannot
recover. Therefore, it may be said that all illegal agreements are void but all void agreements are not necessarily
illegal.

 Consequence of Illegal Agreements
   (i)     an illegal agreement is entirely void;
   (ii)    no action can be brought by a party to an illegal agreement. The maxim is “Ex turpi cause non-oritur
           action” - from an evil cause, no action arises;
  (iii)    money paid or property transferred under an illegal agreement cannot be recovered. The maxim is in
           parti delicto potierest condition defendeties- In cases of equal guilt, more powerful is the condition of
           the defendant;
  (iv)     where an agreement consist of two parts, one part legal and other illegal, and the legal parts is
           separable from the illegal one, then the Court will enforce the legal one. If the legal and the illegal
           parts cannot be separated the whole agreement is illegal; and
   (v)     any agreement which is collateral to an illegal agreement is also tainted with illegality and is treated
           as being illegal, even though it would have been lawful by itself [Film Pratapchand v. Firm Kotri Re. AIR
           (1975) S.C. 1223].

 Exception to General Rule of no Recovery of Money or Property
 In the following cases, a party to an illegal agreement may sue to recover money paid or property transferred:
     (a)    Where the transfer is not in pari delicto (equally guilty) with the defendant, i.e. the transferee. For
            example, where A is induced to enter into an illegal agreement by the fraud of B, A may recover the
            money paid if he did not know that the contract was illegal.
     (b)    If the plaintiff can frame a cause of action entirely dependent of the contract.
     (c)    Where a substantial part of the illegal transaction has not been carried out and the plaintiff is truly
            and genuinely repentant. [Bigos v. Bonstead (1951), All E.R. 92].


                                                                                                                471
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

 Agreements Void as being Opposed to Public Policy
The head public policy covers a wide range of topics. Agreements may offend public policy by tending to the
prejudice of the State in times of war, by tending to the abuse of justice or by trying to impose unreasonable and
inconvenient restrictions on the free choice of individuals in marriage, or their liberty to exercise lawful trade or
calling. The doctrine of public policy is a branch of Common Law and like any other branch of Common Law it
is governed by the precedents [Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas Maiya (1959) 2 S.C.R. (Suppl.) 406; AIR 1959 S.C.
781]. The doctrine of public policy is not to be extended beyond the classes of cases already covered by it and
no Court can invent a new head of public policy [Lord Halsbury, Janson v. Driefontien Consolidated Mines (1902)
A.C. 484, 491]. It has been said by the House of Lords that public policy is always an unsafe and treacherous
ground for legal decisions. Even if it is possible for Courts to evolve a new head of public policy, it should be
done under extraordinary circumstances giving rise to incontestable harm to the society.
The following agreements are void as being against public policy but they are not illegal:




   (a)   Agreement in restrain of parental rights: An agreement by which a party deprives himself of the custody
         of his child is void.
   (b)   Agreement in restraint of marriage: An agreement not to marry at all or not to marry any particular
         person or class of persons is void as it is in restraint of marriage.
   (c)   Marriage brokerage or brokerage Agreements: An agreement to procure marriage for reward is void.
         Where a purohit (priest) was promised Rs. 200 in consideration of procuring a wife for the defendant,
         the promise was held void as opposed to public policy, and the purohit could not recover the promised
         sum.
   (d)   Agreements in restraint of personal freedom are void: Where a man agreed with his money lender not
         to change his residence, or his employment or to part with any of his property or to incur any obligation
         on credit without the consent of the money lender, it was held that the agreement was void.
   (e)   Agreement in restraint of trade: An agreement in restraint of trade is one which seeks to restrict a
         person from freely exercising his trade or profession.

 AGREEMENTS IN RESTRAINT OF TRADE VOID
Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act states that every agreement by which any one is restrained from exercising
a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is, to that extent, void.
This Section is not happily worded and has been criticised by many authors. It appears from the wording that

472
Contract Law                                                                                                LESSON 13

every kind of restraint, whether total or partial falls within the prohibition of this Section. In English law the
Courts have held that if a restraint is reasonable, it will be valid. Leading case on his point is Nordenfelt v. Maxim
Nordenfelt Guns Co., (1894) A.C. 535. N was an inventor and a manufacturer of guns and ammunition. He sold
his world-wide business to M and promised not to manufacture guns anywhere in the world for 25 years. The
House of Lords held that the restraint was reasonable as it was no more than is necessary for the protection
of the company, the contract was binding. Whether a restraint is reasonable or not depends upon the facts of
each case.

 Our courts are not consistent on the point whether reasonable restraints are permitted or not. In Madhub Chunder
 v. RaCoomar (1874) 14 Bang. L.R. 76, A paid Rs. 900 to B’s workman. B undertook to stop his business in a particular
 locality in Calcutta. He did not keep his promise. A’s suit for the sum was dismissed since the agreement was void
 under Section 27. The reasonableness or otherwise of the restraint was not discussed. However, if a restrictive
 meaning is adopted, most of the ordinary mercantile agreements may be hit. Thus, the Courts have held that if
 the restraint is one which is really necessary for the carrying on business, the same is not prohibited. In Mackenzie
 v. Sitarmiah, (1891) 15 Mad. 79, A agreed to sell to B all the salt he manufactured and B agreed to buy such salt. A
 further agreed not to sell salt to third-parties. The Court held that the agreement wasvalid.

Other type of restrains is personal covenants between an employer and his employee whereby the latter
agrees not to compete with the former or serve with any of his competitors after employment. This issue came
before the Supreme Court in Niranjan Shanker Golikari v. The Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd.,
AIR 1967 S.C. 1098. In this case N entered into a bond with the company to serve for a period of five years. In
case, N leaves his job earlier and joins elsewhere with companys competitor within five years, he was liable for
damages. N was imparted the necessary training but he left the job and joined another company. The former
employer instituted a suit against N. The Supreme Court, held that the restraint was necessary for the protection
of the companys interests and not such as the Court would refuse to enforce.

 In other case, it has been reiterated that the restriction should be reasonable taking into account the facts
 and circumstances of the case. In Superintendence Company of India Ltd. v. Krishna Murgai [(1981) 2 SCC
 246], the Supreme Court laid down that a restraint beyond the term of service would be void and the only
 ground on which it can be justified is by showing it is necessary for the protection of the employers goodwill.

The words “to the extent” in Section 27 make it clear that if in an agreement there are some convenants which are
prohibited whereas the others are not and if the two parts can be separated then only those convenants which
operate as restraint of trade would be void and not whole of the agreement itself. To illustrate, in Brahmputra
Tea Co. Ltd. v. Scarth(1885) I.L.R. Cal. 545, the employee agreed with the employer firstly, not to compete with
latter after leaving the job and, secondly, not to injure employer’s interest during employment. The Court held
that the first condition is a restraint of trade but the second is binding.

 Example
 A & B entered into contract in which A will not engage in the business of selling spices in Delhi. B paid Rs.
 5,00,00/- as consideration to this agreement. Is this agreement void?
 Yes, this agreement is void pursuant to section 27 of Indian Contract Act, 1872.

 When Contracts in Restraint of Trade Valid
Prima facie every restraint of trade is void , but certain exceptions to this general rule are recognised. If a partial
and reasonable restraint falls under any of the following exceptions, the contract will be enforceable:
   (a)   Sale of goodwill: Where the seller of the goodwill of a business undertakes not to compete with the

                                                                                                                   473
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

         purchaser of the goodwill, the contract is enforceable provided the restraint appears to be reasonable
         as to territorial limits and the length of time.
   (b)   Partners agreements: Section 11(2) of the Indian Partnership Act permits contracts between partners to
         provide that a partner shall not carry on any business other than that of the firm while he is a partner.
   (c)   Section 36(2) and Section 54 of the Indian Partnership Act provide that a partner may make an
         agreement with his partners that on ceasing to be a partner he will not carry on any business similar to
         that of the firm within specified period or within specified limits. The agreement shall be binding if the
         restrictions are reasonable.
Trade Combinations: An agreement, the object of which is to regulate business and not to restrain it is valid.
Thus, an agreement in the nature of a business combination between traders or manufactures e.g. not to sell
their goods below a certain price, to pool profits or output and to divide the same in an agreed proportion does
not amount to a restraint of trade and is perfectly valid [Fraster& Co. v. Laxmi Narain, (1931) 63 All 316].
Negative stipulations in service agreements: An agreement of service by which a person binds himself during
the term of the agreement not to take service with anyone else is not in restraint of lawful profession and is
valid.

 Wagering Agreements
The literal meaning of the word “wager” is a “bet”. Wagerning agreements are nothing but ordinary betting
agreements. For example, A and B enter into an agreement that if Englands Cricket Team wins the test match,
A will pay B Rs. 100 and if it loses B will pay Rs. 100 to A. This is a wagering agreement and nothing can be
recovered by winning party under the agreement.
The essence of gaming and wagering is that one party is to win and the other to lose upon a future event which
at the time of the contract is of an uncertain nature that is to say, if the event turns out one way A will lose; but
if it turns out the other way he will win [Thacker v. Hardy, (1878) 4 OBD 685].

 Wagering Agreements Void
In India except Mumbai, wagering agreements are void. In Mumbai, wagering agreements have been declared
illegal by the Avoiding Wagers (Amendment) Act, 1865. Therefore, in Mumbai a wagering agreement being
illegal, is void not only between the immediate parties, but taints and renders void all collateral agreements to
it.
Thus, A bets with B and losses, applies to C for a loan, who pays B in settlement of A’s losses. C cannot
recover from A because this is money paid “under” or “in respect of” a wagering transaction which is illegal
in Mumbai. But in respect of India such a transaction (i.e., betting) being only void, C could recover from
A. Of course, if A refused to pay B the amount of the bet that he has lost, B could not sue A anywhere.
Again, where an agent bets on behalf of his principal and looses and pays over the money to the winner,
he cannot recover the money from his principal, if the transactions took place in Mumbai, but elsewhere he
could recover. But if the agent wins, he must pay the winnings to the principal, as this money was received
on behalf of the principal.
Sometimes, commercial transactions assume the form of wagering contracts. The sample test to find out whether
a particular transaction is a wager or a genuine commercial transaction is: “Where delivery of the goods sold
is intended to be given and taken, it is valid contract, but where only the differences are intended to be paid, it
will be a wagering contract and unenforceable”.
In a wagering contract there must be mutuality in the sense that the gain of one party should be loss to the other
on the happening of an uncertain event which is the subject matter of the contract.

474
Contract Law                                                                                           LESSON 13

 Void Agreements
The following types of agreements are void under Indian Contract Act:
   (a)    Agreement by or with a minor or a person of unsound mind or a person disqualified to enter into a
          contract - Section 11.
   (b)    Agreement made under a mistake of fact, material to the agreement on the part of the both the parties -
          Section 20.
   (c)    An agreement of which the consideration or object is unlawful - Section 23.
   (d)    If any part of a single consideration for one or more objects, or any one or any part of any one of
          several considerations for a single object, is unlawful, the agreement is void - Section 24.
   (e)    An agreement made without consideration subject to three exceptions provided to Section 25.
   (f)    An agreement in restraint of marriage - Section 26.
   (g)    An agreement in restraint of trade - Section 27.
   (h)    An agreement in restraint of legal proceedings - Section 28.
   (h)    Agreements, the meaning of which is not certain, or capable of being made certain - Section 29.
   ( j)   Agreement by way of wager- Section 30.
   (k)    An agreement to enter into an agreement in the future.
   (l)    An agreement to do an act impossible in itself - Section 56(1)

 When contract becomes void
An agreement not enforceable by law is void ab initio - Section 2(g).
A contract which ceases to be enforceable by law becomes void when it ceases to be enforceable - Section 2( j)
A contract becomes void when, by reason of some event which the promisor could not prevent, the performance
of the contract becomes impossible, e.g., by destruction of the subject- matter of the contract after the formation
of the contract.
A contract becomes void by reason of subsequent illegality. A in India agrees to supply goods to B in Pakistan.
After the formation of the contract war breaks out between India and Pakistan and the supply of goods to
Pakistan is prohibited by legislation. The contract becomes void.
A contingent contract to do or not do to anything if an uncertain future event happens becomes void if the event
becomes impossible.
Where a contract is voidable at the option of the aggrieved party, the contract becomes void when the option
is exercised by him.

 Restitution
When a contract becomes void, it is not to be performed by either party. But if any party has received any
benefit under such a contract from the other party he must restore it or make compensation for it to the other
party. A agrees to sell to B after 6 months a certain quantity of gold and receives Rs. `500 as advance. Soon
after the agreement, private sales of gold are prohibited by law. The contract becomes void and A must return
the sum of Rs. 500 to B.
Restitution is also provided for by Section 65 where an agreement is discovered to be void. A pays Rs. 500 in
consideration of B’s promising to marry, C, A’s daughter C is dead at the time of the promise. The agreement is
discovered to be void and B must pay back Rs. 500.

                                                                                                               475
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                   Contract Law

But there is no resolution where the parties are wholly incompetent to contract, e.g., where one of the parties
is a minor. The minor cannot be asked to restore the benefit, e.g., a minor borrowed Rs. 1,000 from B, he cannot
be asked to pay back Rs. 1,000 to B because the contract is void (Mohori Bibis case).

 CERTAIN RELATIONS RESEMBLING THOSE OF CONTRACT (QUASI CONTRACTS)

 Nature of Quasi-Contracts
A valid contract must contain certain essential elements, such as offer and acceptance, capacity to contract,
consideration and free consent. But sometimes the law implies a promise imposing obligations on one party
and conferring right in favour of the other even when there is no offer, no acceptance, no consensus ad idem,
and in fact, there is neither agreement nor promise. Such cases are not contracts in the strict sense, but the
Court recognises them as relations resembling those of contracts and enforces them as if they were contracts,
hence the term quasi- contracts (i.e., resembling a contract).

A quasi-contract rests on the equitable principle that a person shall not be allowed to enrich himself unjustly at
the expense of another. In truth, it is not a contract at all. It is an obligation which the law creates, in the absence
of any agreement, when any person is in the possession of other persons money, or its equivalent, under such
circumstances that in equity and good conscience he ought not to retain it, and which in justice and fairness
belongs to another. It is the duty and not an agreement or intention which defines it. A very simple illustration is
money paid under mistake. Equity demands that such money must be paid back.

 Quasi-Contracts or Implied Contracts under the Indian Contract Act
 The following types of quasi-contracts have been dealt within the Indian Contract Act—
      (a)   Necessaries supplied to person incapable of contracting or to anyone whom he is illegally bound to
            support - Section 68.
      (b)   Suit for money had and received - Section 69 and 72.
      (c)   Quantum Meruit.
      (d)   Obligations of a finder of goods - Section 71.
      (e)   Obligation of person enjoying benefit of a non-gratuitous act - Section 70.


 Example
 R and S enter a contract under which R agrees to deliver Groceries at S’s residence and S promises to pay
 Rs. 15,000 end of the month. However, R erroneously delivers the groceries at T’s residence instead of
 S’s.
 When T gets home he assumes that the groceries was send by his uncle and consumed. In this case, even
 there is no contract between T and R, it may be treated as Quasi contract and T is Liable to pay for the
 groceries.


 Necessaries
Contracts by minors and persons of unsound mind are void. However, Section 68 of the Indian Contract Act
provides that their estates are liable to reimburse the trader, who supplies them with necessaries of life.



476
Contract Law                                                                                           LESSON 13

 Suit for money had and received
The right to file a suit for the recovery of money may arise
   (a)   Where the plaintiff paid money to the defendant (i) under a mistake, (ii) in pursuance of a contract the
         consideration for which has failed, or (iii) under coercion, oppression, extortion or other such means.
		 A debtor may recover, from a creditor the amount of an over-payment made to him by mistake. The
   mistake may be mistake of fact or a mistake of law.
   (b)   Payment to third-party of money which another is bound to pay. For example, where A’s goods are
         wrongfully attached in order to realise arrears of Government revenue due by B, and A pays the amount
         to save his goods from being sold, he is entitled to recover the amount from B.
   (c)   Money obtained by defendant from third-parties. For example, where an agent has obtained a secret
         commission or a fraudulent payment from a third-party, the principle can recover the amount from the
         agent.

 Quantum Meruit
The expression “Quantum Meruit” literally means “as much as earned” or reasonable remuneration. It is used
where a person claims reasonable remuneration for the services rendered by him when there was no express
promise to pay the definite remuneration, Thus, the law implies reasonable compensation for the services
rendered by a party if there are circumstances showing that these are to be paid for.
The general rule is that where a party to a contract has not fully performed what the contract demands as a
condition of payment, he cannot sue for payment for that which he has done. The contract has to be indivisible
and the payment can be demanded only on the completion of the contract.
But where one party who has performed part of his contract is prevented by the other from completing it, he
may sue on a quantum meruit, for the value of what he has done.
The claim on a quantum meruit arises when one party abandons the contract, or accepts the work done by
another under a void contract.
The party in default may also sue on a “quantum meruit” for what he has done if the contract is divisible and
the other party has had the benefit of the part which has been performed. But if the contract is not divisible, the
party at fault cannot claim the value of what he has done.

 Obligations of finder of lost goods
The liability of a finder of goods belonging to someone else is that of a bailee. This means that he must take as
much care of the goods as a man of ordinary prudence would take of his own goods of the same kind. So far
as the real owner of the goods is concerned, the finder is only a bailee and must not appropriate the goods to
his own use. If the owner is traced, he must return the goods to him. The finder is entitled to get the reward that
may have been offered by the owner and also any expenses he may have incurred in protecting and preserving
the property.

 Obligation of a person enjoying benefit of non-gratuitous act
Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act provides that where a person lawfully does something for another person
or delivers anything to him without any intention of doing so gratuitously and the other person accepts and
enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter must compensate the former or restore to him the thing so delivered. For
example, when one of the two joint tenants pays the whole rent to the landlord, he is entitled to compensation
from his co-tenant, or if A, a tradesmen, leaves goods at B’s house by mistake and B treats the goods as his
own, he is bound to pay A for them.

                                                                                                               477
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Contract Law

 DISCHARGE OR TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS
A contract is said to be discharged or terminated when the rights and obligations arising out of a contract are
extinguished.
Contracts may be discharged or terminated by any of the following modes:




 (a) Performance of Contracts (Section 37)
Section 37 of the Act provides that the parties to a contract must either perform or offer to perform their respective
promises, unless such performance is dispensed with or excused under the provision of the Indian Contract Act,
or any other law. In case of death of the promisor before performance, the representatives of the promisor are
bound to perform the promise unless a contrary intention appears from the contract.
Tender of Performance (Section 38)
In case of some contracts, it is sometimes sufficient if the promisor performs his side of the contract. Then, if the
performance is rejected,the promisor is discharged from further liability and may sue for the breach of contract
if he so wishes. This is called discharge by tender.
To be valid, a tender must fulfil the following conditions
      i.    it must be unconditional;
      ii.   if must be made at a proper time and place;
   iii.     it must be made under circumstances enabling the other party to ascertain that the party by whom it is
            made is able and willing then and there to do the whole of what he is bound, to do by his promise;
   iv.      if the tender relates to delivery of goods, the promisee must have a reasonable opportunity of seeing
            that the thing offered is the thing which the promisor is bound by his promise to deliver;
      v.    tender made to one of the several joint promisees has the same effect as a tender to all of them.
Who can demand performance?
Generally speaking, a stranger to contract cannot sue and the person who can demand performance is the
party to whom the promise is made. But an assignee of the rights and benefits under a contract may demand
performance by the promisor, in the same way as the assignor, (i.e., the promisee) could have demanded.
Effect of refusal of party to perform wholly
Section 39 provides that when a party to a contract has refused to perform or disabled himself from performing
his promise in its entirety, the promisee may put an end to the contract unless he had signified by words or
conduct his acquiescence in its continuance.

478
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

By whom contract must be performed
Under Section 40 of the Act, if it appears from the nature of the case that it was the intention of the parties to a
contract that it should be performed by the promisor himself such promise must be performed by the promisor
himself. In other cases, the promisor or his representative may employ a competent person to perform it.

 Example
     (a)   X promises to pay Rs. 1,000 to Y. X may either personally pay the money to Y or cause it to be paid
           to Y by another. If X dies before making payment, his representatives must perform the promise or
           employ some proper person to do so.
     (b)   X promises to paint a picture for Y. X must personally perform the promise.

Devolution of Joint Liabilities
Under Section 42 of the Indian Contract Act, where two or more persons have made a joint promise then, unless
a contrary intention appears from the contract all such persons should perform the promise. If any one of them
dies, his representatives jointly with the survivor or survivors should perform. After the death of the last survivor,
the representatives of all jointly must fulfil the promise.
Under Section 43 of the Indian Contract Act when two or more persons made a joint promise, the promisee
may, in the absence of an express agreement to the contrary compel any one or more of such joint promisors to
perform the whole of the promise. Each of two or more joint promisors may compel every other joint promisor to
contribute equally with himself to the performance of the promise unless a contrary intention appears from the
contract. If any one of two ore more promisors make default in such contribution, the remaining joint promisors
should bear the loss arising from such default in equal share.
Under Section 44 of the Act, where two or more persons have made a joint promise, a release of one of such
joint promisors by the promisee does not discharge the other joint promisor(s); neither does it free the joint
promisor so released from responsibility to the other joint promisor or joint promisors.
Devolution of Joint Rights
A promise may be made to two or more persons. The promisees are called joint promisees. For example, X may
give a promise to repay Rs. 1,000 given by Y and Z jointly. In such case, in the absence of a contrary intention,
the right to claim, performance rests with Y and Z. If Y dies, Y’s representative jointly with Z may, demand
performance. If Z also dies, the representatives of Y and Z may demand jointly performance from X.

 Assignment
The promisee may assign rights and benefits of contract and the assignee will be entitled to demand performance
by the promisor. But the assignment to be complete and effectual, must be made by an instrument in writing.
An obligation or liability under a contract cannot be assigned. For example, if A owes B Rs. 500 and A transfers
the liability to C i.e. asks C to pay the sum to B, this would not bind B, and B may not consent to this arrangement,
as he may know nothing of C’s solvency. But if B consents to accept performance by C, there is a substitution
of new contract and the old contract is discharged and all rights and liabilities under it are extinguished. This is
technically called novation.

 (b) Discharge by Mutual Agreement or Consent (Sections 62 and 63)
A contract may be discharged by the agreement of all parties to the contract, or by waiver or release by the
party entitled to performance.


                                                                                                                 479
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

Methods stipulated under Sections 62 and 63 of the Indian Contract Act for discharging a contract by mutual
consent are:




Novation – when a new contract is substituted for existing contract either between the same parties or between
different parties, the consideration mutually being the discharge of the old contract.
Alteration – change in one or more of the material terms of a contract.
Rescission – by agreement between the parties at any time before it is discharged by performance or in some
other way.
Remission – acceptance of a lesser sum than what was contracted for or a lesser fulfilment of the promise made.
Waiver – deliberate abandonment or giving up of a right which a party is entitled to under a contract, where
upon the other party to the contract is released from his obligation.

 (c) Discharge by Lapses of Time
The Limitation Act, in certain circumstance, affords a good defence to suits for breach of contract, and infact
terminates the contract by depriving the party of his remedy to law. For example, where a debtor has failed to
repay the loan on the stipulated date, the creditor must file the suit against him within three years of the default.
If the limitation period of three years expires and he takes no action he will be barred from his remedy and the
other party is discharged of his liability to perform.

 (d) Discharge by Operation of the Law
Discharge under this head may take place as follows:
   (a)   By merger: When the parties embody the inferior contract in a superior contract.
   (b)   By the unauthorised alteration of items of a written document: Where a party to a written contract makes
         any material alteration without knowledge and consent of the other, the contract can be avoided by the
         other party.
   (c)   By insolvency: The Insolvency Act provides for discharge of contracts under particular circumstances.
         For example, where the Court passes an order discharging the insolvent, this order exonerates or
         discharges him from liabilities on all debts incurred previous to his adjudication.
   (e)   Discharge by Impossibility or Frustration (Section 56).
A contract which is entered into to perform something that is clearly impossible is void. For instance, A agrees
with B to discover treasure by magic. The agreement is void by virtue of Section 56 para 1 which lays down the
principle that an agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void.

480
Contract Law                                                                                           LESSON 13

Sometimes subsequent impossibility (i.e. where the impossibility supervenes after the contract has been made)
renders the performance of a contract unlawful and stands discharged; as for example, where a singer contracts
to sing and becomes too ill to do so, the contract becomes void. In this connection, para 2 of Section 56 provides
that a contract to do an act, which after the contract is made, becomes impossible or by reason of some event
which the promisor could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.
If the impossibility is not obvious and the promisor alone knows of the impossibility or illegally then existing or
the promisor might have known as such after using reasonable diligence, such promisor is bound to compensate
the promisee for any loss he may suffer through the non-performance of the promise inspite of the agreement
being void ab-initio (Section 56, para 3).

 In Satyabarta Ghose v. Mugnuram A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 44 the Supreme Court interpreted the term ‘impossible
 appearing in second paragraph of Section 56. The Court observed that the word ‘impossible has not been
 used here in the sense of physical or literal impossibility. The performance of an act may not be literally
 impossible but it may be impracticable and useless from the point of view of the object and purpose which the
 parties had in view; and if an untoward event or change of circumstances totally upsets the very foundation
 upon which theparties rested their bargain; it can very well be said that the promisor found it impossible to do
 the act which he promised to do. In this case, A undertook to sell a plot of land to B but before the plot could
 be developed, war broke out and the land was temporarily requisitioned by the Government. A offered to
 return earnest money to B in cancellation of contract. B did not accept and sued A for specific performance.
 A pleaded discharge by frustration. The Court held that Section 56 is not applicable on the ground that the
 requisition was of temporary nature and there was no time limit within which A was obliged to perform the
 contract. The impossibility was not of such a nature which would strike at the root of the contract.

Discharge by Supervening Impossibility
A contract will be discharged by subsequent or supervening impossibility in any of the following ways:
   (a)   Where the subject-matter of the contract is destroyed without the fault of the parties, the contract is
         discharged.
   (b)   When a contract is entered into on the basis of the continued existence of a certain state of affairs, the
         contract is discharged if the state of things changes or ceases to exist.
   (c)   Where the personal qualifications of a party is the basis of the contract, the contract is discharged by
         the death or physical disablement of that party.
Discharge by Supervening Illegality
A contract which is contrary to law at the time of its formation is void. But if, after the making of the contract,
owing to alteration of the law or the act of some person armed with statutory authority the performance of the
contract becomes impossible, the contract is discharged. This is so because the performance of the promise
is prevented or prohibited by a subsequent change in the law. A enters into contract with B for cutting trees.
By a statutory provision cutting of trees is prohibited except under a licence and the same is refused to A. The
contract is discharged.
Cases in which there is no supervening impossibility
In the following cases contracts are not discharged on the ground of supervening impossibility–
   (a)   Difficulty of performance: The mere fact that performance is more difficult or expensive than the parties
         anticipated does not discharge the duty to perform.
   (b)   Commercial impossibilities do not discharge the contract. A contract is not discharged merely because
         expectation of higher profits is not realised.

                                                                                                               481
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Contract Law

   (c)   Strikes, lockouts and civil disturbance like riots do not terminate contracts unless there is a clause in the
         contract providing for non-performance in such cases.
Supervening impossibility or illegality is known as frustration under English Law.

 (f) Discharge by Breach
Where the promisor neither performs his contract nor does he tender performance, or where the performance is
defective, there is a breach of contract. The breach of contract may be (i) actual; or (ii) anticipatory. The actual
breach may take place either at the time the performance is due, or when actually performing the contract.
Anticipatory breach means a breach before the time for the performance has arrived. This may also take place
in two ways – by the promisor doing an act which makes the performance of his promise impossible or by the
promisor in some other way showing his intention not to perform it.
Anticipatory Breach of Contract
Breach of contract may occur, before the time for performance is due. This may happen where one of the parties
definitely renounces the contract and shows his intention not to perform it or does some act which makes
performance impossible. The other party, on such a breach being committed, has a right of action for damages.
He may either sue for breach of contract immediately after repudiation or wait till the actual date when
performance is due and then sue for breach. If the promisee adopts the latter course, i.e., waits till the date when
performance is due, he keeps the contract alive for the benefit of the promisor as well as for his own. He remains
liable under it and enables the promisor not only to complete the contract in spite of previous repudiation, but
also to avail himself of any excuse for non- performance which may have come into existence before the time
fixed for performance.

 In Hochester v. De La Tour (1853) E.R. 922, A hired B in April to act as a courier commencing employment from
 1st June, but wrote to B in May repudiating the agreement, B sued A for breach of contract immediately after
 repudiation. A contended that there could not be breach of contract before June 1. Held, B was immediately
 entitled to sue and need not wait till 1st June, for his right of action to accrue.
 In Avery v. Bowden (1856) 116 E.R. 1122, A hired B’s ship to carry a cargo from Russia. Later on B repudiated the
 contract. A delayed taking action hoping B would change his mind before the performance date. War broke
 outbetween Russia and Britain before the performance date frustating the contract. Held, A lost his right to sue
 B for damages by his delay.
 In Frost v. Knight (1872) L.R. 7 Ex. 111, the law on the subject of anticipatory breach was summed up as follows:
 “The promisee if he pleases may treat the notice of intention as inoperative and await the time when the contract
 is to be executed and then hold the other party responsible for all the consequences of non-performance:
 but in that case he keeps the contract alive for the benefit of the other party as well as his own; he remains
 subject to all his own obligations and liabilities under it, and enables the other party not only to complete
 the contract, if so advised, notwithstanding his previous repudiation of it, but also to take advantage of any
 supervening circumstances which would justify him in declining to complete it.”

 REMEDIES FOR BREACH OF CONTRACT
Where a contract is broken, the injured party has several courses of action open to him. The appropriate remedy
in any case will depend upon the subject-matter of the contract and the nature of the breach.

 (i) Remedies for Breach of Contract
In case of breach of contract, the injured party may:
   (a)   Rescind the contract and refuse further performance of the contract;

482
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

   (b)   Sue for damages;
   (c)   Sue for specific performance;
   (d)   Sue for an injunction to restrain the breach of a negative term; and
   (e)   Sue on quantum meruit.
When a party to a contract has broken the contract, the other party may treat the contract as rescinded and he
is absolved from all his obligations under the contract. Under Section 65, when a party treats the contract as
rescinded, he makes himself liable to restore any benefits he has received under the contract to the party from
whom such benefits were received. Under Section 75 of the Indian Contract Act, if a person rightfully rescinds
a contract, he is entitled to a compensation for any damage which he has sustained through the non-fulfilment
of the contract by the other party. Section 64 deals with consequences of rescission of voidable contracts, i.e.,
where there is flaw in the consent of one party to the contract. Under this Section when a person at whose
option a contract is voidable rescinds, the other party thereto need not perform any promise therein contained
in which he is the promisor. The party rescinding a voidable contract shall, if he has received any benefit
thereunder, from another party to such contract, restore such benefit so far as may be, to the person from whom
it was received.

 (ii) Damages for Breach of Contract
Under Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, when a contract has been broken, a party who suffers by such
breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage,
caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach or which the parties
knew, when they made the contract to be likely to result from the breach of it. Such compensation is not to be
given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach.
The foundation of the claim for damages rests in the celebrated case of Hadley v. Baxendale, (1854) 9 Ex. 341.
The facts of this case were as follows:
There was a breakdown of a shaft in A’s mill. He delivered the shaft to B, a common carrier to be taken to a
manufacturer to copy and make a new one. A did not make known to B that delay would result in loss of profits.
By some neglect on the part of B, the delivery of the shaft was delayed in transit beyond a reasonable time. As a
result, the mill was idle for a longer period than it would otherwise have been, had there been no such delay. It
was held, B was not liable for the loss of profits during the period of delay as the circumstances communicated
to A did not show that the delay in the delivery of the shaft would entail loss of profits to the mill. In the course
of the judgement it was observed:
“Where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party
ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered
either arising naturally, i.e., according to the usual course of things from such breach of contract itself, or such
as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties at the time they made the
contract as the probable result of the breach of it. Now, if the special circumstances under which the contract
was actually made were communicated by the plaintiffs to the defendants and thus known to both the parties,
the damages resulting from the breach of such a contract which they would reasonably contemplate, would be
the amount of injury which would ordinarily follow from a breach of contract under these special circumstances
so known and communicated. But, on other hand, if these special circumstances were wholly unknown to
the party breaking the contract, he at the most could only be supposed to have had in his contemplation, the
amount of injury which would arise generally and in the great multitude of cases not affected by any special
circumstances from such breach of contract. For, had the special circumstances been known, the parties might
have specially provided for the breach of contract by special terms as to damages in that case and of this
advantage it would be very unjust to deprive them.”

                                                                                                                483
EP-JI&GL                                                                                            Contract Law


 Liquidated and Unliquidated damages: Where the contracting parties agree in advance the amount payable
 in the event of breach, the sum payable is called liquidated damages.

Where the amount of compensation claimed for a breach of contract is left to be assessed by the Court, damages
claimed are called unliquidated damages.
Unliquidated Damages
Those are of the following kinds:
   (a)      general or ordinary damages,
   (b)      special damages,
   (c)      exemplary or punitive damages, and
   (d)      nominal damages.
Ordinary Damages
These are restricted to pecuniary compensation to put the injured party in the position he would have been
had the contract been performed. It is the estimated amount of loss actually incurred. Thus, it applies only to
the proximate consequences of the breach of the contract and the remote consequences are not generally
regarded. For example, in a contract for the sale of goods, the damages payable would be the difference
between the contract price and the price at which the goods are available on the date of the breach.
Special Damages
Special damages are those resulting from a breach of contract under some peculiar circumstances. If at the
time of entering into the contract, the party has notice of special circumstances which makes special loss the
likely result of the breach in the ordinary course of things, then upon his-breaking the contract and the special
loss following this breach, he will be required to make good the special loss. For example, A delivered goods to
the Railway Administration to be carried to a place where an exhibition was being held and told the goods clerk
that if the goods did not reach the destination on the stipulated date he would suffer a special loss. The goods
reached late. He was entitled to claim special damages.
Exemplary Damages
These damages are awarded to punish the defendant and are not, as a rule, granted in case of breach of
contract. In two cases, however, the court may award such damages, viz.,
      (i)   breach of promise to marry; and
   (ii)     wrongful dishonour of a customer scheque by the banker.
In a breach of promise to marry, the amount of the damages will depend upon the extent of injury to the partys
feelings. In the bankers case, the smaller the amount of the cheque dishonoured, larger will be damages as the
credit of the customer would be injured in a far greater measure, if a cheque for a small amount is wrongfully
dishonoured.
Nominal Damages
Nominal damages consist of a small token award, e.g., a rupee of even 25 paise, where there has been an
infringement of contractual rights, but no actual loss has been suffered. These damages are awarded to
establish the right to decree for breach of contract.



484
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

Liquidated Damages and Penalty
Where the contracting parties fix at the time of contract the amount of damages that would be payable in
case of breach, in English law, the question may arise whether the term amounts to “liquidated damages” or
a “penalty”? The Courts in England usually give effect to liquidated damages, but they always relieve against
penalty.

The test of the two is that where the amount fixed is a genuine pre-estimate of the loss in case of breach, it
is liquidated damages and will be allowed. If the amount fixed is without any regard to probable loss, but
is intended to frighten the party and to prevent him from committing breach, it is a penalty and will not be
allowed.

In Indian law, there is no such difference between liquidated damages and penalty. Section 74 provides for
“reasonable compensation” upto the stipulated amount whether it is by way of liquidated damages or penalty.
For example, A borrows Rs. 500 from B and promises to pay Rs. 1,000 if he fails to repay Rs. 500 on the
stipulated date. On A’s failure to repay on the given date, B is entitled to recover from A such compensation,
not exceeding Rs. 1,000 as the Court may consider reasonable. (Union of India v. Raman Iron Foundry, AIR 1974
SC 1265).

 (iii) Specific Performance
It means the actual carrying out by the parties of their contract, and in proper cases the Court will insist upon the
parties carrying out this agreement. Where a party fails to perform the contract, the Court may, at its discretion,
order the defendant to carry out his undertaking according to the terms of the contract. A decree for specific
performance may be granted in addition to or instead of damages.

Specific performance is usually granted in contracts connected with land, e.g., purchase of a particular plot or
house, or to take debentures in a company. In case of sale of goods, it will only be granted if the goods are
unique and cannot be purchased in the market, e.g., a particular race horse, or one of special value to the party
suing by reason of personal or family association, e.g., an heirloom.

Specific performance will not be ordered:

   (a)   where monetary compensation is an adequate remedy;

   (b)   where the Court cannot supervise the execution of the contract, e.g., a building contract;

   (c)   where the contract is for personal service; and

   (d)   where one of the parties is a minor.

 (iv) Injunction
An injunction, is an order of a Court restraining a person from doing a particular act. It is a mode of securing the
specific performance of a negative term of the contract, (i.e., where he is doing something which he promises not
to do), the Court may in its discretion issue an order to the defendant restraining him from doing what he promised
not to do. Injunction may be prohibitory or mandatory. In prohibitory, the Court restrains the commission of a
wrongful act whereas in mandatory, it restrains continuance of a wrongful commission.

In Lumley v. Wagner (1852) 90 R.R. 125. W agreed to sing at L’s theatre and nowhere else. W, in breach of
contract with L entered into a contract to sing for Z. Held, although W could not be compelled to sing at L’s
theatre, yet she could be restrained by injunction from singing for Z.



                                                                                                                485
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

 CONTRACT OF INDEMNITY AND GUARANTEE (SECTIONS 124 TO 147)

 Meaning of Indemnity
A contract of indemnity is a contract by which one party promises to save the other party from loss caused to
him by the conduct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person (Section 124).

 Example
 A contracts to indemnify B against the consequence of legal proceedings which C may take against B in respect
 of 3 lakh rupees. This is a contract of indemnity. The contract of indemnity may be express or implied.

The person who promises to indemnify or make good the loss is called the indemnifier and the person whose
loss is made good is called the indemnified or the indemnity holder. A contract of insurance is an example of
a contract of indemnity according to English Law. In consideration of premium, the insurer promises to make
good the loss suffered by the assured on account of the destruction by fire of his property insured against fire.
Under the Indian Contract Act, the contract of indemnity is restricted to such cases only where the loss promised
to be reimbursed, is caused by the conduct of the promisor or of any other person. The loss caused by events
or accidents which do not depend on the conduct of any person, it seems, cannot be sought to be reimbursed
under a contract of indemnity.

 Rights of Indemnity Holder when Sued
 Under Section 125, the promisee in a contract of indemnity, acting within the scope of his authority, is entitled
 to recover from the promisor—
      1.   all damages which he may be compelled to pay in any suit in respect of any matter to which the
           promise to indemnify applies;
      2.   all costs which he may be compelled to pay in any such suit if, in bringing or defending it, he did not
           contravene the orders of the promisor, and acted as if it would have been prudent for him to act in the
           absence of any contract of indemnity, or if the promisor authorised him to bring or defend the suit; and
      3.   all sums which he may have paid under the terms of any compromise of any such suit, if the
           compromise was not contrary to the orders of the promisor, and was one which it would have been
           prudent for the promisee to make in the absence of any contract of indemnity, or if the promisor
           authorised him to compromise the suit.

 Meaning of Contract of Guarantee
A contract of guarantee is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the liability of a third person in case
of his default. The person who gives the guarantee is called the Surety, the person for whom the guarantee
is given is called the Principal Debtor, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is called the Creditor
(Section 126). A guarantee may be either oral or written, although in the English law, it must be in writing.


  Illustration
  Like a contract of indemnity, a guarantee must also satisfy all the essential elements of a valid contract.
  There is, however, a special feature with regard to consideration in a contract of guarantee. The
  consideration received by the principal debtor is sufficient for surety. Section 127 provides that anything
  done or any promise made for the benefit of the principal debtor may be a sufficient consideration to the
  surety for giving the guarantee.

486
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

  Illustration
    (i)   B requests A to sell and deliver to him goods on credit. A agrees to do so, provided C will guarantee
          the payment of the price of the goods. C promises to guarantee the payment in consideration of A’s
          promise to deliver the goods. This is sufficient consideration for C’s promise.
   (ii)   A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards requests A to forbear to sue B for the debt for a year,
          and promises that if he does so, C will pay for them in default of payment by B. A agrees to forbear
          as requested. This is sufficient consideration for C’s promise.

Like a contract of indemnity, a guarantee must also satisfy all the essential elements of a valid contract. There
is, however, a special feature with regard to consideration in a contract of guarantee. The consideration received
by the principal debtor is sufficient for surety. Section 127 provides that anything done or any promise made
for the benefit of the principal debtor may be a sufficient consideration to the surety for giving the guarantee.

 Distinction between Indemnity and Guarantee
A contract of indemnity differs from a contract of guarantee in the following ways:
   (a)    In a contract of indemnity there are only two parties: the indemnifier and the indemnified. In a contract
          of guarantee, there are three parties; the surety, the principal debtor and the creditor.
   (b)    In a contract of indemnity, the liability of the indemnifier is primary. In a contract of guarantee, the
          liability of the surety is secondary. The surety is liable only if the principal debtor makes a default, the
          primary liability being that of the principal debtor.
   (c)    The indemnifier need not necessarily act at the request of the debtor; the surety gives guarantee only
          at the request of the principal debtor.
   (d)    In the case of a guarantee, there is an existing debt or duty, the performance of which is guaranteed
          by the surety, whereas in the case of indemnity, the possibility of any loss happening is the only
          contingency against which the indemnifier undertakes to indemnify.
   (e)    The surety, on payment of the debt when the principal debtor has failed to pay is entitled to proceed
          against the principal debtor in his own right, but the indemnifier cannot sue third-parties in his own
          name, unless there be assignment. He must sue in the name of the indemnified.

 Example
 Indemnity – X agree to Pay Y Rs. 50000/- in case of loss to any property of later during the use by former.
 Guarantee - Z agree to Pay Y in case of loss to any property of later during the use by X.

 Extent of Surety’s Liability
The liability of the surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor unless the contract otherwise provides
(Section 128). A creditor is not bound to proceed against the principal debtor. He can sue the surety without suing
the principal debtor. As soon as the debtor has made default in payment of the debt, the surety is immediately
liable. But until default, the creditor cannot call upon the surety to pay. In this sense, the nature of the surety’s
liability is secondary.
Section 128 only explains the quantum of a surety’s obligation when terms of the contract do not limit it.
Conversely it doesn’t follow that the surety can never be liable when the principal debtor cannot be held liable.
Thus, a surety is not discharged from liability by the mere fact that the contract between the principal debtor
and creditor was voidable at the option of the former, and was avoided by the former. Where the agreement

                                                                                                                 487
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Contract Law

between the principal debtor and creditor is void as for example in the case of minority of principal debtor, the
surety is liable as a principal debtor; for in such cases the contract of the so-called surety is not collateral, but
a principal contract [Kashiba v. Shripat (1894) 19 Bom. 697].

 Kinds of Guarantees
A contract of guarantee may be for an existing debt, or for a future debt. It may be a specific guarantee, or it
may be a continuing guarantee. A specific guarantee is given for a single debt and comes to an end when the
debt guaranteed has been paid.
A continuing guarantee is one which extends to a series of transactions (Section 129). The liability of surety
in case of a continuing guarantee extends to all the transactions contemplated until the revocation of the
guarantee. As for instance, S, in consideration that C will employ P in collecting the rents of C’s Zamindari,
promises C to be responsible to the amount of Rs. 5,000 for the due collection and payment by P of these rents.
This is a continuing guarantee.

 Revocation of Continuing Guarantee
A continuing guarantee is revoked in the following circumstances:
   (a)   By notice of revocation by the surety (Section 130): The notice operates to revoke the surety’s liability
         as regards future transactions. He continues to be liable for transactions entered into prior to the notice
         [Offord v. Davies (1862) 6 L.T.S. 79].
   (b)   By the death of the surety: The death of the surety operates, in the absence of contract [Lloyds v. Harper
         (188) 16 Ch. D. 290] as a revocation of a continuing guarantee, so far as regards future transactions
         (Section 131). But for all the transactions made before his death, the surety’s estate will be liable.

 Rights of Surety
A surety has certain rights against the creditor, (Section 141) the principal debtor (Sections 140 and 145) and the
co-securities (Sections 146 and 147). Those are—
   (a)   Surety’s rights against the creditor: Under Section 141 a surety is entitled to the benefit of every security
         which the creditor has against the principal debtor at the time when the contract of suretyship is entered
         into whether the surety knows of the existence of such security or not; and, if the creditor losses or,
         without the consent of the surety parts with such security, the surety is discharged to the extent of the
         value of the security.
   (b)   Rights against the principal debtor: After discharging the debt, the surety steps into the shoes of the
         creditor or is subrogated to all the rights of the creditor against the principal debtor. He can then sue
         the principal debtor for the amount paid by him to the creditor on the debtors default; he becomes a
         creditor of the principal debtor for what he has paid.
		       In some circumstances, the surety may get certain rights even before payment. The surety has remedies
         against the principal debtor before payment and after payment. In Mamta Ghose v. United Industrial
         Bank (AIR 1987 Cal. 180) where the principal debtor, after finding that the debt became due, started
         disposing of his properties to prevent seizure by surety, the Court granted an injunction to the surety
         restraining the principal debtor from doing so. The surety can compel the debtor, after debt has become
         due to exonerate him from his liability by paying the debt.
   (c)   Surety’s rights gains co-sureties: When a surety has paid more than his share of debt to the creditor, he
         has a right of contribution from the co-securities who are equally bound to pay with him. A, B and C are
         sureties to D for the sum of Rs. 3,000 lent to E who makes default in payment. A, B and C are liable, as

488
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

         between themselves to pay Rs. 1,000 each. If any one of them has to pay more than Rs. 1,000 he can
         claim contribution from the other two to reduce his payment to only Rs. 1,000. If one of them becomes
         insolvent, the other two shall have to contribute the unpaid amount equally.

 Discharge of Surety
A surety may be discharged from liability under the following circumstances:
   (a)   By notice of revocation in case of a continuing guarantee as regards future transaction (Section 130.)
   (b)   By the death of the surety as regards future transactions, in a continuing guarantee in the absence of a
         contract to the contrary (Section 131).
   (c)   Any variation in the terms of the contract between the creditor and the principal debtor, without the
         consent of the surety, discharges the surety as regards all transactions taking place after the variation
         (Section 133).
   (d)   A surety will be discharged if the creditor releases the principal debtor, or acts or makes an omission
         which results in the discharge of the principal debtor (Section 134). But where the creditor fails to sue
         the principal debtor within the limitation period, the surety is not discharged.
   (e)   Where the creditor, without the consent of the surety, makes an arrangement with the principal debtor
         for composition, or promises to give time or not to sue him, the surety will be discharged (Section 135).
   (f)   If the creditor does any act which is against the rights of the surety, or omits to do an act which his duty
         to the surety requires him to do, and the eventual remedy of the surety himself against the principal
         debtor is thereby impaired, the surety is discharged (Section 139).
If the creditor loses or parts with any security which at the time of the contract the debtor had given in favour of
the creditor, the surety is discharged to the extent of the value of the security, unless the surety consented to the
release of such security by creditor in favour of the debtor. It is immaterial whether the surety was or is aware
of such security or not (Section 141).

 CONTRACT OF BAILMENT AND PLEDGE

 (a) Bailment
A bailment is a transaction whereby one person delivers goods to another person for some purpose, upon a
contract that they are, when the purpose is accomplished to be returned or otherwise disposed of according to
the directions of the person delivering them (Section 148). The person who delivers the goods is called the bailor
and the person to whom they are delivered is called the bailee.
Bailment is a voluntary delivery of goods for a temporary purpose on the understanding that they are to be
returned in specie in the same or altered form. The ownership of the goods remains with the bailor, the bailee
getting only the possession. Delivery of goods may be actual or constructive, e.g., where the key of a godown
is handed over to another person, it amounts to delivery of goods in the godown.
Gratuitous Bailment
A gratuitous bailment is one in which neither the bailor nor the bailee is entitled to any remuneration. Such
a bailment may be for the exclusive benefit of the bailor, e.g., when A leaves his dog with a neighbour to be
looked after in A’s absence on a holiday. It may again be for exclusive benefit of the bailee, e.g., where you lend
your book to a friend of yours for a week. In neither case any charge is made.
A gratuitous bailment terminates by the death of either the bailor or the bailee (Section 162).


                                                                                                                489
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Contract Law

Under Section 159 the lender of a thing for use may at any time require its return if the loan was gratuitous,
even though he lent it for a specified time or purpose. But if on the faith of such loan made for a specified time
or purpose, the borrower has acted in such a manner that the return of the thing lent before the time agreed
upon would cause him loss exceeding the benefit actually derived by him from the loan, the lender must, if he
compels the return, indemnify the borrower the amount in which the loss so occasioned exceeds the benefit so
derived.
Bailment for Reward
This is for the mutual benefit of both the bailor and the bailee. For example, A lets out a motor-car for hire to
B. A is the bailor and receives the hire charges and B is the bailee and gets the use of the car. Where, A hands
over his goods to B, a carrier for carriage at a price, A is the bailor who enjoys the benefit of carriage and B is
the bailee who receives a remuneration for carrying the goods.
Duties of Bailee
The bailee owes the following duties in respect of the goods bailed to him:
   (a)   The bailee must take as much care of the goods bailed to him as a man of ordinary prudence would take
         under similar circumstances of his own goods of the same bulk, quality and value as the goods bailed
         (Section 151). If he takes this much care he will not be liable for any loss, destruction or deterioration of
         the goods bailed (Section 152). The degree of care required from the bailee is the same whether the
         bailment is for reward or gratuitous.
		 Of course, the bailee may agree to take special care of the goods, e.g., he may agree to keep the
   property safe from all perils and answers for accidents or thefts. But even such a bailee will not be
   liable for loss happening by an act of God or by public enemies.
   (b)   The bailee is under a duty not to use the goods in an unauthorised manner or for unauthorised purpose
         (Section 153). If he does so, the bailor can terminate the bailment and claim damages for any loss or
         damage caused by the unauthorised used (Section 154).
   (c)   He must keep the goods bailed to him separate from his own goods (Sections 155-157).
		 If the bailee without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, the
   bailor and the bailee shall have an interest, in production to their respective shares, in the mixture thus
   produced. If the bailee without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own
   goods, and the goods can be separated or divided, the property in the goods remains in the parties
   respectively; but the bailee is bound to bear the expenses of separation, and any damages arising from
   the mixture.
		 If the bailee without the consent of the bailor mixes, the goods of the bailor with his own goods, in such
   a manner that it is impossible to separate the goods bailed from the other goods and deliver them back,
   the bailor is entitled to be compensated by the bailee for the loss of goods.
   (d)   He must not set up an adverse title to the goods.
   (e)   It is the duty of the bailee to return the goods without demand on the expiry of the time fixed or when
         the purpose is accomplished (Section 160). If he fails to return them, he shall be liable for any loss,
         destruction or deterioration of the goods even without negligence on his part (Section 161).
   (f)   In the absence of any contract to the contrary, the baliee must return to the bailor any increase, or profits
         which may have accrued from the goods bailed; for example, when A leaves a cow in the custody of B
         to be taken care of and the cow gets a calf, B is bound is deliver the cow as well as the calf to A (Section
         163).


490
Contract Law                                                                                                LESSON 13

Bailees Particular Lien (Section 170)
Where the goods are bailed for a particular purpose and the bailee in due performance of bailment, expands
his skill and labour, he has in the absence of an agreement to the contrary a lien on the goods, i.e., the bailee
can retain the goods until his charges in respect of labour and skill used on the goods are paid by the bailor. A
gives a piece of cloth to B, a tailor, for making it into a suit, B promises to have the suit ready for delivery within
a fortnight, B has the suit ready for delivery. He has a right to retain the suit until he is paid his dues. The section
expresses the Common Law principle that if a man has an article delivered to him on the improvement of which
he has to bestow trouble and expenses, he has a right to detain it until his demand is paid.
The right of lien arises only where labour and skill have been used so as to confer an additional value on the
article.

 Example
 A gave clothes to B for Laundry. A denies to make full payment. B denied to return the clothes. Can B deny
 to return the goods?
 Yes, he can deny to return the goods as a bailee.

Particular and General Lien
Lien is of two kinds: Particular lien and General lien. A particular lien is one which is available only against that
property of which the skill and labour have been exercised. A bailee’s lien is a particular lien.
A general lien is a right to detain any property belonging to the other and in the possession of the person trying
to exercise the lien in respect of any payment lawfully due to him.
Thus, a general lien is the right to retain the property of another for a general balance of accounts but a
particular lien is a right to retain only for a charge on account of labour employed or expenses bestowed upon
the identical property detained.
The right of general lien is expressly given by Section 171 of the Indian Contract Act to bankers, factors,
warfingers, attorneys of High Court and policy-brokers, provided there is no agreement to the contrary.

 Duties of bailor
 The bailor has the following duties:
     (a)   The bailor must disclose all the known faults in the goods; and if he fails to do that, he will be liable
           for any damage resulting directly from the faults (Section 150). For example, A delivers to B, a carrier,
           some explosive in a case, but does not warn B. The case is handled without extraordinary care
           necessary for such articles and explodes. A is liable for all the resulting damage to men and other
           goods.
 		 In the case of bailment for hire, a still greater responsibility is placed on the bailor. He will be liable
    even if he did not know of the defects (Section 150). A hires a carriage of B. The carriage is unsafe
    though B does not know this. A is injured. B is responsible to A for the injury.
     (b)   It is the duty of the bailor to pay any extraordinary expenses incurred by the bailee. For example,
           if a horse is lent for a journey, the expense of feeding the house would, of course, subject to any
           special agreement be borne by the bailee. If however the horse becomes ill and expenses have
           been incurred on its treatment, the bailor shall have to pay these expenses (Section 158).
     (c)   The bailor is bound to indemnify the bailee for any cost or costs which the bailee may incur because
           of the defective title of the bailor of the goods bailed (Section 164).


                                                                                                                   491
EP-JI&GL                                                                                               Contract Law

Termination of bailment
Where the bailee wrongfully uses or dispose of the goods bailed, the bailor may determine the bailment (Section
153.)
As soon as the period of bailment expires or the object of the bailment has been achieved, the bailment comes
to an end, and the bailee must return the goods to the bailor (Section 160). Bailment is terminated when the
subject matter of bailment is destroyed or by reason of change in its nature, becomes incapable of use for the
purpose of bailment.
A gratuitous bailment can be terminated by the bailor at any time, even before the agreed time, subject to the
limitation that where termination before the agreed period causes loss in excess of benefit, the bailor must
compensate the bailee (Section 159).
A gratuitous bailment terminates by the death of either the bailor or the bailee (Section 162).
Finder of Lost Goods
The position of a finder of lost goods is exactly that of a bailee. The rights of a finder are that he can sue the
owner for any reward that might have been offered, and may retain the goods until he receives the reward. But
where the owner has offered no reward, the finder has only a particular lien and can detain the goods until he
receives compensation for the troubles and expenses incurred in preserving the property for finding out the true
owner. But he cannot file a suit for the recovery of the compensation [Section 168].
Thus, as against the true owner, the finder of goods in a public or quasi public place is only a bailee; he keeps
the article in trust for the real owner. As against every-one else, the property in the goods vests in the finder on
his taking possession of it.
The finder has a right to sell the property—
   (a)   where the owner cannot with reasonable diligence be found, or
   (b)   when found, he refuses to pay the lawful charges of the finder and—
           (i) if the thing is in danger of perishing or losing greater part of its value, or
           (ii)   when the lawful charges of the finder for the preservation of goods and the finding out of the
                  owner amounts to two-thirds of the value of the thing (Section 169).
Carrier as Bailee
A common carrier undertakes to carry goods of all persons who are willing to pay his usual or reasonable rates. He
further undertakes to carry them safely, and make good all loses, unless they are caused by act of God or public
enemies. Carriers by land including railways and carriers by inland navigation, are common carriers. Carriers by Sea
for hire are not common carriers and they can limit their liability. Railways in India are now common carriers.
Inn-keepers: The liability of a hotel keeper is governed by Sections 151 and 152 of the Contract Act and is that
of an ordinary bailee with regard to the property of the guests.
C stayed in a room in a hotel. The hotel-keeper knew that the room was in an insecure condition. While C was
dining in the dining room, some articles were stolen from his room. It was held that the hotel-keeper was liable
as he should have taken reasonable steps to rectify the insecured condition of the rooms (Jan & San v. Caneron
(1922) 44 All. 735).

 (b) Pledge
Pledge or pawn is a contract whereby an article is deposited with a lender of money or promisee as security
for the repayment of a loan or performance of a promise. The bailor or depositor is called the Pawnor and the
bailee or depositee the “Pawnee” (Section 172). Since pledge is a branch of bailment, the pawness is bound to

492
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

take reasonable care of the goods pledged with him. Any kind of goods, valuables, documents or securities
may be pledged. The Government securities, e.g., promissory notes must, however, be pledged by endorsement
and delivery.
The following are the essential ingredients of a pledge:
    (i)   The property pledged should be delivered to the pawnee.
   (ii)   Delivery should be in pursuance of a contract.
  (iii)   Delivery should be for the purpose of security.
  (iv)    Delivery should be upon a condition to return.
Rights of the Pawnee
No property in goods pawned passes to the pawnee, but the pawnee gets a “special property to retain
possession even against the true owner until the payment of the debt, interest on the debt, and any other
expense incurred in respect of the possession or for preservation of the goods pledged” (Section 173). The
pawnee must return the goods to the pawnor on the tender of all that is due to him. The pawnee cannot confer
a good title upon a bona fide purchaser for value.
Should the pawnor make a default in payment of the debt or performance of the promise at the stipulated time,
the pawnee may-
    (i)   file a suit for the recovery of the amount due to him while retaining the goods pledged as collateral
          security; or
   (ii)   sue for the sale of the goods and the realisation of money due to him; or
  (iii)   himself sell the goods pawned, after giving reasonable notice to the pawnor, sue for the deficiency, if
          any, after the sale.
If the sale is made in execution of a decree, the pawnee may buy the goods at the sale. But he cannot sell them
to himself in a sale made by himself under (iii) above. If after sale of the goods, there is surplus, the pawnee must
pay it to the pawnor (Section 176).
Rights of Pawnor
On default by pawnor to repay on the stipulated date, the pawnee may sell the goods after giving reasonable
notice to the pawnor. If the pawnee makes an unauthorised sale without giving notice to the pawnor, the pawnor
has the following rights—
    (i)   He can file a suit for redemption of goods by depositing the money treating the sale as if it had never
          taken
   (ii)   place; or He can ask for damages on the ground of conversion.
Pledge by Non-owners
   (a)    Ordinarily, the owner of the goods would pledge them to secure a loan but the law permits under
          certain circumstances a pledge by a person who is not the owner but is in possession of the goods.
          Thus, a valid pledge may be created by the following non-owners.
		A mercantile agent: Where a mercantile agent is, with the consent of the owner, in possession of goods
  or the documents of title to goods, any pledge made by him, when acting in the ordinary course of
  business of a mercantile agent, is as valid as if he were expressly authorised by the owner of the goods
  to make the same. But the pledge is valid only if the pawnee acts in good faith and has not at the time
  of the pledge notice that the pawnor has not the authority to pledge (Section 178).

                                                                                                                493
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                    Contract Law

   (b)   Pledge by seller or buyer in possession after sale: A seller, left in possession of goods sold, is no more
         the owner, but pledge by him will be valid, provided the pawnee acted in good faith and had no notice
         of the sale of goods to the buyer (Section 30 of The Sale of Goods Act 1930).

   (c)   Pledge where pawnor having limited interest: When the pawnor is not the owner of the goods but has
         a limited interest in the goods which he pawns, e.g., he is a mortgagee or he has a lien with respect of
         these goods, the pledge will be valid to the extent of such interest.

   (d)   Pledge by co-owner in possession: One of the several co-owners of goods in possession thereof with
         the assent of the other co-owners may create a valid pledge of the goods.

   (e)   Pledge by person in possession under a voidable contract: A person may obtain possession under a
         contract which is voidable at the option of the lawful owner on the ground of misrepresentation, fraud,
         etc. The person in possession may pledge the goods before the contract is avoided by the other party
         (Section 178A).

 LAW OF AGENCY

 Definition of Agent (Section 182)
 An agent is a person who is employed to bring his principal into contractual relations with third-parties.
 As the definition indicates, an agent is a mere connecting link between the principal and a third-party.
 But during the period that an agent is acting for his principal, he is clothed with the capacity of his
 principal.

 Creation of Agency
A contract of agency may be express or implied, (Section 186) but consideration is not an essential element in
this contract (Section 185). Agency may also arise by estoppel, necessity or ratification.

  (a)    Express Agency: A contract of agency may be made orally or in writing. The usual form of written
         contract of agency is the Power of Attorney, which gives him the authority to act on behalf of his
         principal in accordance with the terms and conditions therein. In an agency created to transfer
         immovable property, the power of attorney must be registered. A power of attorney may be general,
         giving several powers to the agent, or special, giving authority to the agent for transacting a single
         act.

   (b)   Implied Agency: Implied agency may arise by conduct, situation of parties or necessity of the case.

           (i)   Agency by Estoppel (Section 237): Estoppel arises when you are precluded from denying the truth
                 of anything which you have represented as a fact, although it is not a fact. Thus, where P allows
                 third- parties to believe that A is acting as his authorised agent, he will be estopped from denying
                 the agency if such third-parties relying on it make a contract with A even when A had no authority
                 at all.

           (ii) Wife as agent: Where a husband and wife are living together, the wife is presumed to have her
                husbands authority to pledge his credit for the purchase of necessaries of life suitable to their
                standard of living. But the husband will not be liable if he shows that (a) he had expressly warned
                the trademan not to supply goods on credit to his wife; or (b) he had expressly forbidden the wife
                to pledge his credit; or (c) his wife was already sufficiently supplied with the articles in question; or
                (d) she was supplied with a sufficient allowance.


494
Contract Law                                                                                               LESSON 13

		
 Similarly, where any person is held out by another as his agent, the third-party can hold that
 person liable for the acts of the ostensible agent, or the agent by holding out. Partners are each
 others agents for making contracts in the ordinary course of the partnership business.
         (iii)   Agency of Necessity (Sections 188 and 189): In certain circumstances, a person who has been
                 entrusted with anothers property, may have to incur unauthorised expenses to protect or preserve
                 it. Such an agency is called an agency of necessity. For example, A sent a horse by railway and
                 on its arrival at the destination there was no one to receive it. The railway company, being bound
                 to take reasonable steps to keep the horse alive, was an agent of necessity of A.
		 A wife deserted by her husband and thus forced to live separate from him, can pledge her
   husbands credit to buy all necessaries of life according to the position of the husband even
   against his wishes.
         (iv) Agency by ratification (Sections 169-200): Where a person having no authority purports to act as
              agent, or a duly appointed agent exceeds his authority, the principal is not bound by the contract
              supposedly based on his behalf. But the principal may ratify the agents transaction and so accept
              liability. In this way an agency by ratification arises. This is also known as ex post facto agency—
              agency arising after the event. The effect of ratification is to render the contract binding on the
              principal as if the agent had been authorised before hand. Also ratification relates back to the
              original making of the contract so that the agency is taken to have come into existence from the
              moment the agent first acted, and not from the date the principal ratified it.

 Ratification is effective only if the following conditions are satisfied –
  (a) The agent must expressly contract as agent for a principal who is in existence and competent to contract.
  (b) The principal must be competent to contract not only at the time the agent acted, but also when he
      ratified the agents act.
  (c) The principal at the time of ratification has full knowledge of the material facts, and must ratify the
      whole contract, within a reasonable time.
  (d) Ratification cannot be made so as to subject a third-party to damages, or terminate any right or interest
      of a third person.
  (e) Only lawful acts can be ratified.

 Classes of Agents
Agents may be special or general or, they may be mercantile agents:
   (a)   Special Agent: A special agent is one who is appointed to do a specified act, or to perform a specified
         function. He has no authority outside this special task. The third-party has no right to assume that the
         agent has unlimited authority. Any act of the agent beyond that authority will not bind the principal.
   (b)   General Agent: A general agent is appointed to do anything within the authority given to him by the
         principal in all transactions, or in all transactions relating to a specified trade or matter. The third-party
         may assume that such an agent has power to do all that is usual for a general agent to do in the
         business involved. The third party is not affected by any private restrictions on the agents authority.

 Sub-Agent
A person who is appointed by the agent and to whom the principal’s work is delegated to known as sub-agent.
Section 191 provides that “a sub-agent is a person employed by, and acting under the control of the original
agent in the business of the agency.” So, the sub-agent is the agent of the original agent.

                                                                                                                  495
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Contract Law

As between themselves, the relation of sub-agent and original agent is that of agent and the principal. A sub-
agent is bound by all the duties of the original agent. The sub-agent is not directly responsible to the principal
except for fraud and wilful wrong. The sub-agent is responsible to the original agent. The original agent is
responsible to the principal for the acts of the sub-agent. As regards third persons, the principal is represented
by sub-agent and he is bound and responsible for all the acts of sub-agent as if he were an agent originally
appointed by the principal.

 Mercantile Agent
Section 2(9) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930, defines a mercantile agent as “a mercantile agent having in the
customary course of business as such agent authority either to sell goods or consign goods for the purposes
of sale, or to buy goods, or to raise money on the security of goods”. This definition covers factors, brokers,
auctioneers, commission agents etc.

 Factors
A factor is a mercantile agent employed to sell goods which have been placed in his possession or contract to
buy goods for his principal. He is the apparent owner of the goods in his custody and can sell them in his own
name and receive payment for the goods. He has an insurable interest in the goods and also a general lien in
respect of any claim he may have arising out of the agency.

 Brokers
A broker is a mercantile agent whose ordinary course of business is to make contracts with other parties for the
sale and purchase of goods and securities of which he is not entrusted with the possession for a commission
called brokerage. He acts in the name of principal. He has no lien over the goods as he is not in possession of
them.

 Del Credere Agent
A del credere agent is a mercantile agent, who is in consideration of an extra remuneration guarantees to his
principal that the purchasers who buy on credit will pay for the goods they take. In the event of a third-party
failing to pay, the del credere agent is bound to pay his principal the sum owned by third-party.

 Auctioneers
An auctioneer is an agent who sells goods by auction, i.e., to the highest bidder in public competition. He
has no authority to warrant his principals title to the goods. He is an agent for the seller but after the goods
have been knocked down he is agent for the buyer also for the purpose of evidence that the sale has taken
place.

 Partners
In a partnership firm, every partner is an agent of the firm and of his co-partners for the purpose of the business
of the firm.

 Bankers
The relationship between a banker and his customer is primarily that of debtor and creditor. In addition, a banker
is an agent of his customer when he buys or sells securities, collects cheques dividends, bills or promissory
notes on behalf of his customer. He has a general lien on all securities and goods in his possession in respect
of the general balance due to him by the customer.


496
Contract Law                                                                                               LESSON 13

 Duties of the Agent
An agent’s duties towards his principal are as follows (which give corresponding rights to the principal who may
sue for damages in the event of a breach of duty by the agent):
   (a)    An agent must act within the scope of the authority conferred upon him and carry out strictly the
          instructions of the principal (Section 211).
   (b)    in the absence of express instructions, he must follow the custom prevailing in the same kind of business
          at the place where the agent conducts the business (Section 211).
   (c)    He must do the work with reasonable skill and diligence whereby the nature of his profession, the agent
          purports to have special skill, he must exercise the skill which is expected from the members of the
          profession (Section 212).
   (d)    He must disclose promptly any material information coming to his knowledge which is likely to influence
          the principal in the making of the contract.
   (e)    He must not disclose confidential information entrusted to him by his principal (Section 213).
   (f)    He must not allow his interest to conflict with his duty, e.g., he must not compete with his principal
          (Section 215).
   (g)    The agent must keep true accounts and must be prepared on reasonable notice to render an account.
   (h)    He must not make any secret profit; he must disclose any extra profit that he may make.
		 Where an agent is discovered taking secret bribe, etc., the principal is entitled to (i) dismiss the agent
   without notice, (ii) recover the amount of secret profit, and (iii) refuse to pay the agent his remuneration.
   He may repudiate the contract, if the third-party is involved in secret profit and also recover damages.
    (i)   An agent must not delegate his authority to sub-agent. A sub-agent is a person employed by and acting
          under the control of the original agent in the business of agency (Section 191). This rule is based on the
          principle: Delegatus non-potest delegare — a delegate cannot further delegate (Section 190).
But there are exceptions to this rule and the agent may delegate (i) where delegation is allowed by the
principal, (ii) where the trade custom or usage sanctions delegation, (iii) where delegation is essential for proper
performance, (iv) where an emergency renders it imperative, (v) where nature of the work is purely ministerial,
and (vi) where the principal knows that the agent intends to delegate.

 Rights of Agents
Where the services rendered by the agent are not gratuitous or voluntary, the agent is entitled to receive
the agreed remuneration, or if none was agreed, a reasonable remuneration. The agent becomes entitled to
receive remuneration as soon as he has done what he had undertaken to do (Section 219).
Certain classes of agents, e.g., factors who have goods and property of their principal in their possession, have
a lien on the goods or property in respect of their remuneration and expense and liabilities incurred. He has a
right to stop the goods in transit where he is an unpaid seller.
As the agent represents the principal, the agent has a right to be indemnified by the principal against all
charges, expenses and liabilities properly incurred by him in the course of the agency (Sections 222-223).

 Example
 B, at Singapore, under instructions from A of Calcutta, contracts with C to deliver certain goods to him. A
 does not send the goods to B, and C sues B for breach of contract. B informs A of the suit, and A authorizes
 him to defend the suit. B defends the suit, and is compelled to pay damages and costs, and incurs expenses.
 A is liable to B (as an agent) for such damages, costs and expenses.


                                                                                                                497
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                Contract Law

 Extent of Agent’s Authority
The extent of the authority of an agent depends upon the terms expressed in his appointment or it may be
implied by the circumstances of the case. The contractual authority is the real authority, but implied authority
is to do whatevers incidental to carry out the real authority. This implied authority is also known as apparent or
ostensible authority, Thus, an agent having an authority to do an act has authority to do everything lawful which
is necessary for the purpose or usually done in the course of conducting business.

An agent has authority to do all such things which may be necessary to protect the principal from loss in an
emergency and which he would do to protect his own property under similar circumstances. Where butter was
becoming useless owing to delay in transit and was therefore sold by the station master for the best price
available as it was not possible to obtain instructions from the principal, the sale was held binding upon the
principal.

 Responsibilities of Principal to Third-parties
The effect of a contract made by an agent varies according to the circumstances under which the agent
contracted.

There are three circumstances in which an agent may contract, namely—

   (a)   the agent acts for a named principal;

   (b)   the agent acts for an undisclosed principal; and

   (c)   the agent acts for a concealed principal.

(a) Disclosed principal: Where the agent contracts as agent for a named principal, he generally incurs neither
rights nor liabilities under the contract, and drops out as soon as it is made. The contract is made between the
principal and the third-party and it is between these two that rights and obligations are created. The legal effect
is the same as if the principal had contracted directly with the third-party.

The effect is that the principal is bound by all acts of the agent done within the scope of actual, apparent or
ostensible authority. This ostensible authority of the agent is important, for the acts of a general agent are
binding on the principal if they are within the scope of his apparent authority, although they may be outside the
scope of his actual authority. Therefore, a private or secret limitation or restriction of powers of an agent do not
bind innocent third- party.

(b) Undisclosed principal: Where the agent disclose that he is merely an agent but conceals the identity of his
principal, he is not personally liable, as he drops out in normal way. The principal, on being discovered, will be
responsible for the contract made by the agent.

(c) Concealed principal: Where an agent appears to be contracting on his own behalf, without either contracting
as an agent or disclosing the existence of an agency (i.e., he discloses neither the name of the principal nor his
existence), he becomes personally liable. The third-party may sue either the principal (when discovered) or the
agent or both. If the third-party chooses to sue the principal and not the agent, he must allow the principal the
benefit of all payments made by him to the agent on account of the contract before the agency was disclosed.
The third-party is also entitled to get the benefit of anything he may have paid to the agent.

If the principal discloses himself before the contract is completed, the other contracting party may refuse to fulfil
the contract if he can show that, if he had known who the principal in the contract was, or if he had known that
the agent was not the principal, he would not have entered into the contract.


498
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

 Principal Liable for Agent’s Torts (Section 238)
 If an agent commits a tort or other wrong (e.g., misrepresentation or fraud) during his agency, whilst acting
 within the scope of his actual or apparent authority, the principal is liable. But the agent is also personally
 liable, and he may be sued also. The principal is liable even if the tort is committed exclusively for the benefit
 of the agent and against the interests of the principal.

 Personal Liability of Agent to Third-party
An agent is personally liable in the following cases:
   (a)     Where the agent has agreed to be personally liable to the third-party.
   (b)     Where an agent acts for a principal residing abroad.
   (c)     When the agent signs a negotiable instrument in his own name without making it clear that he is signing
           it only as agent.
   (d)     When an agent acts for a principal who cannot be sued (e.g., he is minor), the agent is personally
           liable.
   (e)     An agent is liable for breach of warranty of authority. Where a person contracts as agent without any
           authority there is a breach of warranty of authority. He is liable to the person who has relied on the
           warranty of authority and has suffered loss.
   (f)     Where authority is one coupled with interest or where trade, usage or custom makes the agent
           personally liable, he will be liable to the third-party.
   (g)     He is also liable for his torts committed in the course of agency.

 Meaning of Authority Coupled with Interest (Section 202)
An agency is coupled with an interest when the agent has an interest in the authority granted to him or
when the agent has an interest in the subject matter with which he is authorised to deal. Where the agent
was appointed to enable him to secure some benefit already owed to him by the principal, the agency
was coupled with an interest. For example, where a factor had made advances to the principal and is
authorised to sell at the best price and recoup the advances made by him or where the agent is authorised
to collect money from third-parties and pay himself the debt due by the principal, the agencies are coupled
with interest. But a mere arrangement that the agent’s remuneration to paid out of the rents collected by
him, it does not give him any interest in the property and the agency is not the one coupled with an interest.
An agency coupled with interest cannot be terminated in the absence of a contract to the contrary to the
prejudice of such interest.

 The principal laid down in Section 202 applies only if the following conditions are fulfilled:
     (a)    The interest of the agent should exist at the time of creation of agency and should not have arisen
            after the creation of agency.
     (b)    Authority given to the agent must be intended for the protection of the interest of the agent.
     (c)    The interest of the agent in the subject matter must be substantial and not ordinary.
     (d)    The interest of the agent should be over and above his remuneration. Mere prospect of remuneration
            is not sufficient interest.



                                                                                                                499
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                      Contract Law

 Termination of Agency
An agency comes to an end or terminates—
   (a)           By the performance of the contract of agency; (Section 201)
   (b)           By an agreement between the principal and the agent;
   (c)           By expiration of the period fixed for the contract of agency;
   (d)           By the death of the principal or the agency; (Section 201)
   (e)           By the insanity of either the principal or the agent; (Section 201)
   (f)           By the insolvency of the principal, and in some cases that of the agent; (Section 201)
   (g)           Where the principal or agent is an incorporated company, by its dissolution;
   (h)           By the destruction of the subject-matter; (Section 56)
      (i)        By the renunciation of his authority by the agent; (Section 201)
   ( j)          By the revocation of authority by the principal. (Section 201)

 When Agency is Irrevocable
Revocation of an agency by the principal is not possible in the following cases:
   (a)           Where the authority of agency is one coupled with an interest, even the death or insanity of the principal
                 does not terminate the authority in this case (Section 202).
   (b)           When agent has incurred personal liability, the agency becomes irrevocable.
   (c)           When the authority has been partly exercised by the agent, it is irrevocable in particular with regard to
                 obligations which arise from acts already done (Section 204).

 Example
            1.    A gives authority to B to sell A’s land, and to pay himself, out of the proceeds, the debts due to him
                  from A. A cannot revoke this authority, nor can it be terminated by his insanity or death.
        2.        A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay for it out of A’s moneys
                  remaining in B’s hands. B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in his own name, so as to make himself
                  personally liable for the price. A cannot revoke B’s authority so far as regards payment for the
                  cotton.

 When Termination Takes Effect
Termination of an agency takes effect or is complete, as regards the agent when it becomes known to the agent.
If the principal revokes the agents authority, the revocation will take effect when the agent comes to know of it.
As regards the third-parties, the termination takes effect when it comes to their knowledge (Section 208). Thus,
if an agent whose authority has been terminated to his knowledge, enters into a contract with a third-party who
deals with him bona fide, the contract will be binding on the principal as against the third-party. The termination
of an agent’s authority terminates the authority of the sub-agent appointed by the agent (Section 210).
The revocation of agency as regards the agent and as regards the principal takes effect at different points
of time. Section 209 charges the agent with duty to protect the principal’s interest where the principal dies or
becomes of unsound mind. It provides that when an agency is terminated by the principal dying or becoming of


500
Contract Law                                                                                              LESSON 13

unsound mind, the agent is bound to take, on behalf of the representatives of his late principal, all reasonable
steps for the protection and preservation of the interest entrusted to him. So it is the duty of the agent to take all
steps to protect the interest of his deceased principal on his death.

 JOINT VENTURE/ FOREIGN COLLABORATION/MULTINATIONAL AGREEMENTS
International business professionals use the term “modes of entry” to describe the different methods and
approaches available to enter markets and conduct business in other countries. One mode of entry is the joint
venture where two or more organizations join together in a cooperative effort to further their business goals.
The joint venture is one of the most common and effective means of conducting business internationally. The
joint venture documents and agreements are critical to the success of the venture. The joint venture agreement
forms the basis of the understanding between and among the parties. It is relied upon to ensure that all parties
understand their roles, rights, responsibilities, and remedies in the conduct of the venture. Organizations enter
into joint ventures in good faith but closely scrutinize the joint venture documents if anything goes awry.
The importance of the documents and the purpose of this part is to cover, step by step, the critical elements
to consider and include in joint venture agreements. Equity participation, for example, may or may not be as
important as operational control. Technical participation in the venture may or may not be as important as the
intellectual property rights that may result from the venture. A key to developing joint venture agreements is to
determine goals and objectives in advance and ensure that the interests are reflected in the agreement.
Selection of good local partner is the key to success of any joint venture. Personal interviews with a prospective
joint venture partner should be supplemented with proper due diligence. Once a partner is selected generally
the parties highlighting the basis of the future joint venture agreement sign a memorandum of understanding
or a letter of intent. Before signing the joint venture agreement, the terms should be thoroughly discussed to
avoid any misunderstanding at a later stage. Negotiations require an understanding of the cultural and legal
background of the parties.
It is difficult to prepare a set frame of the terms and conditions. The conditions may differ according to the
requirements.
While drafting a foreign collaboration agreement, the following factors should be kept in mind:
    l   Capability of the collaborator and the requirements of the party are clearly indicated.
    l   Clear definitions of technical terms are given.
    l   Specify if the product shall be manufactured/sold on exclusive or non-exclusive basis.
    l   Terms and conditions regarding nature of technical know-how, disclosure of drawings, specifications
        and other documents, furnishing of technical information in respect of processes with flow charts etc.,
        plant outlay list of equipment, machinery and tool with specification have to be provided.
    l   Provisions for making available the engineers and/or skilled workers of the collaborator on payment of
        expenses relating to their stay per diem etc. are given.
    l   Details regarding specification and quality of the product to be manufactured are given.
    l   Quality control and trademarks to be used are also specified.
    l   Responsibility of the collaborator in establishing or maintaining assembly plants should be clearly
        determined and provided for.
    l   If sub-contracting of the work is involved, clarify if there would be any restrictions.
    l   The rate of royalty, mode of calculation and payment etc. Also, make provision as to who will bear the
        taxes/cess on such payments.
    l   Use of information and industrial property rights should also be provided for in the agreement.


                                                                                                                 501
EP-JI&GL                                                                                              Contract Law

      l    A clause on force majeure should be included.
      l    A clause that the collaborating company has to train the personnel of Indian company within a
           specified period should be incorporated The clause should also specify the terms and conditions of
           such assistance, place of training, period of training and fees payable.
      l    A comprehensive clause on arbitration containing a clear provision as to the kind of arbitrator and
           place of arbitration should be included.
      l    There should be provision in the agreement for payment of interest on delayed payments.

 E-CONTRACT
Electronic contracts are not paper based but rather in electronic form are born out of the need for speed,
convenience and efficiency. In the electronic age, the whole transaction can be completed in seconds, with
both parties simply affixing their digital signatures to an electronic copy of the contract. There was initially an
apprehension amongst the legislatures to recognize this modern technology, but now many countries have
enacted laws to recognize electronic contracts. The conventional law relating to contracts is not sufficient to
address all the issues that arise in electronic contracts. The Information Technology Act, 2000 solves some of
the peculiar issues that arise in the formation and authentication of electronic contracts
As in every other contract, an electronic contract also requires the following necessary ingredients:
      l    An offer needs to be made
      l    The offer needs to be accepted
      l    There has to be lawful consideration
      l    There has to be an intention to create legal relations
      l    The parties must be competent to contract
      l    There must be free and genuine consent
      l    The object of the contract must be lawful
      l    There must be certainty and possibility of performance.

 Basic Type of e-contracts
      1.   Shrink wrap agreements: In these type of agreements the product is wrapped. Terms and Conditions
           are placed with the product itself. These are End user Licence Agreements. Example: purchase of Anti
           Virus.
   2.      Clickwrap Agreements: These agreements requires the users to accept the proposal by clicking the “I
           agree”. User agree by clicking on the agree button. Example: Creation of email id.
   3.      Browse Wrap Agreements: These agreements are entered by continued use of the website. By using
           the website, the user is deemed to have accepted the conditions. Example: Sale and Purchase on
           online platforms.
   4.      Scroll Wrap Agreements: In these agreements, Where users are required to scroll to the complete terms
           and conditions of the documents and give their implied consent. Example: Few mobile applications
           requires the user to scroll down.
   5.      Sign-In Wrap Agreements: In these agreements, user agree by signing in to a particular website or
           mobile application. User agree with the terms and conditions by Signing in.
E-contracts are binding only if they have all the essentials required under Indian Contract Act. If any term or
condition are not in accordance with the law than the agreements are valid.


502
Contract Law                                                                                             LESSON 13

 CASE LAWS

 Trimex International FZE Ltd. Dubai (Petitioner) vs. Vedanta Aluminium Ltd., India (Respondent) on 22nd
 January, 2010
 This case may be referred to understand the position of law relating to contract contract concluded by
 emails. In this case, the court has held that an contract may be concluded by exchange of emails. It was
 stated:
 As rightly pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner, when Mr A of Trimex opened the email
 of Mr. B of Vedanta at 3:06 PM on 16.10.2007, it came to his knowledge that an irrevocable contract was
 concluded. Apart from this, the mandate of Section 7 of the Indian Contract Act stipulated that an acceptance
 must be absolute and unconditional has also been fulfilled. It is true that in the first acceptance conveyed
 by the respondent contained a rider, namely, cancellation after 2 shipments which made acceptance
 conditional. However, taking note of the said condition, the petitioner requested the respondent to convey
 an unconditional acceptance which was readily done through his email sent at 3:06 PM with the words “we
 confirm the deal for 5 shipments”, which is unconditional and unqualified.
 Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company Limited v. Ratnagiri Gas and Power Private Limited &
 Ors. decided by Supreme Court on 09th November, 2023
 In this case, in order to resolve the issue of non-payment of fixed charges, the first respondent filed a petition
 under Section 79 of the Electricity Act 2003 inter alia seeking the resolution of the issue of shortfall of
 domestic gas. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) allowed the above petition and held the
 appellant liable to pay fixed capacity charges. CERC’s decision was upheld by (Appellate Tribunal For
 Electricity) APTEL. Later, the appeal was filed before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
 The issue arose before the Supreme Court for consideration was whether the CERC and APTEL were justified
 in affixing liability to pay fixed charges on the appellant. The dispute primarily turns on the terms of the Power
 Purchase Agreement (PPA). For the reasons stated hereafter, the court answered the issue in the affirmative.
 The Apex Court said that a commercial document cannot be interpreted in a manner that is at odds with
 the original purpose and intendment of the parties to the document. A deviation from the plain terms of the
 contract is warranted only when it serves business efficacy better. The appellant’s arguments would entail
 reading in implied terms contrary to the contractual provisions which are otherwise clear. Such a reading of
 implied conditions is permissible only in a narrow set of circumstances.



                                              LESSON ROUND-UP

   l A contract is an agreement enforceable at law, made between two or more persons, by which rights
       are acquired by one or more to acts or forbearances on the part of the other or others.
   l Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration for each other, is an agreement.

   l All agreements are contracts if they are made by the free consent of parties competent to contract,
       for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not hereby expressly declared to be
       void.
   l In flaw contract There may be the circumstances under which a contract made under these rules may
       still be bad, because there is a flaw, vice or error somewhere. As a result of such a flaw, the apparent
       agreement is not a real agreement.


                                                                                                                503
EP-JI&GL                                                                                             Contract Law


   l Section 27 of the Indian Contract Act states that every agreement by which any one is restrained from
      exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is, to that extent, void.
   l The literal meaning of the word “wager” is a “bet”. Wagerning agreements are nothing but ordinary
      betting agreements.
   l An agreement not enforceable by law is void ab initio.

   l A contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do something, if some event collateral to such
      contract, does or does not happen. Contract of insurance and contracts of indemnity and guarantee
      are popular instances of contingent contracts.
   l A quasi-contract rests on the equitable principle that a person shall not be allowed to enrich himself
      unjustly at the expense of another. In truth, it is not a contract at all. It is an obligation which the
      law creates, in the absence of any agreement, when any person is in the possession of one persons
      money, or its equivalent, under such circumstances that in equity and good conscience he ought not
      to retain it, and which in justice and fairness belongs to another. It is the duty and not an agreement or
      intention which defines it.
   l A contract is said to be discharged or terminated when the rights and obligations arising out of a
      contract are extinguished.
   l Where a contract is broken, the injured party has several courses of action open to him. The appropriate
      remedy in any case will depend upon the subject-matter of the contract and the nature of the breach.
   l A contract of indemnity is a contract by which one party promises to save the other party from loss
      caused to him by the conduct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person.
   l A bailment is a transaction whereby one person delivers goods to another person for some purpose,
      upon a contract that they are, when the purpose is accomplished to be returned or otherwise disposed
      of according to the directions of the person delivering them.
   l Pledge or pawn is a contract whereby an article is deposited with a lender of money or promisee as
      security for the repayment of a loan or performance of a promise. The bailor or depositor is called the
      Pawnor and the bailee or depositee the “Pawnee” (Section 172)
   l Electronic contracts are not paper based but rather in electronic form are born out of the need for
      speed, convenience and efficiency. In the electronic age, the whole transaction can be completed in
      seconds, with both parties simply affixing their digital signatures to an electronic copy of the contract.



                                               TEST YOURSELF

(These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
  1. Define consideration and state its essential features.
  2. “No consideration, no contract”. Do you agree?
  3. “The essence of every agreement is that there ought to be free consent on both the sides”. Discuss.
  4. How does a contract differ from agreements?
  5. Write short notes on:
           (a)   Reciprocal promises.
           (b)   Substituted Agent.
  6. An agreement without Free Consent is Voidable. Analyse the Statement.


504
Contract Law                                                                                     LESSON 13

                                      LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

   l The Indian Contract & Specific Relief Acts (Set of 2 Volumes) (2017)- Pollock and Sir Dinshaw Fardunji
       Mulla
   l Bare Act of Indian Contract Act, 1872



                      OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2187/2/A187209.pdf




                                                                                                        505
EP-JI&GL   Contract Law




506
Law relating to                                                                      Lesson
Negotiable Instruments                                                                 14
KEY CONCEPTS
n Negotiable Instrument n Bouncing of Cheques n Dishonour of Cheques n Instruments




Learning Objectives
To understand:
       What are Negotiable Instruments?
       Characteristics of Negotiable Instruments
       Parties to the different Negotiable Instruments
       Effect of Negotiability
       Kinds of Negotiable Instruments
       Crossing and Bouncing of Cheques
       Dishonour of Cheques & its Remedies
       Presumption of Law as to Negotiable Instruments



Lesson Outline
       Definition of a Negotiable Instrument
       Important Characterstics of Negotiable Instruments
       Kinds of Negotiable Instruments
       Dishonour and its remedies
       Noting and Protest
       Presumption of Law
       National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT)
       Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
       Lesson Round-Up
       Glossary
       Test Yourself
       List of Further Readings and References




                                                                                         507
EP-JI&GL                                                                           Law relating to Negotiable Instruments


 The new criminal laws i.e. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023
 and Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam 2023 have repealed Indian Penal Code 1860, Criminal Procedure
 Code 1973 and Indian Evidence Act 1872 (old criminal laws) respectively.
 Therefore, by virtue of Section 8 of General Clauses Act 1897, the references to the old criminal laws,
 unless a different intention appears, be construed as references to the provision of new criminal laws.

 REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
      l     Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881

 DEFINITION OF A NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT
A negotiable instrument may be defined as “an instrument, the property in which is acquired by anyone who
takes it bona fide, and for value, notwithstanding any defect of title in the person from whom he took it, from
which it follows that an instrument cannot be negotiable unless it is such and in such a state that the true owner
could transfer the contract or engagement contained therein by simple delivery of instrument” (Willis—The Law
of Negotiable Securities, Page 6).

  According to this definition the following are the conditions of negotiability:
      (i)   The instrument should be freely transferable. An instrument cannot be negotiable unless it is such
            and in such state that the true owner could transfer by simple delivery or endorsement and delivery.
   (ii)     The person who takes it for value and in good faith is not affected by the defect in the title of the
            transferor.
  (iii)     Such a person can sue upon the instrument in his own name.

Negotiability involves two elements namely, transferability free from equities and transferability by delivery or
endorsement (Mookerjee J. In Tailors Priya vs. Gulab Chand, AIR 1965 Cal).
But the Act recognises only three types of instruments viz., a Promissory Note, a Bill of Exchange and a Cheque
as negotiable instruments. However, it does not mean that other instruments are not negotiable instruments
provided that they satisfy the following conditions of negotiability:
      1.    The instrument should be freely transferable by the custom of trade. Transferability may be by
             (i) delivery or
             (ii)   endorsement and delivery.
   2.       The person who obtains it in good faith and for consideration gets it free from all defects and can sue
            upon it in his own name.
   3.       The holder has the right to transfer. The negotiability continues till the maturity.
The law relating to negotiable instruments is contained in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. It is an Act to
define and amend the law relating to promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheques.
The Act does not affect the custom or local usage relating to an instrument in oriental language i.e., a Hundi.

 The term “negotiable instrument” means a document transferable from one person to another. However the
 Act has not defined the term. It merely says that “A negotiable instrument” means a promissory note, bill of
 exchange or cheque payable either to order or to bearer. [Section 13(1)]



508
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                           LESSON 14

 Effect of Negotiability
The general principle of law relating to transfer of property is that no one can pass a better title than he himself
has (nemodat quad non-habet). The exceptions to this general rule arise by virtue of statute or by a custom. A
negotiable instrument is one such exception which is originally a creation of mercantile custom.
Thus a bona fide transferee of negotiable instrument for consideration without notice of any defect of title,
acquires the instrument free of any defect, i.e., he acquires a better title than that of the transferor.

 IMPORTANT CHARACTERISTICS OF NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
Following are the important characteristics of negotiable instruments:

                     The holder of the instruments is presumed to be the owner of the property
                     contained in it




                     They are freely transfereable




                     The holder of the instruments is presumed to be the owner of the property
                     contained in it




                     The holder in due course is entitled to sue on the instrument in his own name




                     The instrument is transferable till maturity and in case of cheques till it become
                     stale



                     Certain equal presumed are applicable to all negotiable instruments unless the
                     connrary is proved



 Classification of Negotiable Instruments
The negotiable instruments may be classified as under:
                                                        For
                                                      Ins eign
                                                                   s                              Inc
                         s            nts                                                            h
                                                                                                Inc oate
                                                          tru
                  Bea                         Inla       De   me nts
                                            Ins nd
                                                             m
                Ins rer          Ord                                                                om
                                                       Ins and
                                                           tru me nts
                                                                                              Ins           or
                   tru         Ins er           tru                                               tru plete
                                                         Tim
                                                       Ins e
                                                           tru
                       me         tru               me         me nts                                me
                          nt          me               ntAm
                                                       Ins biguo
                                                           tru me us
                                                                  nts                                   nts




1. Bearer Instruments
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is payable to bearer when (i) it is expressed to be so payable,
or (ii) the only or last endorsement on the instrument is an endorsement in blank. A person who is a holder of a
bearer instrument can obtain the payment of the instrument.

 Example:
 A bearer cheque that may be encashed from a bank the person in possession is a bearer Instrument.

                                                                                                                      509
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

2. Order Instruments
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is payable to order (i) which is expressed to be so payable; or (ii)
which is expressed to be payable to a particular person, and does not contain any words prohibiting transfer or
indicating an intention that it shall not be transferable.
3. Inland Instruments (Section 11)
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque drawn or made in India, and made payable, or drawn upon any
person, resident in India shall be deemed to be an inland instrument. Since a promissory note is not drawn
on any person, an inland promissory note is one which is made payable in India. Subject to this exception, an
inland instrument is one which is either:
      (i)   drawn and made payable in India, or
   (ii)     drawn in India upon some persons resident therein, even though it is made payable in a foreign country.
4. Foreign Instruments
An instrument which is not an inland instrument, is deemed to be a foreign instrument. The essentials of a
foreign instrument include that:
      (i)   it must be drawn outside India and made payable outside or inside India; or
   (ii)     it must be drawn in India and made payable outside India and drawn on a person resident outside India.
5. Demand Instruments (Section 19)
A promissory note or a bill of exchange in which no time for payment is specified is an instrument payable on
demand.
6. Time Instruments
Time instruments are those which are payable at some time in the future. Therefore, a promissory note or a bill
of exchange payable after a fixed period, or after sight, or on specified day, or on the happening of an event
which is certain to happen, is known as a time instrument. The expression “after sight” in a promissory note
means that the payment cannot be demanded on it unless it has been shown to the maker. In the case of bill
of exchange, the expression “after sight” means after acceptance, or after noting for non-acceptance or after
protest for non- acceptance.

 Ambiguous Instruments (Section 17)
An instrument, which in form is such that it may either be treated by the holder as a bill or as a note, is an
ambiguous instrument. Section 5(2) of the English Bills of Exchange Act provides that where in a bill, the drawer
and the drawee are the same person or where the drawee is a fictitious person or a person incompetent to
contract, the holder may treat the instrument, at his option, either as a bill of exchange or as a promissory note.
Bill drawn to or to the order of the drawee or by an agent on his principal, or by one branch of a bank on another
or by the direction of a company or their cashier are also ambiguous instruments. A promissory note addressed
to a third person may be treated as a bill by such person by accepting it, while a bill not addressed to any one
may be treated as a note. But where the drawer and payee are the same, e.g., where A draws a bill payable
to A’s order, it is not an ambiguous instrument and cannot be treated as a promissory note. Once an instrument
has been treated either as a bill or as a note, it cannot be treated differently afterwards.

 Inchoate or Incomplete Instrument (Section 20)
When one person signs and delivers to another a paper stamped in accordance with the law relating to
negotiable instruments, and either wholly blank or having written thereon an incomplete negotiable instrument,
he thereby gives prima facie authority to the holder thereof to make or complete, as the case may be, upon it a
negotiable instrument, for any amount specified therein, and not exceeding the amount, covered by the stamp.


510
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                  LESSON 14

Such an instrument is called an inchoate instrument. The person so signing shall be liable upon such instrument,
in the capacity in which he signs the same, to any holder in due course for such amount, provided that no person
other than a holder in due course shall recover from the person delivering the instrument anything in excess of
the amount intended by him to be paid thereon.
The authority to fill up a blank or incomplete instrument may be exercised by any “holder” and not only the first
holder to whom the instrument was delivered. The person signing and delivering the paper is liable both to a
“holder” and a “holder-in-due- course”. But there is a difference in their respective rights. A “holder” can recover
only what the person signing and delivering the paper agreed to pay under the instrument, while a “holder-in-
due- course” can recover the whole amount made payable by the instrument provided that it is covered by the
stamp, even though the amount authorised was smaller.

 Example:
 A blank cheque is an inchoate instrument. It comes with the option of writing the amount by the first holder.

 KINDS OF NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS
The Act recognises only three kinds of negotiable instruments under Section 13 but it does not exclude any
other negotiable instrument provided the instrument entitles a person to a sum of money and is transferable by
delivery. Instruments written in oriental languages i.e. hundis are also negotiable instruments. These instruments
are discussed below:

 (i) Promissory Notes

 A “promissory note” is an instrument in writing (not being a bank note or a currency note) containing an
 unconditional undertaking, signed by the maker to pay a certain sum of money to, or to the order of, a
 certain person, or only to bearer of the instrument. (Section 4)

Parties to a Promissory Note:
  A promissory note has the following parties:
   (a)   The maker: the person who makes or executes the note promising to pay the amount stated therein.
   (b)   The payee: one to whom the note is payable.
   (c)   The holder: is either the payee or some other person to whom he may have endorsed the note.
   (d)   The endorser.
   (e)   The endorsee.

Essentials of a Promissory Note:
To be a promissory note, an instrument must possess the following essentials:
   (a)   It must be in writing. An oral promise to pay will not do.
   (b)   It must contain an express promise or clear undertaking to pay. A promise to pay cannot be inferred. A
         mere acknowledgement of debt is not sufficient. If A writes to B “I owe you (I.O.U.) Rs. 500”, there is no
         promise to pay and the instrument is not a promissory note.
   (c)   The promise or undertaking to pay must be unconditional. A promise to pay “when able”, or “as soon
         as possible”, or “after your marriage to D”, is conditional. But a promise to pay after a specific time or
         on the happening of an event which must happen, is not conditional, e.g. “I promise to pay Rs. 1,000 ten
         days after the death of B”, is unconditional.


                                                                                                                511
EP-JI&GL                                                                          Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

   (d)      The maker must sign the promissory note in token of an undertaking to pay to the payee or his order.
   (e)      The maker must be a certain person, i.e., the note must show clearly who the person is engaging
            himself to pay.
   (f)      The payee must be certain. The promissory note must contain a promise to pay to some person or
            persons ascertained by name or designation or to their order.
   (g)      The sum payable must be certain and the amount must not be capable of contingent additions or
            subtractions. If A promises to pay Rs. 100 and all other sums which shall become due to him, the
            instrument is not a promissory note.
   (h)      Payment must be in legal money of the country. Thus, a promise to pay Rs. 500 and deliver 10 quintals
            of rice is not a promissory note.
      (i)   It must be properly stamped in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. Each
            stamp must be duly cancelled by maker’s signature or initials.
   ( j)     It must contain the name of place, number and the date on which it is made. However, their omission will
            not render the instrument invalid, e.g. if it is undated, it is deemed to be dated on the date of delivery.
  Question
  X made a promissory note for Rs. 50,000/- to be paid to Y on 31st December, 2022. Y endorse the bill Z.
  Find out who is maker, payee, holder, endorser and endorsee.
Note : A promissory note cannot be made payable or issued to bearer, no matter whether it is payable on
demand or after a certain time (Section 31 of the RBI Act, 1934).

 (ii) Bills of Exchange

 A “bill of exchange” is an instrument in writing containing an unconditional order, signed by the maker,
 directing a certain person to pay a certain sum of money only to or to the order of, a certain person or to the
 bearer of the instrument. (Section 5)

The definition of a bill of exchange is very similar to that of a promissory note and for most of the cases the rules
which apply to promissory notes are in general applicable to bills. There are however, certain important points
of distinction between the two.

 Parties to bills of exchange
The following are parties to a bill of exchange:
   (a)      The Drawer: the person who draws the bill.
   (b)      The Drawee: the person on whom the bill is drawn.
   (c)      The Acceptor: one who accepts the bill. Generally, the drawee is the acceptor but a stranger may
            accept it on behalf of the drawee.
   (d)      The payee: one to whom the sum stated in the bill is payable, either the drawer or any other person
            may be the payee.
   (e)      The holder: is either the original payee or any other person to whom, the payee has endorsed the bill.
            In case of a bearer bill, the bearer is the holder.
   (f)      The endorser: when the holder endorses the bill to any one else he becomes the endorser.
   (g)      The endorsee: is the person to whom the bill is endorsed.

512
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                      LESSON 14

   (h)    Drawee in case of need: Besides the above parties, another person called the “drawee in case of need”,
          may be introduced at the option of the drawer. The name of such a person may be inserted either by
          the drawer or by any endorser in order that resort may be had to him in case of need, i.e., when the bill
          is dishonoured by either non-acceptance or non-payment.
    (i)   Acceptor for honour: Further, any person may voluntarily become a party to a bill as acceptor. A
          person, who on the refusal by the original drawee to accept the bill or to furnish better security, when
          demanded by the notary, accept the bill supra protest in order to safeguard the honour of the drawer
          or any endorser, is called the acceptor for honour.

  Essentials of a Bill of Exchange:
   (1)    It must be in writing.
   (2)    It must contain an unconditional order to pay money only and not merely a request.
   (3)    It must be signed by the drawer.
   (4)    The parties must be certain.
   (5)    The sum payable must also be certain.
   (6)    It must comply with other formalities e.g. stamps, date, etc.


 Distinction between Bill of Exchange and Promissory Note
The following are the important points of distinction between a bill of exchange and a promissory note:
   (a)    A promissory note is a two-party instrument, with a maker (debtor) and a payee (creditor). In a bill there
          are three parties—drawer, drawee and payee, though any two out of the three capacities may be filled
          by one and the same person. In a bill, the drawer is the maker who orders the drawee to pay the bill to
          a person called the payee or to his order. When the drawee accepts the bill he is called the acceptor.
   (b)    A note cannot be made payable to the maker himself, while in a bill, the drawer and payee may be the
          same person.
   (c)    A note contains an unconditional promise by the maker to pay to the payee or his order; in a bill there
          is an unconditional order to the drawee to pay according to the directions of the drawer.
   (d)    A note is presented for payment without any prior acceptance by the maker. A bill payable after sight
          must be accepted by the drawee or someone else on his behalf before it can be presented for payment.
   (e)    The liability of the maker of a pro-note is primary and absolute, but the liability of the drawer of a bill is
          secondary and conditional.
   (f)    Foreign bill must be protested for dishonour but no such protest is necessary in the case of a note.
   (g)    When a bill is dishonoured, due notice of dishonour is to be given by the holder to the drawer and the
          intermediate endorsee, but no such notice need to be given in the case of a note.
   (h)    A bill can be drawn payable to bearer provided it is not payable on demand. A promissory note cannot
          be made payable to bearer, even if it is made payable otherwise than on demand.

 How Bill of Exchange Originates—Forms of Bills of Exchange
 Bills of exchange were originally used for payment of debts by traders residing in one country to another
 country with a view to avoid transmission of coin. Now-a-days they are used more as trade bills both in
 connection with domestic trade and foreign trade and are called inland bills and foreign bills respectively.


                                                                                                                   513
EP-JI&GL                                                                         Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Inland Bills (Sections 11 and 12)
A bill of exchange is an inland instrument if it is (i) drawn or made and payable in India, or (ii) drawn in India upon
any person who is a resident in India, even though it is made payable in a foreign country. But a promissory note
to be an inland should be drawn and payable in India, as it has no drawee.

Two essential conditions to make an inland instrument are:

      (i)   the instrument must have been drawn or made in India; and

   (ii)     the instrument must be payable in India or the drawee must be in India.

  Example
  A bill drawn in India, payable in USA, upon a person resident in India is an inland instrument. A bill drawn in
  India and payable in India but drawn on a person in USA is also an inland instrument.


 Foreign Bills
All bills which are not inland are deemed to be foreign bills. Normally foreign bills are drawn in sets of three
copies.

 Trade Bill
A bill drawn and accepted for a genuine trade transaction is termed as a trade bill. When a trader sells goods
on credit, he may make use of a bill of exchange.

  Example :
  A sells goods worth Rs. 1,000 to B and allows him 90 days time to pay the price, A will draw a bill of
  exchange on B, on the following terms: “Ninety days after date pay A or order, the sum of one thousand
  rupees only for value received”. A will sign the bill and then present it to B for acceptance. This is necessary
  because, until a bill is accepted by the drawee, nobody has either rights or obligations. If B agrees to obey
  the order of A, he will accept the bill by writing across its face the word “accepted” and signing his name
  underneath and then delivering the bill to the holder. B, the drawee, now becomes the acceptor of the bill
  and liable to its holders. Such a bill is a genuine trade bill.


 Accommodation Bill
All bills are not genuine trade bills, as they are often drawn for accommodating a party. An accommodation
bill is a bill in which a person lends or gives his name to oblige a friend or some person whom he knows
or otherwise. In other words, a bill which is drawn, accepted or endorsed without consideration is called an
accommodation bill. The party lending his name to oblige the other party is known as the accommodating or
accommodation party, and the party so obliged is called the party accommodated. An accommodation party is
not liable on the instrument to the party accommodated because as between them there was no consideration
and the instrument was merely to help. But the accommodation party is liable to a holder for value, who takes
the accommodation bill for value, though such holder may not be a holder in due course. Thus, A may be in
need of money and approach his friends B and C who, instead of lending the money directly, propose to draw
an “Accommodation Bill” in his favour in the following form:



514
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                     LESSON 14

   “Three months after date pay A or order, the sum of Rupees one thousand only”.

                                                                              B.

   To

                          C.

If the credit of B and C is good, this device enables A to get an advance of Rs. 1,000 from his banker at the
commercial rate of discount. The real debtor in this case is not C, but A the payee who promises to reimburse
C before the period of three months only. A is here the principal debtor and B and C are mere sureties. This
inversion of liability affords a good definition of an accommodation bill: “If as between the original parties to the
bill the one who should prima facie be principal is in fact the surety whether he be drawer, acceptor, or endorser,
that bill is an accommodation bill”.

 Bills in Sets (Section 132 and 133)
Foreign bills are usually drawn in sets to avoid the danger of loss. They are drawn in sets of three, each of which
is called “Via” and as soon as any one of them is paid, the others become inoperative. All these parts form one
bill and the drawer must sign and deliver all of them to the payee. The stamp is affixed only on one part and
one part is required to be accepted. But if the drawer mistakenly accepts all the parts of the same bill, he will
be liable on each part accepted as if it were a separate bill.

 Right to Duplicate Bill
Where a bill of exchange has been lost before it was overdue, the person who was the holder to it may apply
to the drawer, to give him another bill of the same tenor. It is only the holder who can ask for a duplicate bill,
promissory note or cheque.

 Bank Draft
A bill of exchange is also sometimes spoken of as a draft. It is called as a bank draft when a bill of exchange
drawn by one bank on another bank, or by itself on its own branch, and is a negotiable instrument. It is very
much like the cheque with three points of distinction between the two. A bank draft can be drawn only by a bank
on another bank, usually its own branch. It cannot so easily be counter-manded. It cannot be made payable to
bearer.

 Specimen of a Bank Draft
                                                    A.B.C. Bank
                                                   X.Y.Z. Branch
No.....................                                                                              Date...................
On demand pay ‘A’ or order the sum of rupees one thousand five hundred only for value received.
                                                                                                             Rs.1,500/-
                                                                                                      Sd./- Manager
To
‘B’ Branch, (Place)
In the above demand draft, the drawer is X.Y.Z. Branch, the drawee is ‘B’ branch and the payee is ‘A’.

                                                                                                                      515
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 (iii) Cheques
The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 2002 and Negotiable Instrument
(Amendment) Act, 2015 have broadened, the definition of cheque to include the electronic image of a truncated
cheque and a cheque in the electronic form. Section 6 of the Act provides that a ‘cheque’ is a bill of exchange
drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable otherwise than on demand and it includes the
electronic
image of a truncated cheque and a cheque in the electronic form.

 Example:
 After this amendment, the banks may send the electronic copy of the cheque to another for releasing the
 Payment. This amendment has reduced the time for clearing of cheques.

Despite the amendment as is evident the basic definition of the cheque has been retained and the definition has
only been enlarged to include cheques in the above form as well.
As per explanation appended to the section, the expression:
      (i)   “a cheque in the electronic form” means a cheque drawn in electronic form by using any computer
            resource and signed in a secure system with digital signature (with or without biometrics signature) and
            asymmetric crypto system or with electronic signature, as the case may be;
   (ii)     “a truncated cheque” means a cheque which is truncated during the course of a clearing cycle, either
            by the clearing house or by the bank whether paying or receiving payment, immediately on generation
            of an electronic image for transmission, substituting the further physical movement of the cheque in
            writing. (Explanation I).
The expression ‘clearing house’ means the clearing house managed by the Reserve Bank of India or a clearing
house recognised as such by the Reserve Bank of India. (Explanation II).

 ‘Explanation III. – For the purposes of this section, the expressions “asymmetric crypto system”, “computer
 resource”, “digital signature”, “electronic form” and “electronic signature” shall have the same meanings
 respectively assigned to them in the Information Technology Act, 2000.’

Simply stated, a cheque is a bill of exchange drawn on a bank payable always on demand. Thus, a cheque is a
bill of exchange with two additional qualifications, namely: (i) it is always drawn on a banker, and (ii) it is always
payable on demand. A cheque being a species of a bill of exchange, must satisfy all the requirements of a bill;
it does not, however, require acceptance.

 Note: By virtue of Section 31 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, no bill of exchange or hundi can be made
 payable to bearer on demand and no promissory note or a bank draft can be made payable to bearer at all,
 whether on demand or after a specified time. Only a cheque can be payable to bearer on demand.

  Parties to a cheque
  The following are the parties to a cheque:
  l The drawer: The person who draws the cheque.

  l The drawee: The banker of the drawer on whom the cheque is drawn.

  l The payee, holder, endorser and endorsee: same as in the case of a bill.



516
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                    LESSON 14

 Essentials of a Cheque
   (1)   It is always drawn on a banker.

   (2)   It is always payable on demand.

   (3)   It does not require acceptance. There is, however, a custom among banks to mark cheques as good for
         purposes of clearance.

   (4)   A cheque can be drawn on bank where the drawer has an account.

   (5)   Cheques may be payable to the drawer himself. It may be made payable to bearer on demand unlike
         a bill or a note.

   (6)   The banker is liable only to the drawer. A holder has no remedy against the banker if a cheque is
         dishonoured.

   (7)   A cheque is usually valid for fix months. However, it is not invalid if it is post dated or ante-dated.

   (8)   No Stamp is required to be affixed on cheques.

  Distinction between Cheques and Bills of Exchange

  As a general rule, the provisions applicable to bills payable on demand apply to cheques, yet there are
  few points of distinction between the two, namely:

   (a)   A cheque is a bill of exchange and always drawn on a banker, while a bill may be drawn on any one,
         including banker.

   (b)   A cheque can only be drawn payable on demand, a bill may be drawn payable on demand, or on
         the expiry of a specified period after sight or date.

   (c)   A bill payable after sight must be accepted before payment can be demanded, a cheque does not
         require acceptance and is intended for immediate payment.

   (d)   A grace of 3 days is allowed in the case of time bills, while no grace is given in the case of a cheque,
         for payment.

   (e)   The drawer of a bill is discharged, if it is not presented for payment, but the drawer of a cheque is
         discharged only if he suffers any damage by delay in presentment for payment.

   (f)   Notice of the dishonour of a bill is necessary, but not in the case of a cheque.

   (g)   The cheque being a revocable mandate, the authority may be revoked by countermanding payment,
         and is determined by notice of the customer’s death or insolvency. This is not so in the case of bill.

   (h)   A cheque may be crossed, but not a bill.

A cheque is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and always payable on demand. A cheque is
always drawn on a particular banker and is always payable on demand. Consequently, all cheques are bills of
exchange but all bills are not cheques.




                                                                                                                   517
EP-JI&GL                                                                            Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Specimen of a Cheque
                                                             A.B.C. Bank
                                                             X.Y.Z. Branch
                                                                                                 Date...................................
Pay ‘A’ ............................. or the bearer sum of rupees only.
A/c No............... LF.............
                                                                                                                               Rs. /-
No.....................................                                                                                          Sd/-

 Banker
A banker is one who does banking business. Section 5(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 defines banking
as, “accepting for the purpose of lending or investment, of deposits of money from the public, repayable on
demand or otherwise and withdrawable by cheque, draft or otherwise.” This definition emphasises two points:
      (1)     that the primary function of a banker consists of accepting of deposits for the purpose of lending or
              investing the same;
     (2)      that the amount deposited is repayable to the depositor on demand or according to the agreement. The
              demand for repayment can be made through a cheque, draft or otherwise, and not merely by verbal
              order.

 Customer
The term “customer” is neither defined in Indian nor in English statutes. The general opinion is that a customer
is one who has an account with the bank or who utilises the services of the bank.
The special features of the legal relationship between the banker and the customer may be termed as the
obligations and rights of the banker. These are:
       1.     Obligation to honour cheques of the customers.
      2.      Obligation to collect cheques and drafts on behalf of the customers.
      3.      Obligation to keep proper record of transactions with the customer.
      4.      Obligation to comply with the express standing instructions of the customer.
      5.      Obligation not to disclose the state of customer’s account to anyone else.
      6.      Obligation to give reasonable notice to the customer, if the banker wishes to close the account.
      7.      Right of lien over any goods and securities bailed to him for a general balance of account.
      8.      Right of set off and right of appropriation.
      9.      Right to claim incidental charges and interest as per rules and regulations of the bank, as communicated
              to the customer at the time of opening the account.

 Liability of a Banker
By opening a current account of a customer, the banker becomes liable to his debtor to the extent of the amount
so received in the said account and undertakes to honour the cheques drawn by the customer so long as he holds
sufficient funds to the customer’s credit. If a banker, without justification, fails to honour his customer’s cheques, he is
liable to compensate the drawer for any loss or damage suffered by him. But the payee or holder of the cheque has
no cause of action against the banker as the obligation to honour a cheque is only towards the drawer.

518
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                             LESSON 14

The banker must also maintain proper and accurate accounts of credits and debits. He must honour a cheque
presented in due course. But in the following circumstances, he must refuse to honour a cheque and in some
others he may do so.

 When Banker must Refuse Payment
In the following cases the authority of the banker to honour customer’s cheque comes to an end, he must refuse
to honour cheques issued by the customer:
   (a)   When a customer countermands payment i.e., where or when a customer, after issuing a cheque issues
         instructions not to honour it, the banker must not pay it.
   (b)   When the banker receives notice of customer’s death.
   (c)   When customer has been adjudged an insolvent.
   (d)   When the banker receives notice of customer’s insanity.
   (e)   When an order (e.g., Garnishee Order) of the Court, prohibits payment.
   (f)   When the customer has given notice of assignment of the credit balance of his account.
   (g)   When the holder’s title is defective and the banker comes to know of it.
   (h)   When the customer has given notice for closing his account.

 When Banker may Refuse Payment
In the following cases the banker may refuse to pay a customer’s cheque:
   (a)   When the cheque is post-dated.
   (b)   When the banker has no sufficient funds of the drawer with him and there is no communication between
         the bank and the customer to honour the cheque.
   (c)   When the cheque is of doubtful legality.
   (d)   When the cheque is not duly presented, e.g., it is presented after banking hours.
   (e)   When the cheque on the face of it is irregular, ambiguous or otherwise materially altered. (f)
         When the cheque is presented at a branch where the customer has no account.
   (g)   When some persons have joint account and the cheque is not signed jointly by all or by the survivors
         of them.
   (h)   When the cheque has been allowed to become stale, i.e., it has not been presented within six months
         of the date mentioned on it.

 Example
 A issued an account payee cheque in the name of B on 30th October, 2022. The date on cheque was 30th
 November, 2022. The cheque presented for payment on 29th November, 2022. In this case, The bank may
 deny to make the payment to B.

 Protection of Paying Banker (Sections 10, 85 and 128)
Section 85 lays down that where a cheque payable to order purports to be endorsed by or on behalf of the
payee the banker is discharged by payment in due course. He can debit the account of the customer with the
amount even though the endorsement turns out subsequently to have been forged, or the agent of the payee

                                                                                                          519
EP-JI&GL                                                                     Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

without authority endorsed it on behalf of the payee. It would be seen that the payee includes endorsee. This
protection is granted because a banker cannot be expected to know the signatures of all the persons in the
world. He is only bound to know the signatures of his own customers.
Therefore, the forgery of drawer’s signature will not ordinarily protect the banker but even in this case, the
banker may debit the account of the customer, if it can show that the forgery was intimately connected with the
negligence of the customer and was the proximate cause of loss.
In the case of bearer cheques, the rule is that once a bearer cheque, always a bearer cheque. Where, therefore,
a cheque originally expressed by the drawer himself to be payable to bearer, the banker may ignore any
endorsement on the cheque. He will be discharged by payment in due course. But a cheque which becomes
bearer by a subsequent endorsement in blank is not covered by this Section. A banker is discharged from
liability on a crossed cheque if he makes payment in due course.

 Payment in due Course (Section 10)
Any person liable to make payment under a negotiable instrument, must make the payment of the amount due
thereunder in due course in order to obtain a valid discharge against the holder.
A payment in due course means a payment in accordance with the apparent tenor of the instrument, in good
faith and without negligence to any person in possession thereof.

  A payment will be a payment in due course if:
   (a)   it is in accordance with the apparent tenor of the instrument, i.e., according to what appears on the
         face of the instrument to be the intention of the parties;
   (b)   it is made in good faith and without negligence, and under circumstances which do not afford a ground
         for believing that the person to whom it is made is not entitled to receive the amount;
   (c)   it is made to the person in possession of the instrument who is entitled as holder to receive payment;
   (d)   payment is made under circumstances which do not afford a reasonable ground believing that he is
         not entitled to receive payment of the amount mentioned in the instrument; and
   (e)   payment is made in money and money only.

Under Sections 10 and 128, a paying banker making payment in due course is protected.

 Collecting Banker
Collecting Banker is one who collects the proceeds of a cheque for a customer. Although a banker collects the
proceeds of a cheque for a customer purely as a matter of service, yet the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
indirectly imposes statutory obligation, statutory in nature. This is evident from Section 126 of the Act which
provides that a cheque bearing a “general crossing” shall not be paid to anyone other than banker and a
cheque which is “specially crossed” shall not be paid to a person other than the banker to whom it is crossed.
Thus, a paying banker must pay a generally crossed cheque only to a banker thereby meaning that it should
be collected by another banker. While so collecting the cheques for a customer, it is quite possible that the
banker collects for a customer, proceeds of a cheque to which the customer had no title in fact. In such cases,
the true owner may sue the collecting banker for “conversion”. At the same time, it cannot be expected of a
banker to know or to ensure that all the signatures appearing in endorsements on the reverse of the cheque
are genuine. The banker is expected to be conversant only with the signatures of his customer. A customer
to whom a cheque has been endorsed, would request his banker to collect a cheque. In the event of the
endorser’s signature being proved to be forged at later date, the banker who collected the proceeds should not

520
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                     LESSON 14

be held liable for the simple reason that he has merely collected the proceeds of a cheque. Section 131 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act affords statutory protection in such a case where the customer’s title to the cheque
which the banker has collected has been questioned. It reads as follows:

  “A banker who has in good faith and without negligence received payment for a customer of a cheque
  crossed generally or specially to himself shall not, in case the title to the cheque proves defective, incur
  any liability to the true owner of the cheque by reason of only having received such payment.
  Explanation: A banker receives payment of a crossed cheque for a customer within the meaning of this
  section notwithstanding that he credits his customer’s account with the amount of the cheque before
  receiving payment thereof.”
The Amendment Act, 2002 has added a new explanation to Section 131 which provides that it shall be the duty
of the banker who receives payment based on an electronic image of a truncated cheque held with him, to
verify the prima facie genuineness of the cheque to be truncated and any fraud, forgery or tampering apparent
on the face of the instrument that can be verified with due diligence and ordinary care. (Explanation II)
The requisites of claiming protection under Section 131 are as follows:
    (i)    The collecting banker should have acted in good faith and without negligence. An act is done in good
           faith when it is done honestly. The plea of good faith can be rebutted on the ground of recklessness
           indicative of want of proper care and attention. Therefore, much depends upon the facts of the case.
		 The burden of proving that the cheque was collected in good faith and without negligence is upon
   the banker claiming protection. Failure to verify the regularity of endorsements, collecting a cheque
   payable to the account of the company to the credit of the director, etc. are examples of negligence.
   (ii)    The banker should have collected a crossed cheque, i.e., the cheque should have been crossed before
           it came to him for collection.
   (iii)   The proceeds should have been collected for a customer, i.e., a person who has an account with him.
  (iv)     That the collecting banker has only acted as an agent of the customer. If he had become the holder for
           value, the protection available under Section 131 is forfeited—Where for instance, the banker allows the
           customer to withdraw the amount of the cheque before the cheque is collected or where the cheque has
           been accepted in specific reduction of an overdraft, the banker is deemed to have become the holder
           for value and the protection is lost. But the explanation to Section 131 says that the mere crediting of the
           amount to the account does not imply that the banker has become a holder for value because due to
           accounting conveniences the banker may credit the account of the cheque to the customer’s account
           even before proceeds thereof are realised.

 Overdue, Stale or Out-of-date Cheques
A cheque is overdue or becomes statute-barred after three years from its due date of issue. A holder cannot
sue on the cheque after that time. Apart from this provision, the holder of a cheque is required to present it for
payment within a reasonable time, as a cheque is not meant for indefinite circulation. In India, a cheque, which
has been in circulation for more than six months, is regarded by bankers as stale. If, as a result of any delay in
presenting a cheque, the drawer suffers any loss, as by the failure of the bank, the drawer is discharged from
liability to the holder to the extent of the damage.

 Liability of Endorser
In order to charge an endorser, it is necessary to present the cheque for payment within a reasonable time of
its delivery by such endorser.




                                                                                                                  521
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments



 Example:
 ‘A’ endorses and delivers a cheque to B, and B keeps it for an unreasonable length of time, and then endorses
 and delivers it to C. C presents it for payment within a reasonable time after its receipt by him, and it is
 dishonoured. C can enforce payment against B but not against A, as qua A, the cheque has become stale.

 Rights of Holder against Banker
A banker is liable to his customer for wrongful dishonour of his cheque but it is not liable to the payee or holder
of the cheque. The holder has no right to enforce payment from the banker except in two cases, namely,
(i) where the holder does not present the cheque within a reasonable time after issue, and as a result the drawer
suffers damage by the failure of the banker in liquidation proceedings; and (ii) where a banker pays a crossed
cheque by mistake over the counter, he is liable to the owner for any loss occasioned by it.

  Crossing of Cheques

  A cheque is either “open” or “crossed”. An open cheque can be presented by the payee to the paying
  banker and is paid over the counter. A crossed cheque cannot be paid across the counter but must be
  collected through a banker.

  A crossing is a direction to the paying banker to pay the money generally to a banker or to a particular
  banker, and not to pay otherwise. The object of crossing is to secure payment to a banker so that it
  could be traced to the person receiving the amount of the cheque. Crossing is a direction to the paying
  banker that the cheque should be paid only to a banker or a specified banker. To restrain negotiability,
  addition of words “Not Negotiable” or “Account Payee Only” is necessary. A crossed bearer cheque can
  be negotiated by delivery and crossed order cheque by endorsement and delivery. Crossing affords
  security and protection to the holder of the cheque.


 Modes of Crossing (Sections 123-131A)
There are two types of crossing which may be used on cheque, namely: (i) General, and (ii) Special. To these
may be added another type, i.e. Restrictive crossing.

It is general crossing where a cheque bears across its face an addition of two parallel transverse lines and/
or the addition of the words “and Co.” between them, or addition of “not negotiable”. As stated earlier, where
a cheque is crossed generally, the paying banker will pay to any banker. Two transverse parallel lines are
essential for a general crossing (Sections 123-126).

In case of general crossing, the holder or payee cannot get the payment over the counter of the bank but
through a bank only. The addition of the words “and Co.” do not have any significance but the addition of the
words “not negotiable” restrict the negotiability of the cheque and in case of transfer, the transferee will not give
a better title than that of a transferor.

Where a cheque bears across its face an addition of the name of a banker, either with or without the words “not
negotiable” that addition constitutes a crossing and the cheque is crossed specially and to that banker. The
paying banker will pay only to the banker whose name appears across the cheque, or to his collecting agent.
Parallel transverse lines are not essential but the name of the banker is the insignia of a special crossing.

In case of special crossing, the paying banker is to honour the cheque only when it is prescribed through the
bank mentioned in the crossing or it’s agent bank.

522
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                    LESSON 14

Account Payee’s Crossing: Such crossing does, in practice, restrict negotiability of a cheque. It warns the
collecting banker that the proceeds are to be credited only to the account of the payee, or the party named, or
his agent. If the collecting banker allows the proceeds of a cheque bearing such crossing to be credited to any
other account, he will be guilty of negligence and will not be entitled to the protection given to collecting banker
under Section 131. Such crossing does not affect the paying banker, who is under no duty to ascertain that the
cheque is in fact collected for the account of the person named as payee.

 Not Negotiable Crossing
A cheque may be crossed not negotiable by writing across the face of the cheque the words “Not Negotiable”
within two transverse parallel lines in the case of a general crossing or alongwith the name of a banker in the
case of a special crossing. Section 130 of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides “A person taking a cheque
crossed generally or specially bearing in either case with the words ”not negotiable” shall not have and shall
not be capable of giving, a better title to the cheque than that which the person from whom he took it had”. The
crossing of cheque “not negotiable” does not mean that it is non-transferable. It only deprives the instrument of
the incident of negotiability. Normally speaking, the essential feature of a negotiable instrument as opposed to
chattels is that a person who takes the instrument in good faith, without negligence, for value, before maturity
and without knowledge of the defect in the title of the transferor, gets a good title to the instrument. In other
words, he is called a holder in due course who acquires an indisputable title to the cheque. (When the instrument
passes through a holder-in-due course, it is purged of all defects and the subsequent holders also get good
title). It is exactly this important feature which is taken away by crossing the cheque “not negotiable”. In other
words, a cheque crossed “not negotiable” is like any other chattel and therefore the transferee gets same title
to the cheque which his transferor had. That is to say that the transferee cannot claim the rights of a holder-in-
due-course. So long as the title of the transferors is good, the title of the transferees is also good but if there is
a taint in the title to the cheque of one of the endorsers, then all the subsequent transferees’ title also become
tainted with the same defect they cannot claim to be holders- in-due-course.

The object of this Section is to afford protection to the drawer or holder of a cheque who is desirous of
transmitting it to another person, as much protection as can reasonably be afforded to him against dishonestly
or actual miscarriage in the course of transit. For example, a cheque payable to bearer is crossed generally
and is marked “not negotiable”. It is lost or stolen and comes into the possession of X who takes it in good
faith and gives value for it, X collects the cheque through his bank and paying banker also pays. In this case,
both the paying and the collecting bankers are protected under Sections 128 and 131 respectively. But X
cannot claim that he is a holder-in-due course which he could have under the normal circumstances claimed.
The reason is that cheque is crossed “not negotiable” and hence the true owner’s (holder’s) right supercedes
the rights of the holder-in-due-course. Since X obtained the cheque from a person who had no title to the
cheque (i.e. from one whose title was defective) X can claim no better title solely because the cheque was
crossed “not negotiable” and not for any other reason. Thus “not negotiable” crossing not only protects the
rights of the true owner of the cheque but also serves as a warning to the endorsees’ to enquire thoroughly
before taking the cheque as they may have to be answerable to the true owner thereof if the endorser’s title
is found to be defective.

“Not negotiable” restricts the negotiability of the cheque and in case of transfer, the transferee will not get a
better title than that of a transferor.

If the cheque becomes “not negotiable” it lacks negotiability. A cheque crossed specially or generally bearing
the words “not negotiable”, lacks negotiability and therefore is not a negotiable instrument in the true sense. It
does not restrict transferability but restricts negotiability only.


                                                                                                                 523
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

Specimen of a general crossing                                                     Specimen of a special crossing


                                                                                 el B   ank
                                                                             Mod


                                                                                        Ba   nk
                                                                                M  odel
                                                                                                  e
                                                                                       e go  abl
                                                                                      N
                  o   .                                                           Not l Bank
                                                                                       e
               &C                                                                  Mod
                                                                                         e l B ank
                                                                                    Mod egoable
                                                                                         N
                                                                                     Not
                  egoable
             Not N

 Maturity
Cheques are always payable on demand but other instruments like bills, notes, etc. may be made payable on
a specified date or after the specified period of time. The date on which payment of an instrument falls due is
called its maturity. According to Section 22 of the Act, “the maturity of a promissory note or a bill of exchange is
the date at which it falls due”. According to Section 21 a promissory note or bill of exchange payable “at sight” or
“on presentment” is payable on demand. It is due for payment as soon as it is issued. The question of maturity,
therefore, arises only in the case of a promissory note or a bill of exchange payable “after date” or “after sight”
or at a certain period after the happening of an event which is certain to happen.
Maturity is the date on which the payment of an instrument falls due. Every instrument payable at a
specified period after date or after sight is entitled to three days of grace. Such a bill or note matures
or falls due on the last day of the grace period, and must be presented for payment on that day and if
dishonoured, suit can be instituted on the next day after maturity. If an instrument is payable by instalments,
each instalment is entitled to three days of grace. No days of grace are allowed for cheques, as they are
payable on demand.
Where a note or bill is expressed to be payable on the expiry of specified number of months after sight, or after
date, the period of payment terminates on the day of the month which corresponds with the date of instrument,
or with the date of acceptance if the bill be accepted or presented for sight, or noted or protested for non-
acceptance. If the month in which the period would terminate has no corresponding day, the period shall be
held to terminate on the last day of such month.
If the day of maturity falls on a public holiday, the instrument is payable on the preceeding business day. Thus,
if a bill is at maturity on a Sunday. It will be deemed due on Saturday and not on Monday.
The ascertainment of the date of maturity becomes important because all these instruments must be presented
for payment on the last day of grace and their payment cannot be demanded before that date. Where an
instrument is payable by instalments, it must be presented for payment on the third day after the day fixed for
the payment of each instalment.

524
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                 LESSON 14

 Holder
According to Section 8 of the Act a person is a holder of a negotiable instrument who is entitled in his own
name to the possession of the instrument, and (ii) to recover or receive its amount from the parties thereto.
It is not every person in possession of the instrument who is called a holder. To be a holder, the person must
be named in the instrument as the payee, or the endorsee, or he must be the bearer thereof. A person who
has obtained possession of an instrument by theft, or under a forged endorsement, is not a holder, as he
is not entitled to recover the instrument. The holder implies de jure (holder in law) holder and not de facto
(holder in fact) holder. An agent holding an instrument for his principal is not a holder although he may
receive its payment.

 Holder in Due Course
Section 9 states that a holder in due course is (i) a person who for consideration, obtains possession of a
negotiable instrument if payable to bearer, or (ii) the payee or endorsee thereof, if payable to order, before its
maturity and without having sufficient cause to believe that any defect existed in the title of the person from
whom he derived his title.

  In order to be a holder in due course, a person must satisfy the following conditions:
    (i)    He must be the holder of the instrument.
   (ii)    He should have obtained the instrument for value or consideration.
   (iii)   He must have obtained the negotiable instrument before maturity.
  (iv)     The instrument should be complete and regular on the face of it.
   (v)     The holder should take the instrument in good faith.

A holder in due course is in a privileged position. He is not only himself protected against all defects of the
persons from whom he received the instrument as current coin, but also serves as a channel to protect all
subsequent holders. A holder in due course can recover the amount of the instrument from all previous parties,
although, as a matter of fact, no consideration was paid by some of the previous parties to the instrument or
there was a defect of title in the party from whom he took it. Once an instrument passes through the hands of a
holder in due course, it is purged of all defects. It is like current coin. Whoever takes it can recover the amount
from all parties previous to such holder.

 Capacity of Parties

Capacity to incur liability as a party to a negotiable instrument is co-extensive with capacity to contract.
According to Section 26, every person capable of contracting according to law to which he is subject, may bind
himself and be bound by making, drawing, acceptance, endorsement, delivery and negotiation of a promissory
note, bill of exchange or cheque.
Negatively, minors, lunatics, idiots, drunken person and persons otherwise disqualified by their personal law,
do not incur any liability as parties to negotiable instruments. But incapacity of one or more of the parties to a
negotiable instrument in no way, diminishes the abilities and the liabilities of the competent parties. Where a
minor is the endorser or payee of an instrument which has been endorsed all the parties accepting the minor
are liable in the event of its dishonour.




                                                                                                               525
EP-JI&GL                                                                           Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Liability of Parties
The provisions regarding the liability of parties to negotiable instruments are laid down in Sections 30 to 32 and
35 to 42 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. These provisions are as follows:
1. Liability of Drawer (Section 30)
The drawer of a bill of exchange or cheque is bound, in case of dishonour by the drawee or acceptor thereof, to
compensate the holder, provided due notice of dishonour has been given to or received by the drawer.
The nature of drawer’s liability is that by drawing a bill, he undertakes that (i) on due presentation, it shall be
accepted and paid according to its tenor, and (ii) in case of dishonour, he will compensate the holder or any
endorser, provided notice of dishonour has been duly given. However, in case of accommodation bill no notice
of dishonour to the drawer is required.
The liability of a drawer of a bill of exchange is secondary and arises only on default of the drawee, who is
primarily liable to make payment of the negotiable instrument.
2. Liability of the Drawee of Cheque (Section 31)
The drawee of a cheque having sufficient funds of the drawer in his hands properly applicable to the payment
of such cheque must pay the cheque when duly required to do so and, or in default of such payment, he shall
compensate the drawer for any loss or damage caused by such default.

  As a cheque is a bill of exchange, drawn on a specified banker, the drawee of a cheque must always be
  a banker. The banker, therefore, is bound to pay the cheque of the drawer, i.e., customer, if the following
  conditions are satisfied:
      (i)   The banker has sufficient funds to the credit of customer’s account.
   (ii)     The funds are properly applicable to the payment of such cheque, e.g., the funds are not under any
            kind of lien etc.
  (iii)     The cheque is duly required to be paid, during banking hours and on or after the date on which it is
            made payable.

If the banker is unjustified in refusing to honour the cheque of its customer, it shall be liable for damages.
3. Liability of “Maker” of Note and “Acceptor” of Bill (Section 32)
In the absence of a contract to the contrary, the maker of a promissory note and the acceptor before maturity of
a bill of exchange are bound to pay the amount thereof at maturity, according to the apparent tenor of the note
or acceptance respectively. The acceptor of a bill of exchange at or after maturity is bound to pay the amount
thereof to the holder on demand.
It follows that the liability of the acceptor of a bill corresponds to that of the maker of a note and is absolute and
unconditional but the liability under this Section is subject to a contract to the contrary (e.g., as in the case of
accommodation bills) and may be excluded or modified by a collateral agreement. Further, the payment must
be made to the party named in the instrument and not to any-one else, and it must be made at maturity and
not before.
4. Liability of endorser (Section 35)
Every endorser incurs liability to the parties that are subsequent to him. Whoever endorses and delivers a
negotiable instrument before maturity is bound thereby to every subsequent holder in case of dishonour of the
instrument by the drawee, acceptor or maker, to compensate such holder of any loss or damage caused to him
by such dishonour provided (i) there is no contract to the contrary; (ii) he (endorser) has not expressly excluded,

526
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                  LESSON 14

limited or made conditional his own liability; and (iii) due notice of dishonour has been given to, or received by,
such endorser. Every endorser after dishonour, is liable upon the instrument as if it is payable on demand.
He is bound by his endorsement notwithstanding any previous alteration of the instrument. (Section 88)
5. Liability of Prior Parties (Section 36)
Every prior party to a negotiable instrument is liable thereon to a holder in due course until the instrument is
duly satisfied. Prior parties may include the maker or drawer, the acceptor and all the intervening endorsers to a
negotiable instrument. The liability of the prior parties to a holder in due course is joint and several. The holder
in due course may hold any or all prior parties liable for the amount of the dishonoured instrument.
6. Liability inter se
Various parties to a negotiable instrument who are liable thereon stand on a different footing with respect to the
nature of liability of each one of them.
7. Liability of Acceptor of Forged Endorsement (Section 41)
An acceptor of a bill of exchange already endorsed is not relieved from liability by reason that such endorsement
is forged, if he knew or had reason to believe the endorsement to be forged when he accepted the bill.
8. Acceptor’s Liability on a Bill drawn in a Fictitious Name
An acceptor of a bill of exchange drawn in a fictitious name and payable to the drawer’s order is not, by reason
that such name is fictitious, relieved from liability to any holder in due course claiming under an endorsement
by the same hand as the drawer’s signature, and purporting to be made by the drawer.

 Negotiation (Section 14)
A negotiable instrument may be transferred by negotiation or assignment. Negotiation is the transfer of an
instrument (a note, bill or cheque) for one person to another in such a manner as to convey title and to constitute
the transferee the holder thereof. When a negotiable instrument is transferred by negotiation, the rights of
the transferee may rise higher than those of the transferor, depending upon the circumstances attending the
negotiation. When the transfer is made by assignment, the assignee has only those rights which the assignor
possessed. In case of assignment, there is a transfer of ownership by means of a written and registered
document.

 Negotiability and Assignability Distinguished
A transfer by negotiation differs from transfer by assignment in the following respects:
   (a)   Negotiation requires mere delivery of a bearer instrument and endorsement and delivery of an order
         instrument to effectuate a transfer. Assignment requires a written document signed by the transferor.
   (b)   Notice of transfer of debt (actionable claim) must be given by the assignee to the debtor in order to
         complete his title; no such notice is necessary in a transfer by negotiation.
   (c)   On assignment, the transferee of an actionable claim takes it subject to all the defects in the title of,
         and subject to all the equities and defences available against the assignor, even though he took the
         assignment for value and in good faith. In case of negotiation the transferee, as holder-in-due course,
         takes the instrument free from any defects in the title of the transferor.

 Importance of Delivery
Negotiation is effected by mere delivery of a bearer instrument and by endorsement and delivery of an order
instrument. This shows that “delivery” is essential in negotiable instruments. Section 46 expressly provides

                                                                                                                527
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

that making acceptance or endorsement of negotiable instrument is not complete until delivery, actual or
constructive, of the instrument. Delivery made voluntarily with the intention of passing property in the instrument
to the person to whom it is given is essential.

 Negotiation by Mere Delivery
A bill or cheque payable to bearer is negotiated by mere delivery of the instrument. An instrument is payable
to bearer:
      (i)   Where it is made so payable, or
   (ii)     Where it is originally made payable to order but the only or the last endorsement is in blank.
   (ii)     Where the payee is a fictitious or a non-existing person.
These instruments do not require signature of the transferor. The person who takes them is a holder, and can
sue in his own name on them. Where a bearer negotiates an instrument by mere delivery, and does not put his
signature thereon, he is not liable to any party to the instrument in case the instrument is dishonoured, as he
has not lent his credit to it. His obligations are only towards his immediate transferee and to no other holders.
A cheque, originally drawn payable to bearer remains bearer, even though it is subsequently endorsed in full.
The rule is once a bearer cheque always a bearer cheque.

 Negotiation by Endorsement and Delivery
An instrument payable to a specified person or to the order of a specified person or to a specified person
or order is an instrument payable to order. Such an instrument can be negotiated only by endorsement and
delivery. Unless the holder signs his endorsement on the instrument, the transferee does not become a
holder. Where an instrument payable to order is delivered without endorsement, it is merely assigned and
not negotiated and the holder thereof is not entitled to the rights of a holder in due course, and he cannot
negotiate it to a third person.

 Endorsement (Sections 15 and 16)
Where the maker or holder of a negotiable instrument signs the same otherwise than as such maker for the
purpose of negotiation, on the back or face thereof or on a slip of paper annexed thereto (called Allonge), or
so, signs for the same purpose, a stamped paper intended to be completed as a negotiable instrument, he is
said to endorse the same (Section 15), the person to whom the instrument is endorsed is called the endorsee.
In other words, ‘endorsement’ means and involves the writing of something on the back of an instrument for the
purpose of transferring the right, title and interest therein to some other person.

 Classes of endorsement
An endorsement may be (a) Blank or General, (b) Special or Full, (c) Restrictive, or (d) Partial, and (e) Conditional
or Qualified.
  (a)       Blank or General: An endorsement is to be blank or general where the endorser merely writes his
            signature on the back of the instrument, and the instrument so endorsed becomes payable to bearer,
            even though originally it was payable to order. Thus, where bill is payable to “Mohan or order”, and he
            writes on its back “Mohan”, it is an endorsement in blank by Mohan and the property in the bill can pass
            by mere delivery, as long as the endorsement continues to be a blank. But a holder of an instrument
            endorsed in blank may convert the endorsement in blank into an endorsement in full, by writing above
            the endorser’s signature, a direction to pay the instrument to another person or his order.



528
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                      LESSON 14

           Example
           A bill is payable to Lokesh. Lokesh endorses the bill by simply affixing his signature. This is
           endorsement in blank by Lokesh.

   (b)   Special or Full: If the endorser signs his name and adds a direction to pay the amount mentioned in
         the instrument to, or to the order of a specified person, the endorsement is said to be special or in full.
         A bill made payable to Mohan or Mohan or order, and endorsed “pay to the order of Sohan” would be
         specially endorsed and Sohan endorses it further. A blank endorsement can be turned into a special
         one by the addition of an order making the bill payable to the transferee.
   (c)   Restrictive: An endorsement is restrictive which prohibits or restricts the further negotiation of an
         instrument. Examples of restrictive endorsement: “Pay A only” or “Pay A for my use” or “Pay A on
         account of B” or “Pay A or order for collection”.
   (d)   Partial: An endorsement partial is one which purports to transfer to the endorsee a part only of the
         amount payable on the instrument. A partial endorsement does not operate as negotiation of the
         instrument. A holds a bill for Rs. 1,000 and endorses it as “Pay B or order Rs. 500”. The endorsement is
         partial and invalid.
   (e)   Conditional or qualified: An endorsement is conditional or qualified which limits or negatives the
         liability of the endorser. An endorser may limit his liability in any of the following ways:
          (i) By sans recourse endorsement, i.e. by making it clear that he does not incur the liability of an
              endorser to the endorsee or subsequent holders and they should not look to him in case of
              dishonour of instrument. The endorser excludes his liability by adding the words “sans recourse”
              or “without recourse”, e.g., “pay A or order sans recourse”.
          (ii)   By making his liability depending upon happening of a specified event which may never happen,
                 e.g., the holder of a bill may endorse it thus: “Pay A or order on his marrying B”. In such a case, the
                 endorser will not be liable until A marries B.
It is pertinent to refer to Section 52 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 here. It reads “The endorser of a
negotiable instrument may, by express words in the endorsement exclude his own liability thereon, or make
such liability or the right of the endorsee to receive the amount due thereon depend upon the happening of a
specified event, although such event may never happen”.

 Example:
 X being the payee, transfers the instrument to Z, by an endorsement “without recourse” and Z endorses it to
 Y, who endorses it to X. X does not only has his former rights back, but has the rights of an endorsee against
 Y and Z.

 Negotiation Back
Where an endorser negotiates an instrument and again becomes its holder, the instrument is said to be
negotiated back to that endorser and none of the intermediary endorsees are then liable to him. The rule
prevents a circuity of action.
Where an endorser so excludes his liability and afterwards becomes the holder of the instrument, all the
intermediate endorsers are liable to him. “the italicised portion of the above Section is important”.




                                                                                                                   529
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Negotiable Instruments


 Example
 A, the holder of a bill endorses it to B, B endorses to C, and C to D, and endorses it again to A. A, being a
 holder in due course of the bill by second endorsement by D, can recover the amount thereof from B, C, or
 D and himself being a prior party is liable to all of them. Therefore, A having been relegated by the second
 endorsement to his original position, cannot sue B, C and D.


 Example
 A is the payee of a negotiable instrument. He endorses the instrument ‘sans recourse’ to B, B endorses to C,
 C to D, and D again endorses it to A. In this case, A is not only reinstated in his former rights but has the right
 of an endorsee against B, C and D.

 Negotiation of Lost Instrument or that Obtained by Unlawful Means
When a negotiable instrument has been lost or has been obtained from any maker, acceptor or holder thereof
by means of an offence or fraud, or for an unlawful consideration, no possessor or endorsee, who claims
through the person who found or obtained the instrument is entitled to receive the amount due thereon from
such maker, acceptor, or holder from any party prior to such holder unless such possessor or endorsee is, or
some person through whom he claims was, a holder in due course.

 Forged Endorsement
The case of a forged endorsement is worth special notice. If an instrument is endorsed in full, it cannot be
negotiated except by an endorsement signed by the person to whom or to whose order the instrument is
payable, for the endorsee obtains title only through his endorsement. Thus, if an instrument be negotiated by
means of a forged endorsement, the endorsee acquires no title even though he be a purchaser for value and
in good faith, for the endorsement is a nullity. Forgery conveys no title. But where the instrument is a bearer
instrument or has been endorsed in blank, it can be negotiated by mere delivery, and the holder derives his title
independent of the forged endorsement and can claim the amount from any of the parties to the instrument.

 Example
 A bill is endorsed, “Pay A or order”. A endorses it in blank, and it comes into the hands of B, who simply
 delivers it to C, C forges B’s endorsement and transfer it to D. Here, D, as the holder does not derive his title
 through the forged endorsement of B, but through the genuine endorsement of A and can claim payment
 from any of the parties to the instrument in spite of the intervening forged endorsement.

 Acceptance of a Bill of Exchange
The drawee of a bill of exchange, as such, has no liability on any bill addressed to him for acceptance or
payment. A refusal to accept or to pay such bill gives the holder no rights against him. The drawee becomes
liable only after he accepts the bill. The acceptor has to write the word ‘accepted’ on the bill and sign his name
below it. Thus, it is the acceptor who is primarily liable on a bill.
The acceptance of a bill is the indication by the drawee of his assent to the order of the drawer. Thus, when the
drawee writes across the face of the bill the word “accepted” and signs his name underneath he becomes the
acceptor of the bill.
An acceptance may be either general or qualified. A general acceptance is absolute and as a rule, an acceptance
has to be general. Where an acceptance is made subject to some condition or qualification, thereby varying
the effect of the bill, it is a qualified acceptance. The holder of the bill may either refuse to take a qualified
acceptance or non- acquiescence in it. Where he refuses to take it, he can treat the bill as dishonoured by non-

530
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                       LESSON 14

acceptance, and sue the drawer accordingly.

 Acceptance for Honour
When a bill has been noted or protested for non-acceptance or for better security, any person not being a party
already liable thereon may, with the consent of the holder, by writing on the bill, accept the same for the honour
of any party thereto. The stranger so accepting, will declare under his hand that he accepts the protested bill
for the honour of the drawer or any particular endorser whom he names.
The acceptor for honour is liable to pay only when the bill has been duly presented at maturity to the
drawee for payment and the drawee has refused to pay and the bill has been noted and protested for non-
payment. Where a bill has been protested for non-payment after having been duly accepted, any person
may intervene and pay it supra protest for the honour of any party liable on the bill. When a bill is paid
supra protest, it ceases to be negotiable. The stranger, on paying for honour, acquires all the right of holder
for whom he pays.

 Presentment for Acceptance
It is only bills of exchange that require presentment for acceptance and even these of certain kinds only. Bills
payable on demand or on a fixed date need not be presented. Thus, a bill payable 60 days after due date on
the happening of a certain event may or may not be presented for acceptance. But the following bills must be
presented for acceptance otherwise, the parties to the bill will not be liable on it:
   (a)     A bill payable after sight. Presentment is necessary in order to fix maturity of the bills; and
   (b)     A bill in which there is an express stipulation that it shall be presented for acceptance before it is
           presented for payment.
Section 15 provides that the presentment for acceptance must be made to the drawee or his duly authorised
agent. If the drawee is dead, the bill should be presented to his legal representative, or if he has been declared
an insolvent, to the official receiver or assigner.

  The following are the persons to whom a bill of exchange should be presented:
    (i)    The drawee or his duly authorised agent.
   (ii)    If there are many drawees, bill must be presented to all of them.
   (iii)   The legal representatives of the drawee if drawee is dead.
  (iv)     The official receiver or assignee of insolvent drawee.
   (v)     To a drawee in case of need, if there is any. This is necessary when the original drawee refuses to
           accept the bill.
  (vi)     The acceptor for honour. In case the bill is not accepted and is noted or protested for non-acceptance,
           the bill may be accepted by the acceptor for honour. He is a person who comes forward to accept
           the bill when it is dishonoured by non-acceptance.

The presentment must be made before maturity, within a reasonable time after it is drawn, or within the
stipulated period, if any, on a business day within business hours and at the place of business or residence of
the drawee. The presentment must be made by exhibiting the bill to the drawee; mere notice of its existence in
the possession of holder will not be sufficient.
When presentment is compulsory and the holder fails to present for acceptance, the drawer and all the
endorsers are discharged from liability to him.


                                                                                                                  531
EP-JI&GL                                                                        Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Presentment for Acceptance when Excused
Compulsory presentment for acceptance is excused and the bill may be treated as dishonoured in the following
cases:
   (a)      Where the drawee cannot be found after reasonable search.
   (b)      Where drawee is a fictitious person or one incapable of contracting.
   (c)      Where although the presentment is irregular, acceptance has been refused on some other ground.

 Presentment for Payment
Section 64 lays down the general rule as to presentment of negotiable instruments for payment. It says all notes,
bills and cheques must be presented for payment thereof respectively by or on behalf of the holder during the
usual hours of business and of the maker or acceptor, and if at banker’s within banking hours. [Section 64(1)]
As mentioned earlier, the definition of cheque has been broadened to include the electronic image of a truncated
cheque and a cheque in the electronic form. Thus, the section has also been suitably amended to provide rules
as to presentment of truncated cheque. The amendment, despite recognising electronic image of a truncated
cheque, has made provision for the drawee bank to call for the truncated cheque in original if it is not satisfied
about the instrument.
Section 64(2) stipulates, where an electronic image of a truncated cheque is presented for payment, the drawee
bank is entitled to demand any further information regarding the truncated cheque from the bank holding
the truncated cheque in case of any reasonable suspicion about the genuineness of the apparent tenor of
instrument, and if the suspicion is that of any fraud, forgery, tampering or destruction of the instrument, it is
entitled to further demand the presentment of the truncated cheque itself for verification:
Provided that the truncated cheque so demanded by the drawee bank shall be retained by it, if the payment is
made accordingly.

 Presentment for Payment when Excused
No presentment is necessary and the instrument may be treated as dishonoured in the following cases:
   (a)      Where the maker, drawer or acceptor actively does something so as to intentionally obstruct the
            presentment of the instrument, e.g., deprives the holder of the instrument and keeps it after maturity.
   (b)      Where his business place is closed on the due date.
   (c)      Where no person is present to make payment at the place specified for payment.
   (d)      Where he cannot, after due search be found. (Section 61)
   (e)      Where there is a promise to pay notwithstanding non-presentment.
   (f)      Where the presentment is express or impliedly waived by the party entitled to presentment.
   (g)      Where the drawer could not possibly have suffered any damage by non-presentment.
   (h)      Where the drawer is a fictitious person, or one incompetent to contract.
      (i)   Where the drawer and the drawee are the same person.
   ( j)     Where the bill is dishonoured by non-acceptance.
   (k)      Where presentment has become impossible, e.g., the declaration of war between the countries of the
            holder and drawee.
   (l)      Where though the presentment is irregular, acceptance has been refused on some other grounds.


532
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                 LESSON 14

  Dishonour by Non-Acceptance
  Section 91 provides that a bill is said to be dishonoured by non-acceptance:
  (a)    When the drawee does not accept it within 48 hours from the time of presentment for acceptance.
  (b)    When presentment for acceptance is excused and the bill remains unaccepted.
  (c)    When the drawee is incompetent to contract.
  (d)    When the drawee is a fictitious person or after reasonable search can not be found.
  (e)    Where the acceptance is a qualified one.

 DISHONOUR AND ITS REMEDIES

 Dishonour by Non-payment (Section 92)
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is said to be dishonoured by non-payment when the maker of
the note, acceptor of the bill or drawee of the cheque makes default in payment upon being duly required to
pay the same. Also, a negotiable instrument is dishonoured by non-payment when presentment for payment is
excused and the instrument when overdue remains unpaid.
If the bill is dishonoured either by non-acceptance or by non-payment, the drawer and all the endorsers of the
bill are liable to the holder, provided he gives notice of such dishonour. The drawee is liable only when there is
dishonour by non-payment.

 Notice of Dishonour (Sections 91-98 and Sections 105-107)
When a negotiable instrument is dishonoured either by non-acceptance or by non-payment, the holder or some
party liable thereon must give notice of dishonour to all other parties whom he seeks to make liable. Each party
receiving notice of dishonour must in order to render any prior party liable to himself, give notice of dishonour
to such party within a reasonable time after he has received it. The object of giving notice is not to demand
payment but to whom the party notified of his liability and in case of drawer to enable him to protect himself as
against the drawee or acceptor who has dishonoured the instrument issued by him. Notice of dishonour is so
necessary that an omission to give it discharges all parties other than the maker or acceptor. These parties are
discharged not only on the bill or note, but also in respect of the original consideration.
Notice may be oral or in writing, but it must be actual formal notice. It must be given within a reasonable time
of dishonour.

  Notice of Dishonour Unnecessary
  No notice of dishonour is necessary:
   (a)   When it is dispensed with or waived by the party entitled thereto, e.g., where an endorser writes on
         the instrument such words as “notice of dishonour waived”.
   (b)   When the drawer has countermanded payment.
   (c)   When the party charged would not suffer damage for want of notice.
   (d)   When the party entitled to notice cannot after due search be found.
   (e)   When the omission to give notice is caused by unavoidable circumstances, e.g., death or serious
         illness of the holder.
   (f)   Where the acceptor is also a drawer, e.g., where a firm draws on its branch.
   (g)   Where the promissory note is not negotiable. Such a note cannot be endorsed.
   (h)   Where the party entitled to notice promises to pay unconditionally.


                                                                                                              533
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 NOTING AND PROTEST (SECTIONS 99-104 A)

 Noting
Where a note or bill is dishonoured, the holder is entitled after giving due notice of dishonour, to sue the drawer
and the endorsers. Section 99 provides a convenient method of authenticating the fact of dishonour by means
of “Noting”. Where a bill or note is dishonoured, the holder may, if he so desires, cause such dishonour to be
noted by a notary public on the instrument, or on a paper attached thereto or partly on each. The noting or
minute must be recorded by the notary public within a reasonable time after dishonour and must contain the
fact of dishonour, the date of dishonour, the reason, if any, assigned for such dishonour if the instrument has not
been expressly dishonoured the reasons why the holder treats it dishonoured and notary’s charges.

 Protest
The protest is the formal notarial certificate attesting the dishonour of the bill, and based upon the noting which
has been effected on the dishonour of the bill. After the noting has been made, the formal protest is drawn up
by the notary and when it is drawn up it relates back to the date of noting.
Where the acceptor of a bill has become insolvent, or has suspended payment, or his credit has been publicly
impeached, before the maturity of the bill, the holder may have the bill protested for better security. The notary
public demands better security and on its refusal makes a protest known as “protest for better security”.
Foreign bills must be protested for dishonour when such protest is required by the law of the place where they
are drawn. Foreign promissory notes need not be so protested. Where a bill is required by law to be protested,
then instead of a notice of dishonour, notice of protest must be given by the notary public.
A protest to be valid must contain on the instrument itself or a literal transcript thereof, the names of the parties
for and against whom protest is made, the fact and reasons for dishonour together with the place and time
of dishonour and the signature of the notary public. Protest affords an authentic evidence of dishonour to the
drawer and the endorsee.

 Discharge
The discharge in relation to negotiable instrument may be either (i) discharge of the instrument or (ii) discharge
of one or more parties to the instrument from liability.

 Discharge of the Instrument
A negotiable instrument is discharged:
   (a)   by payment in due course;
   (b)   when the principal debtor becomes the holder;
   (c)   by an act that would discharge simple contract;
   (d)   by renunciation; and
   (e)   by cancellation.

 Discharge of a Party or Parties
When any particular party or parties are discharged, the instrument continues to be negotiable and the
undischarged parties remain liable on it. For example, the non-presentment of a bill on the due date discharges
the endorsers from their liability, but the acceptor remains liable on it.


534
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                           LESSON 14

A party may be discharged in the following ways :
   (a)    By cancellation by the holder of the name of any party to it with the intention of discharging him.
   (b)    By release, when the holder releases any party to the instrument
   (c)    Discharge of secondary parties, i.e., endorsers.
   (d)    By the operation of the law, i.e., by insolvency of the debtor.
   (e)    By allowing drawee more than 48 hours to accept the bill, all previous parties are discharged. (f) B y
          non-presentment of cheque promptly the drawer is discharged.
   (g)    By taking qualified acceptance, all the previous parties are discharged.
   (h)    By material alteration.

 MATERIAL ALTERATION (SECTION 87)
An alteration is material which in any way alters the operation of the instrument and the liabilities of the parties
thereto. Therefore, any change in an instrument which causes it to speak a different language in legal effect
from that which it originally spoke, or which changes legal character of the instrument is a material alteration.
A material alteration renders the instrument void, but it affects only those persons who have already become
parties at the date of the alteration. Those who take the altered instrument cannot complain. Section 88
provides that an acceptor or endorser of a negotiable instrument is bound by his acceptance or endorsement
notwithstanding any previous alteration of the instrument.

  Examples of material alteration are :
  Alteration (i) of the date of the instrument (ii) of the sum payable, (iii) in the time of payment, (iv) of the place
  of payment,(v) of the rate of interest, (vi) by addition of a new party, (vii) tearing the instrument in a material part.

There is no material alteration and the instrument is not vitiated in the following cases:
    (i)   correction of a mistake, (ii) to carry out the common intention of the parties, (iii) an alteration made
          before the instrument is issued and made with the consent of the parties, (iv) crossing a cheque, (v)
          addition of the words “on demand” in an instrument where no time of payment is stated.

  Section 89 affords protection to a person who pays an altered note bill or cheque. However, in order to be
  able to claim the protection, the following conditions must be fulfilled:
  (i)     the alteration should not be apparent;
  (ii)    the payment must be made in due course; and
  (ii)    the payment must be by a person or banker liable to pay.

Section 89 has been amended to provide for the amendment in the definition of cheque so as to provide for
electronic image of a truncated cheque. The section provides that any bank or a clearing house which receives
a transmitted electronic image of a truncated cheque, shall verify from the party who transmitted the image
to it, that the image so transmitted to it and received by it, is exactly the same. Where there is any difference
in apparent tenor of such electronic image and the truncated cheque, it shall be a material alteration. In such
a case, it shall be the duty of the bank or the clearing house, as the case may be, to ensure the exactness of
the apparent tenor of electronic image of the truncated cheque while truncating and transmitting the image. If
the bank fails to discharge this duty, the payment made by it shall not be regarded as good and it shall not be
afforded protection.

                                                                                                                         535
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Retirement of a Bill under Rebate
An acceptor of a bill may make payment before maturity, and the bill is then said to be retired, but it is not
discharged and must not be cancelled except by the acceptor when it comes into his hands. It is customary in
such a case to make allowance of interest on the money to the acceptor for the remainder of the time which the
bill has to run. The interest allowance is known as rebate.

 Hundis
Hundis are negotiable instruments written in an oriental language. They are sometimes bills of exchange and
sometimes promissory notes, and are not covered under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. Generally, they
are governed by the customs and usages in the locality but if custom is silent on the point in dispute before
the Court, this Act applies to the hundis. The term “hundi” was formerly applicable to native bills of exchange.
The promissory notes were then called “teep”. The hundis were in circulation in India even before the present
Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 came into operation. The usages attached to these hundis varied with the
locality in which they were in circulation.
Generally understood, the term “hundi” includes all indigenous negotiable instruments whether they are bills
of exchange or promissory notes. An instrument in order to be a hundi must be capable of being sued by the
holder in his own name, and must by the custom of trade be transferred like cash by delivery. Obviously the
customs relating to hundis were many. In certain parts of the country even oral acceptance was in vague.
The following types of hundis are worth mentioning :
1. Shah Jog Hundi
“Shah” means a respectable and responsible person or a man of worth in the bazar. Shah Jog Hundi means a
hundi which is payable only to a respectable holder, as opposed to a hundi payable to bearer. In other words
the drawee before paying the same has to satisfy himself that the payee is a ‘SHAH’.
2. Jokhmi Hundi
A “jokhmi” hundi is always drawn on or against goods shipped on the vessel mentioned in the hundi. It implies
a condition that money will be paid only in the event of arrival of the goods against which the hundi is drawn. It
is in the nature of policy of insurance. The difference, however, is that the money is paid before hand and is to
be recovered if the ship arrives safely.
3. Jawabee Hundi
According to Macpherson, “A person desirous of making a remittance writes to the payee and delivers the
letter to a banker, who either endorses it on to any of his correspondents near the payee’s place of residence,
or negotiates its transfer. On the arrival, the letter is forwarded to the payee, who attends and gives his receipt
in the form of an answer to the letter which is forwarded by the same channel of the drawer or the order.”
Therefore, this is a form of hundi which is used for remitting money from one place to another.
4. Nam jog Hundi
It is a hundi payable to the party named in the bill or his order. The name of the payee is specifically inserted
in the hundi. It can also be negotiated like a bill of exchange. Its alteration into a Shah Jog hundi is a material
alteration and renders it void.
5. Darshani Hundi
This is a hundi payable at sight. It is freely negotiable and the price is regulated by demand and supply. They
are payable on demand and must be presented for payment within a reasonable time after they are received
by the holder.
6. Miadi Hundi
This is otherwise called muddati hundi, that is, a hundi payable after a specified period of time. Usually money

536
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                   LESSON 14

is advanced against these hundis by shroffs after deducting the advance for the period in advance. There are
other forms of hundis also like.
Dhani Jog Hundi - A hundi which is payable to “dhani” i.e., the owner.

Firman Jog Hundi - which is payable to order if can be negotiated by endorsement and delivery.

 PRESUMPTIONS OF LAW
A negotiable instrument is subject to certain presumptions. These have been recognised by the Negotiable
Instruments Act under Sections 118 and 119 with a view to facilitate the business transactions. These are
described below:

It shall be presumed that:
   (1)   Every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration irrespective of the consideration
         mentioned in the instrument or not.
   (2)   Every negotiable instrument having a date was made on such date.
   (3)   Every accepted bill of exchange was accepted within a reasonable time before its maturity.
   (4)   Every negotiable instrument was transferred before its maturity.
   (5)   The instruments were endorsed in the order in which they appear on it.
   (6)   A lost or destroyed instrument was duly signed and stamped.
   (7)   The holder of the instrument is a holder in due course.
   (8)   In a suit upon an instrument which has been dishonoured, the Court shall presume the fact of dishonour,
         or proof of the protest.

However these legal presumptions are rebuttable by evidence to the contrary. The burden to prove to the
contrary lies upon the defendant to the suit and not upon the plaintiff.

 Payment of Interest in case of dishonour
The Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 was amended in the year 1988, revising the rate of interest as contained in
Sections 80 and 117, from 6 per cent to 18 per cent per annum payable on negotiable instruments from the due
date in case no rate of interest is specified, or payable to an endorser from the date of payment on a negotiable
instrument on its dishonour with a view to discourage the withholding of payment on negotiable instruments on
due dates.

 Penalties in case of dishonour of cheques
Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act provides for penalties in case of dishonour of certain cheques
for insufficiencies of funds in the accounts. Sections 138 to 147 deal with these aspects.

Chapter XVII has been amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act,
2002. The amendments have provided the drawer with more time to send notice, made the punishment for the
offence more stringent, given power to court for condonation of delay in filing of complaint, excluded liability of
government nominated directors, made provision for summary trial of cases under the Chapter and time bound
disposal of cases, have relaxed the rules of evidence, and made the offences under the Act compoundable.

Further Chapter XVII amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015. The amendment focused on
clarifying the jurisdiction related issues for filing cases for offence committed under section 138 of the Negotiable

                                                                                                                537
EP-JI&GL                                                                                      Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

Instruments Act, 1881. The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015, facilitates filing of cases only in a court
within whose local jurisdiction the bank branch of the payee, where the payee delivers the cheque for payment
through his account, is situated, except in case of bearer cheques, which are presented to the branch of the drawee
bank and in that case the local court of that branch would get jurisdiction. The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Act, 2015 provides for retrospective validation for the new scheme of determining the jurisdiction of a court to try a
case under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015
also mandates centralisation of cases against the same drawer.

With a view to address the issue of undue delay in final resolution of cheque dishonour cases so as to provide
relief to payees of dishonoured cheques and to discourage frivolous and unnecessary litigation, Parliament
enacted the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2018 and notified by the Central Government on 1st
September, 2018. The Amendments Act strengthen the credibility of cheques and help trade and commerce
in general by allowing lending institutions, including banks, to continue to extend financing to the productive
sectors of the economy. The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2018 inserted two new sections i.e.
Section 143A dealing with Power to direct interim compensation and Section 148 dealing with Power of Appellate
Court to order payment pending appeal against conviction.

 Dishonour of Cheque for Insufficiency, etc., of Funds in the Account
Section 138 of the Act provides that where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him
with a banker for payment of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge,
in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of
money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount
arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed
to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two years’, or with fine which may extend to twice the
amount of the cheque, or with both.

   *Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless—
   (a)    the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on which
          it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
   (b)    the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for the
          payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice; in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, within
          thirty days] of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as
          unpaid; and
    (c)   the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the
          case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.


  Example
  Naresh draws a cheque of Rs 25,000 on his own account payable to Mukesh but only has Rs. 20,000 in his
  account. Mukesh presents the same to the bank with in the time allowed under section 138 of the Negotiable
  Instruments Act, 1881. Cheques bounces due to insufficient funds in Naresh’s account.
  Naresh is liable under section 138 of the Act. However, compliance with the proviso to section 138 is
  necessary.

* By virtue of notification dated November 4, 2011, Reserve Bank directed that with effect from April 1, 2012, banks should not make
payment of cheques/drafts/pay orders/banker’s cheques bearing that date or any subsequent date, if they are presented beyond the
period of three months from the date of such instrument.

538
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                  LESSON 14

 CASE LAW
 Dayawati vs. Yogesh Kumar Gosain (17.10.2017 - DEL. HC) : 2017 SCC Online Del 11032.
 In this case, whether an offence under section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act can be referred for amicable
 settlement through mediation. Court stated that
 “even though an express statutory provision enabling the criminal court to refer the complainant and accused
 persons to alternate dispute redressal mechanisms has not been specifically provided by the Legislature,
 however, the Cr.P.C. does permit and recognize settlement without stipulating or restricting the process
 by which it may be reached. There is thus no bar to utilizing the alternate dispute mechanisms including
 arbitration, mediation, conciliation (recognized under Section 89 of CPC) for the purposes of settling disputes
 which are the subject matter of offences covered under Section 320 of the Cr.P.C.”
 Meters and Instruments Private Limited and Ors. vs. Kanchan Mehta (05.10.2017 - SC) : AIR 2017 SC 4594
 In this case, inter alia the aspect “that though compounding requires consent of both parties, even in absence
 of such consent, the Court, in the interests of justice, on being satisfied that the complainant has been duly
 compensated, can in its discretion close the proceedings and discharge the Accused” is emerged. The court
 stated that:
 “Nature of offence Under Section 138 primarily related to a civil wrong and the 2002 amendment specifically
 made it compoundable. The offence was also described as ‘regulatory offence’. The burden of proof was on
 the Accused in view of presumption Under Section 139 and the standard of proof was of “preponderance
 of probabilities”. The object of the provision was described as both punitive as well as compensatory. The
 intention of the provision was to ensure that the complainant received the amount of cheque by way of
 compensation.
 The court has to balance the rights of the complainant and the Accused and also to enhance access to justice.
 Basic object of the law is to enhance credibility of the cheque transactions by providing speedy remedy to
 the complainant without intending to punish the drawer of the cheque whose conduct is reasonable or where
 compensation to the complainant meets the ends of justice. Appropriate order can be passed by the Court in
 exercise of its inherent power Under Section 143 of the Act which is different from compounding by consent
 of parties.”

 Presumption in Favour of Holder
As per Section 139 of the Act, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque
received the cheque of the nature referred to in section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt
or other liability.
Once the execution of cheque is admitted, Section 139 creates a presumption that the holder of a cheque
receives the cheque in discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability, Basalingappa vs. Mudibassapa,
2019 SCC OnLine SC 491.

 Defence which may not be Allowed in any Prosecution under Section 138
Section 140 states that it shall not be a defence in a prosecution for an offence under section 138 that the drawer
had no reason to believe when he issued the cheque that the cheque may be dishonoured on presentment for
the reasons stated in section 138.

 Offences by Companies
According to Section 141(1) of the Act, if the person committing an offence under section 138 is a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company

                                                                                                                539
EP-JI&GL                                                                      Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any person liable to punishment if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge, or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
Provided further that where a person is nominated as a Director of a company by virtue of his holding any office
or employment in the Central Government or State Government or a financial corporation owned or controlled
by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, he shall not be liable for prosecution
under Chapter XVII.

 Explanation: For the purposes of section 141 (a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or
 other association of individuals; and (b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.

Further Section 141(2) states that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

 CASE LAWS
 A.R. Radha Krishna vs. Dasari Deepthi and Ors. (28.02.2019 - SC) : AIR 2019 SC 2518
 In this case, the question was when can a cheque bounce complain against a director of the company be
 quashed. Supreme Court opined that -
 “….The High Court, in deciding a quashing petition Under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure, must
 consider whether the averment made in the complaint is sufficient or if some unimpeachable evidence has
 been brought on record which leads to the conclusion that the Director could never have been in charge
 of and responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at the relevant time. While the role of a
 Director in a company is ultimately a question of fact, and no fixed formula can be fixed for the same, the High
 Court must exercise its power Under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure when it is convinced, from the
 material on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of process of the Court…..”
 Susela Padmavathy Amma v. M/s Bharti Airtel Limited, 2024 INSC 206 decided by Supreme Court on
 15.03.2024
 In this case the, Hon’ble Apex Court has laid down that in the case of S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd., this Court
 was considering the question as to whether it was sufficient to make the person liable for being a director of
 a company under Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. This Court considered the definition of
 the word “director” as defined in Section 2(13) of the Companies Act, 1956. This Court observed thus:
 “8. ……. There is nothing which suggests that simply by being a director in a company, one is supposed
 to discharge particular functions on behalf of a company. It happens that a person may be a director in a
 company but he may not know anything about the day-to-day functioning of the company. As a director
 he may be attending meetings of the Board of Directors of the company where usually they decide policy
 matters and guide the course of business of a company. It may be that a Board of Directors may appoint
 sub-committees consisting of one or two directors out of the Board of the company who may be made
 responsible for the day-to-day functions of the company. These are matters which form part of resolutions of
 the Board of Directors of a company. Nothing is oral. What emerges from this is that the role of a director in a


540
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                   LESSON 14

 company is a question of fact depending on the peculiar facts in each case. There is no universal rule that a
 director of a company is in charge of its everyday affairs. We have discussed about the position of a director
 in a company in order to illustrate the point that there is no magic as such in a particular word, be it director,
 manager or secretary. It all depends upon the respective roles assigned to the officers in a company. …..”
 It was held that merely because a person is a director of a company, it is not necessary that he is aware
 about the day-today functioning of the company. This Court held that there is no universal rule that a director
 of a company is in charge of its everyday affairs. It was, therefore, necessary, to aver as to how the director
 of the company was in charge of day-to-day affairs of the company or responsible to the affairs of the
 company. This Court, however, clarified that the position of a managing director or a joint managing director
 in a company may be different. This Court further held that these persons, as the designation of their office
 suggests, are in charge of a company and are responsible for the conduct of the business of the company.
 To escape liability, they will have to prove that when the offence was committed, they had no knowledge of
 the offence or that they exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.
 …. clearly be seen that this Court has held that merely reproducing the words of the section without a clear
 statement of fact as to how and in what manner a director of the company was responsible for the conduct
 of the business of the company, would not ipso facto make the director vicariously liable.

 Cognizance of Offences
As per Section 142(1) of the Act, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 -
   (a)   no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under Section 138 except upon a complaint,
         in writing, made by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in due course of the cheque;
   (b)   such complaint is made within one month of the date on which the cause of action arises under clause
         of the proviso to Section 138.
		 Clause (c) of the proviso to Section 138 provides that the drawer of such cheque fails to make the
   payment of the said amount of money to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course
   of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
		 Provided that the cognizance of a complaint may be taken by the Court after the prescribed period, if
   the complainant satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause for not making a complaint within such
   period;
   (c)   no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try
         any offence punishable under Section 138.
		 Further, Section 142(2) provides that the offence under Section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only
   by a court within whose local local jurisdiction—
          (i) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the
              payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is situated; or
          (ii)   if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or holder in due course, otherwise through
                 an account, the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer maintains the account, is situated.

 Explanation: For the purposes of clause (a), where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of the
 bank of the payee or holder in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered to the
 branch of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account.



                                                                                                                541
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Validation for Transfer of Pending Cases
Section 142A(1) of the Negotiable Instrument Act states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court, all cases transferred to
the court having jurisdiction under section 142(2), as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2015, shall be deemed to have been transferred under this Act, as if that sub-section had been in
force at all material times.
As per Section 142A(2), notwithstanding anything contained in Section 142(2) or Section 142(1) , where the payee
or the holder in due course, as the case may be, has filed a complaint against the drawer of a cheque in the
court having jurisdiction under section 142(2) or the case has been transferred to that court under Section 142(1)
and such complaint is pending in that court, all subsequent complaints arising out of section 138 against the
same drawer shall be filed before the same court irrespective of whether those cheques were delivered for
collection or presented for payment within the territorial jurisdiction of that court.
Section 142A(3) states that if, on the date of the commencement of the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment)
Act, 2015, more than one prosecution filed by the same payee or holder in due course, as the case may be,
against the same drawer of cheques is pending before different courts, upon the said fact having been brought
to the notice of the court, such court shall transfer the case to the court having jurisdiction under Section 142(2),
as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, before which the first case was filed
and is pending, as if that sub-section had been in force at all material times.

 Power of Court to try Cases Summarily
Section 143(1) of the Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 all offences under Chapter XVII of the Act shall be tried by a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or by
a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 shall, as far as may be, apply to such trials.
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for the
Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and an amount of fine
exceeding five thousand rupees.
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this section,
it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the case
summarily, the Magistrate shall after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and thereafter recall any
witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner provided by the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 .
As per Section 143(2), the trial of a case under this section shall, so far as practicable, consistently with the
interests of justice, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the Court finds the adjournment of
the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Section 143(3) states that every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible and an
endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of filing of the complaint.

 Power to Direct Interim Compensation
Section 143A(1) Negotiable Instruments Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court trying an offence under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881
(Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account) may order the drawer of the cheque to pay
interim compensation to the complainant—
   (a)   in a summary trial or a summons case, where he pleads not guilty to the accusation made in the
         complaint; and


542
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                      LESSON 14

   (b)         in any other case, upon framing of charge.
Section 143A(2) states that the interim compensation under sub-section (1) shall not exceed twenty per cent. of
the amount of the cheque.
Section 143A(3), the interim compensation shall be paid within sixty days from the date of the order under sub-
section (1), or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on sufficient
cause being shown by the drawer of the cheque.
As per Section 143A(4), if the drawer of the cheque is acquitted, the Court shall direct the complainant to repay
to the drawer the amount of interim compensation, with interest at the bank rate as published by the Reserve
Bank of India, prevalent at the beginning of the relevant financial year, within sixty days from the date of the
order, or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on sufficient cause
being shown by the complainant.
Section 143A(5) provides that the interim compensation payable section 143A may be recovered as if it were a
fine under section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
As per Section 143A(6), the amount of fine imposed under section 138 or the amount of compensation awarded
under section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall be reduced by the amount paid or recovered
as interim compensation under this section.

  CASE LAW
 G.J. Raja vs. Tejraj Surana (30.07.2019 - SC) : (2019) 19 SCC 469
 In this case, the question that arises therefore is whether Section 143A of the Act is retrospective in operation
 and can be invoked in cases where the offences punishable Under Section 138 of the Act were committed
 much prior to the introduction of Section 143A. It was held by the court that -
 “In our view, the applicability of Section 143A of the Act must, therefore, be held to be prospective in nature
 and confined to cases where offences were committed after the introduction of Section 143A, in order to force
 an Accused to pay such interim compensation.
 Rakesh Ranjan Shrivastava v. The State of Jharkhand & Anr. 2024 INSC 205 decided by Supreme Court
 on 15.03.2024
 In this case the Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down the broad parameters for exercising the discretion
 under Section 143A of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. These are as follows:
         i.     The Court will have to prima facie evaluate the merits of the case made out by the complainant
                and the merits of the defence pleaded by the accused in the reply to the application. The financial
                distress of the accused can also be a consideration.
         ii.    A direction to pay interim compensation can be issued, only if the complainant makes out a prima
                facie case.
     iii.       If the defence of the accused is found to be prima facie plausible, the Court may exercise discretion
                in refusing to grant interim compensation.
     iv.        If the Court concludes that a case is made out to grant interim compensation, it will also have to
                apply its mind to the quantum of interim compensation to be granted. While doing so, the Court
                will have to consider several factors such as the nature of the transaction, the relationship, if any,
                between the accused and the complainant, etc.
         v.     There could be several other relevant factors in the peculiar facts of a given case, which cannot be
                exhaustively stated. The parameters stated above are not exhaustive.


                                                                                                                   543
EP-JI&GL                                                                       Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

 Mode of Service of Summons
According to Section 144 of the Act, a Magistrate issuing a summons to an accused or a witness may direct
a copy of summons to be served at the place where such accused or witness ordinarily resides or carries on
business or personally works for gain, by speed post or by such courier services as are approved by a Court
of Session.
Where an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the accused or the witness or an endorsement purported
to be made by any person authorised by the postal department or the courier services that the accused or the
witness refused to take delivery of summons has been received, the Court issuing the summons may declare
that the summons has been duly served.

 Evidence on Affidavit
Section 145 of the Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, the evidence of the complainant may be given by him on affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions
be read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and
examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the facts contained therein.

 Bank’s Slip Prima Facie Evidence of Certain Facts
According to Section 146, the Court shall, in respect of every proceeding under this Chapter, on production of
Bank’s slip or memo having thereon the official mark denoting that the cheque has been dishonoured, presume
the fact of dishonour of such cheque, unless and until such fact is disproved.

 Offences to be Compoundable
Section 147 of the Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, every offence punishable under the Negotiable Instrument Act shall be compoundable.

 Power of Appellate Court to Order Payment Pending Appeal against Conviction
Section 148(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
in an appeal by the drawer against conviction under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881
(Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account), the Appellate Court may order the
appellant to deposit such sum which shall be a minimum of twenty per cent. of the fine or compensation
awarded by the trial Court.
The amount payable shall be in addition to any interim compensation paid by the appellant under section 143A.
Section 148(2) states that the amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deposited within sixty days from the
date of the order, or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on
sufficient cause being shown by the appellant.
As per Section 148(3) the Appellate Court may direct the release of the amount deposited by the appellant to
the complainant at any time during the pendency of the appeal:
It may be noted that if the appellant is acquitted, the Court shall direct the complainant to repay to the appellant
the amount so released, with interest at the bank rate as published by the Reserve Bank of India, prevalent at
the beginning of the relevant financial year, within sixty days from the date of the order, or within such further
period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on sufficient cause being shown by the
complainant.


544
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                 LESSON 14

  CASE LAWS
 Surinder Singh Deswal and Ors. vs. Virender Gandhi (29.05.2019 - SC) : AIR 2019 SC 2956
 In this case, Supreme Court held that Section 148 of the Act which was also introduced by the Amendment
 Act 20 of 2018 from 01.09.2018 is retrospective in operation. Court observed
 “….considering the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the amendment in Section 148 of the N.I. Act stated
 hereinabove, on purposive interpretation of Section 148 of the N.I. Act as amended, we are of the opinion
 that Section 148 of the N.I. Act as amended, shall be applicable in respect of the appeals against the order of
 conviction and sentence for the offence Under Section 138 of the N.I. Act, even in a case where the criminal
 complaints for the offence Under Section 138 of the N.I. Act were filed prior to amendment Act No. 20/2018
 i.e., prior to 01.09.2018….
 …therefore the amendment so brought in the Act by insertion of Section 148 of the N.I. Act is purely procedural
 in nature and not substantive and does not affect the vested rights of the Appellants, as such, the same can
 have a retrospective effect and can be applied in the present case also…..”
 Jamboo Bhandari vs. M.P. State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors. decided by Supreme
 Court on 04th September, 2023
 The appellants in these two appeals were the accused before the learned Judicial Magistrate who tried
 them on a complaint filed by the respondent No. 1 under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
 (“N.I. Act”). The learned Magistrate convicted the appellants and directed them to pay the cheque amount
 with interest thereon @ 9% per annum. An appeal was preferred by the appellants before the Sessions Court.
 Relying upon Section 148 of the N.I. Act, the Sessions Court granted relief under Section 389 of the Code
 of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C.”) subject to condition of appellants depositing 20% of the amount of
 compensation.
 High Court also confirmed the order of the Sessions Court.
 In appeal, the Supreme Court held that a purposive interpretation should be made of Section 148 of the N.I.
 Act. Hence, normally, Appellate Court will be justified in imposing the condition of deposit as provided in
 Section 148. However, in a case where the Appellate Court is satisfied that the condition of deposit of 20%
 will be unjust or imposing such a condition will amount to deprivation of the right of appeal of the appellant,
 exception can be made for the reasons specifically recorded.
 Therefore, when Appellate Court considers the prayer under Section 389 of the Cr.P.C. of an accused who
 has been convicted for offence under Section 138 of the N.I. Act, it is always open for the Appellate Court to
 consider whether it is an exceptional case which warrants grant of suspension of sentence without imposing
 the condition of deposit of 20% of the fine/compensation amount….

 National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT) is a nation-wide payment system facilitating one-to-one funds transfer.
Under this Scheme, individuals, firms and corporates can electronically transfer funds from any bank branch to
any individual, firm or corporate having an account with any other bank branch in the country participating in
the Scheme.
NEFT is an electronic fund transfer system that operates on a Deferred Net Settlement (DNS) basis which settles
transactions in batches. In DNS, the settlement takes place with all transactions received till the particular cut-
off time. These transactions are netted (payable and receivables) in NEFT whereas in RTGS the transactions are
settled individually. For example, currently, NEFT operates in hourly batches. Any transaction initiated after a


                                                                                                               545
EP-JI&GL                                                                            Law relating to Negotiable Instruments

designated settlement time would have to wait till the next designated settlement time Contrary to this, in the
RTGS transactions are processed continuously throughout the RTGS business hours.
The acronym ‘RTGS’ stands for Real Time Gross Settlement, which can be defined as the continuous (real-
time) settlement of funds transfers individually on an order by order basis (without netting). ‘Real Time’ means
the processing of instructions at the time they are received rather than at some later time; ‘Gross Settlement’
means the settlement of funds transfer instructions occurs individually (on an instruction by instruction basis).
Considering that the funds settlement takes place in the books of the Reserve Bank of India, the payments are
final and irrevocable.

Advantages of NEFT
1


      l   Round the clock availability on all days of the year.
      l   Near-real-time funds transfer to the beneficiary account and settlement in a secure manner.
      l   Pan-India coverage through large network of branches of all types of banks.
      l   The beneficiary need not visit a bank branch for depositing the paper instruments. Remitter can initiate
          the remittances from his / her home / place of work using internet banking, if his / her bank offers such
          service.
      l   Positive confirmation to the remitter by SMS / e-mail on credit to beneficiary account.
      l   Penal interest provision for delay in credit or return of transactions.
      l   No levy of charges by RBI from banks.
      l   No charges to savings bank account customers for online NEFT transactions.
      l   The transaction charges have been capped by RBI.
      l   Besides funds transfer, NEFT system can be used for a variety of transactions including payment of credit
          card dues to the card issuing banks, payment of loan EMI, inward foreign exchange remittances, etc.
      l   The transaction has legal backing.

Benefits of RTGS2
      l   It is a safe and secure system for funds transfer.
      l   RTGS transactions / transfers have no amount cap set by RBI.
      l   The system is available on all days on 24x7x365 basis. There is real time transfer of funds to the
          beneficiary account.
      l   The remitter need not use a physical cheque or a demand draft.
      l   The beneficiary need not visit a bank branch for depositing the paper instruments.
      l   The beneficiary need not be apprehensive about loss / theft of physical instruments or the likelihood of
          fraudulent encashment thereof.
      l   Remitter can initiate the remittances from his / her home / place of work using internet banking, if his /
          her bank offers such service.
      l   The transaction charges have been capped by RBI.
      l   The transaction has legal backing.


1. https://m.rbi.org.in/Scripts/faqview.aspx?Id=60
2. https://m.rbi.org.in/scripts/FAQView.aspx?Id=65

546
Law relating to Negotiable Instruments                                                                 LESSON 14

                                              LESSON ROUND-UP

   l The law relating to negotiable instruments is contained in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. It is an
       Act to define and amend the law relating to promissory notes, bills of exchange and Cheques.
   l The term “negotiable instrument” means a document transferable from one person to another.

   l A “promissory note” is an instrument in writing containing an unconditional undertaking, signed by the
       maker to pay a certain sum of money to, or to the order of, a certain person, or only to bearer of the
       instrument.
   l A “bill of exchange” is an instrument in writing containing an unconditional order, signed by the maker,
       directing a certain person to pay a certain sum of money only to or to the order of, a certain person orto
       the bearer of the instrument.
   l Bills of exchange were originally used for payment of debts by traders residing in one country to
       another country with a view to avoid transmission of coin. Now-a-days they are used more as trade
       bills both in connection with domestic trade and foreign trade and are called inland bills and foreign
       bills respectively.
   l A ‘Cheque’ is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to be payable
       otherwise than on demand and it includes the electronic image of a truncated Cheque and a Cheque
       in the electronic form.
   l NEFT is an electronic fund transfer system that operates on a Deferred Net Settlement (DNS) basis
       which settles transactions in batches. In DNS, the settlement takes place with all transactions received
       till the particular cut- off time. These transactions are netted (payable and receivables) in NEFT whereas
       in RTGS the transactions are settled individually.


                                                   GLOSSARY

 Inland instrument : A bill of exchange is an inland Instrument if it is (i) drawn or made and payable in India,
 or (ii) drawn in India upon any person who is a resident in India, even though it is made payable in a foreign
 country. But a promissory note to be an inland should be drawn and payable in India, as it has no drawee.
 Holder in Due Course : Holder in Due Course is (i) a person who for consideration, obtains possession of a
 negotiable instrument if payable to bearer, or (ii) the payee or endorsee thereof, if payable to order, before
 its maturity and without having sufficient cause to believe that any defect existed in the title of the person
 from whom he derived his title.
 Hundi : Hundis are negotiable instruments written in an oriental language. They are sometimes bills of
 exchange and sometimes promissory notes, and are not covered under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
 Generally, they are governed by the customs and usages in the locality.


                                                TEST YOURSELF

 (These are meant for re-capitulation only. Answers to these questions are not to be submitted for evaluation)
    1. Define negotiable instrument. Make a distinction between a Bill and a Cheque.
   2. What is crossing of a cheque?
   3. What is hundi? Describe some of the important hundis.


                                                                                                              547
EP-JI&GL                                                                 Law relating to Negotiable Instruments


  4. What are certain presumptions of law a negotiable instrument is subject to?
  5. Write a short note on endorsements.
  6. Explain the types of Negotiable Instruments?
   7. Define “Holder in due course”.


                                        LIST OF FURTHER READINGS

      l    Bare Act on the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
      l    The Negotiable Instruments Act - Universal Law Series


                        OTHER REFERENCES (INCLUDING WEBSITES / VIDEO LINKS)

   l https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2189/1/a1881-26.pdf

   l https://m.rbi.org.in/Scripts/faqview.aspx?Id=60

   l https://m.rbi.org.in/scripts/FAQView.aspx?Id=65




548
                                                 WARNING
Regulation 27 of the Company Secretaries Regulations, 1982
In the event of any misconduct by a registered student or a candidate enrolled for any examination
conducted by the Institute, the Council or any Committee formed by the Council in this regard, may
suo-moto or on receipt of a complaint, if it is satisfied that, the misconduct is proved after such investigation
as it may deem necessary and after giving such student or candidate an opportunity of being heard,
suspend or debar him from appearing in any one or more examinations, cancel his examination result,
or registration as a student, or debar him from re-registration as a student, or take such action as may be
deemed fit.
It may be noted that according to regulation 2(ia) of the Company Secretaries Regulations, 1982, ‘misconduct’
in relation to a registered student or a candidate enrolled for any examination conducted by the Institute
means behaviour in disorderly manner in relation to the Institute or in or around an examination centre or
premises, or breach of any provision of the Act, rule, regulation, notification, condition, guideline, direction,
advisory, circular of the Institute, or adoption of malpractices with regard to postal or oral tuition or resorting
to or attempting to resort to unfair means in connection with writing of any examination conducted by the
Institute, or tampering with the Institute’s record or database, writing or sharing information about the
Institute on public forums, social networking or any print or electronic media which is defamatory or any
other act which may harm, damage, hamper or challenge the secrecy, decorum or sanctity of examination
or training or any policy of the Institute.




                                                                                                                 549
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                      Test Paper



                                    EXECUTIVE PROGRAMME
   JURISPRUDENCE, INTERPRETATION & GENERAL LAWS
                                          GROUP 1 l PAPER 1
                  (This test paper is for practice and self study only and not to be sent to the Institute)
Time allowed: 3 hours                                                                               Maximum Mark: 100
NOTE: Answer ALL Questions
Question No. 1
  (a)   Article 13 of the Constitution of India inter alia provides that all laws in force in the territory of India
        immediately before the commencement of Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the
        provisions of Part III, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
		 Further, the State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Part III
   and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
		 As per the definition provided under the Constitution of India,“law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-
   law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of law and
   “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in the
   territory of India before the commencement of Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding
   that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
		 In lights of the above details and relevant law, answer the below mentioned questions with reasons:
           (i) An Authority which comes under the definition of State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India
               made a regulation which is against Article 38 of the Constitution of India. Is the regulation made
               by the Authority Void by virtue of Article 13?
           (ii)   Does the meaning of “State” for the purpose of Article 13 is only restricted to State Governments
                  only and not extended to the Central Government?
        (iii)     Whether legislature of State is competent for the purpose of making Laws under List I of Seventh
                  Schedule to the Constitution of India?
        (iv) A Public Limited Company made certain rules for the Conduct of its Employees which are against
             Right to Equality as provided under Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Can these rules be
             challenged by virtue of Article 13 to the Constitution of India?
         (v)      Whether High Courts are competent to provide the remedy for violation of the rights provided
                  under part III of the Constitution of India?
                                                                                                         (2 marks each)
  (b)   Section 3 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 embodies the rule of admission of evidence
        relating to what is commonly known as res gestae. Acts or declarations accompanying the transaction
        or the facts in issue are treated as part of the res gestae and admitted as evidence. The obvious ground
        for admission of such evidence is the spontaneity and immediacy of the act or declaration in question.
        Section 3 provides that facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form
        part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and place or at
        different times and places.

550
Test Paper

		Further occasion, cause, effect and opportunity are also made as relevant by virtue of section 5 of
  the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. It states that Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect,
  immediate or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under
  which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
  Also, any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or
  relevant fact.
		       Section 7 of Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 makes facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant
         facts. Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut
         an inference suggested by a fact in issue or a relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything,
         or person whose identity, is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact
         happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in
         so far as they are necessary for that purpose.
		 In view of the above details and relevant law, answer the below mentioned questions with reasons:
             (i) Whether the concepts of relevancy and admissibility of Evidences are used Inter-changeably
                 under the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023?
          (ii)   Soon after the commission of the crime at Delhi, Anika absconded from his house. He intend to
                 give evidence that he went to attend an urgent meeting in Kerela. Does this fact as provided by
                 Anika relevant for the purpose of adducing evidence as per Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023
                 in the above mentioned circumstances?
         (iii)   Whether condition of Binay’s (one person) health before the symptoms ascribed to poison, and
                 habits of Binay, known to Anika (Binay’s neighbour), which did not afforded an opportunity for the
                 administration of poison, are relevant facts for the purpose of adducing evidence as per Bharatiya
                 Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023?
         (iv) Whether section 6 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 is related to relevancy of evidences
              for the purpose of adducing evidences before the courts? Explain.
         (v)     “Evidence can be given of facts in issue and not of relevant facts”. Is this statement valid?
                                                                                                     (2 marks each)
Question No. 2
   (a)   “Law is the command of the sovereign”. Explain the school of law to which the given statement is
         related.
   (b)   Mr. P applied for passport to the concerned Authorities but his request was refused without informing
         any reason. Which constitutional right of Mr. P has been violated? Also explain the remedy available to
         Mr. P under the Constitution of India?
   (c)   Mr. X filed a complaint to Police officer that Mr. Y has committed dacoity. The police officer after
         preliminary inquiry issued the notice of appearance to Mr. Y instead of arresting. Comment on the
         validity of the Act of Police Officer as per the law in force.
                                                                                                     (5 marks each)
Question No. 3
   (a)   Explain how the Fundamental Right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) of the
         Constitution of India is restricted by the law under Article 19(2) for defamation matters.


                                                                                                                 551
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                       Test Paper

   (b)      Arvind sends a written offer to Meera proposing to sell his plot of land for `8 lakhs, mentioning that the
            offer will remain open for seven days. On the same day, before Meera receives the letter, Arvind sends
            her an email revoking the offer. However, Meera reads the offer letter first, and believing the offer to
            be open, sends her acceptance by registered post. Two days later, she opens her email and sees the
            revocation message. Meanwhile, Arvind receives her posted acceptance.
		 Discuss whether a valid contract has been formed. Also, explain with the rules of communication of
   offer, acceptance, and revocation.
   (c)      Riya’s brother is arrested by the police without any formal charge, and the police refuse to disclose his
            location.
		 Discuss the various types of Writs and which writ can Riya file to get him produced before the court?
                                                                                                         (5 marks each)
                                     Attempt all parts of either Q. No. 4 or Q. No. 4A
Question No. 4
   (a)      Explain Justice, Equity and Good Conscience as a Source of Indian Law.
                                                                                                               (5 marks)
   (b)      Discuss the applicability of Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023.
                                                                                                               (5 marks)
   (c)      Mention the Limitation Period for the below mentioned description of suits:
             (i) Against a factor for an account.
             (ii)   For an account and a share of the profits of a dissolved partnership.
            (iii)   For compensation for doing or for omitting to do an act alleged to be in pursuance of any enactment
                    in force for the time being in the territories to which Limitation Act, 1963 extends.
            (iv) To enforce payment of money secured by a mortgage or otherwise charged upon immovable
                 property.
             (v)    For money lent under an agreement that it shall be payable on demand.
                                                                                                           (1 mark each)
                                            OR (Alternate question to Q. No. 4)
Question No. 4A
      (i)   Mr. S files a civil suit against Mr. T in the District Court of Dwarka in New Delhi on 20.07.2023. Mr. T filed
            the suit on same cause of action in civil court in Jaipur on 15.10.2023. The matter is such that both the
            courts have Jurisdiction over the matter. What should be correct course of action by civil court situated
            in Jaipur? Explain with the help of relevant provision of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
   (ii)     Mr. X entered into a Contract with Mr. Y for providing 1000 laptops imported from a foreign country. Mr.
            X is ready to deliver 980 Laptops to Mr. Y. The government prohibited the import of Laptop from that
            country and consequently Mr. X is not able to procure the other 20 Laptops. Mr. Y denied to take the
            delivery.
		 Mr. X intends to file a suit for specific performance of contract against Mr. Y. Can he succeed? Advice Mr.
   X citing the relevant provisions applicable in above mentioned circumstances.


552
Test Paper

  (iii)   Elaborate the provisions relating to Interim Measures by Courts and Arbitral Tribunal under Arbitration
          and Conciliation Act, 1996.
                                                                                                     (5 marks each)
Question No. 5
   (a)    Distinguish between Reference, Review and Revision in Civil Cases.
   (b)    Mr. X committed a crime and went to one Member of Legislative Assembly and confessed his crime.
          Later, he denied making that confession. Can this extra-judicial confession is capable of sustaining a
          conviction? Justify your answer with the help of a decided case law.
   (c)    An award has been passed in the matter of Mr. X and Mr. Y by an Arbitrator. The Arbitrator intended to
          mention Rs. 10,00,000/- (Ten Lakh) in the award. However, due to clerical error it was mentioned as Rs.
          1,00,000/- (One Lakh). Mr. X intends to correct this clerical error. Explain the recourse available to Mr. X
          in this matter.
                                                                                                     (5 marks each)
                                 Attempt all parts of either Q. No. 6 or Q. No. 6A
Question No. 6
   (a)    X prepared and signed a cheque of Rs. 5,00,000/- relating to a Bank Account belonging to Mr. Y and
          gave it to Mr. Z. Explain the offence that is committed by X by preparing that cheque and punishment
          provided for this offence.
   (b)    Explain the doctrine of Res Gestae.
   (c)    An award has been passed by an Arbitral Tribunal in the matter of Mr. X and Mr. Y. The time for making
          an application to set aside the arbitral award under section 34 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
          has been expired. Mr. X has contended that the award can now be enforced like an Agreement made
          under the Indian Contract Act, 1872. Is the contention of Mr. X correct? Advise Mr. Y quoting relevant
          provision.
   (d)    Explain the concept of void and voidable contracts under the Indian Contract Act, 1872. Distinguish
          between them with suitable examples and relevant sections.
                                                                                                     (5 marks each)
                                        OR (Alternate question to Q. No. 6)
Question No. 6A
    (i)   A chemical manufacturing company, GreenChem Pvt. Ltd., stores large quantities of toxic industrial
          gases in its factory located near a residential area. Despite following basic safety measures, a minor
          valve defect in one of the storage tanks causes a massive leakage of toxic gas. The gas spreads rapidly
          into the surrounding locality, causing respiratory injuries to hundreds of residents and killing several
          animals.
		 GreenChem argues that:
		 The leakage occurred due to a latent manufacturing defect in the valve, which they could not have
   detected even with reasonable care.
		 They had complied with all government-mandated safety standards.
		 The leakage was neither intentional nor foreseeable.


                                                                                                                 553
EP-JI&GL                                                                                                 Test Paper

		 The affected residents file a suit for compensation.
		 Is GreenChem Pvt. Ltd. liable under the rule of Strict Liability or Absolute Liability? Justify your answer.
   (ii)   An enactment provides that the information of employees of the company is to be maintained in written
          form. The manager of the company has maintained it in electronic form. Can the manager maintain
          such information in electronic mode? Advise citing relevant provision.
  (iii)   Write short note on legal maxim “quantum meruit”.
  (iv)    Mr. X issued a Cheque to Mr. Y towards payment for the goods purchased. The cheque is returned
          by the Bank due to insufficient funds in the Account of Mr. X. What are the pre-requisites provided in
          the proviso of section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 before filing the suit for recovery of the
          amount?
                                                                                                   (5 marks each)
                                                         ***




554
Test Paper

             NOTES




                     555
EP-JI&GL           Test Paper

           NOTES




556
