Total No. of Questions: 03
NOV 2024
Seat No.:
DES SHRI NAVALMAL FIRODIA LAW COLLEGE, PUNE
[Time: 3 Hours]
LL.B. (Semester-I)
First Year of Three Year Law Course
LAW OF CRIMES [LCC 0504]
(CBCS 2023 Pattern) (Theory)
Instructions to the candidates:
1) All questions are compulsory.
2) Figures to the right indicates the full marks.
[Max. Marks: 70]
A] Attempt Any 2 questions from the following:
1) Elaborate and explain the structure and classification of the BNS.
2) Discuss the Principles of criminal liability and elements of crime.
(15 x 2)
3) Explain and elaborate the provisions of Right of Private Defense of body and property
under BNS.
4) Explain the provisions of Culpable Homicide and Murder under BNS.
B] Attempt Any 3 questions from the following: (10 x 3)
5) Define and explain in detail the nature of inchoate crimes in BNS.
6) Elaborate the concepts of Abetment and Conspiracy under BNS.
7) Explain various offences against the State with illustrations under the BNS.
1
8) Define and elaborate with illustrations about Criminal Breach of Trust in BNS.
9) Define the offence of Rape and Sexual harassment with its distinction and illustrations
with relevant provisions of BNS.
C] Write Short Notes:
10) Write Any 2 Short Notes.
(5 x 2)
a. 'A, an officer of court of Justice, being ordered by that Court to arrest 'Y, and
without conducting due enquiry believing Z' to be 'Y', arrests 'Z'. is A liable.
b. "A" the accused, while quarrelling with his brother fetched a sword, but was
seized by others and disarmed before he could use it. Is 'A' guilty? Decide giving
reason.
c.
d.
A is a person watching their neighbor through a window without them knowing
while she is taking a bath. explain the offence and discuss the same.
'A' constantly calling the wife derogatory names, belittling her, or criticizing her
appearance, intelligence, or abilities. 'A' is liable for?
*********


[Total No. of Question: 09] SEAT No. -
First Year LL.B. (Three Year Course)

LCC 0504: Law of Crimes
(2023 Pattern) (Semester – I)

Time : 03 Hours Max. Marks : 70
Instructions to the candidates :-
1) Answer any two questions from “PART –A” Each question carries 15 marks
2) Answer any two questions from “PART –B” Each question carries 10 marks
3) Answer any two questions from “PART –C” Each question carries 5 marks

PART - A [15X 2 = 30]

( Any Two)
Q.1) Describe various stages of crime. Distinguish between Preparation and

Attempt of crime.
Q 2) Define "Abatement" and discuss in detail the liability of an abetor.
Q.3) Define the offence of Defamation under Indian Penal Code.
What are the exceptions to the offence of Defamation?
Q.4) Explain in detail the Right of Private defense of Property.

15
PART – B [10X 3= 30]

( Any Three)

Q.5) What are the essentials of the offence of 'Culpable Homicide'? Under what
circumstances does Culpable Homicide amount to 'Murder'?
Q.6) What is House breaking? In what circumstances does it amount to robbery?
Q.7) Define "Extortion" and explain the Essentials of the offence of "Extortion".

Distinguish between Extortion and Theft.
Q.8. Define Mistake of Fact and Mistake of Law and distinguish between Mistake
of Fact and Mistake of Law.
Q.9. Explain the scope of the defense of minority under the Indian Penal Code.

PART- C

( Any Two)
Q.10 Write short notes on any two [ 2X5 – 10]
a) Actus rea
b) Unlawful Assembly
c) Robbery
d) Good Faith
e) Outraging the Modesty of Women


