CRIMINOLOGY
        And

 PENOLOGY




       Prof. Dr.

 M. Shokry EI-Dakkak
        ISBN Number
  ISBN978-9948-20-867-9


First Edition 2014
Copyright Reserved to: the Judicial Department - Abu Dhabi


                                   - 2 -
- 3 -
- 4 -
                                PREFACE

      It was to my pleasure and pride that I have been charged by the Judicial
Department in the Emirate of Abu Dhabi to issue this book. I accepted, not only
because of the honor it bestowed upon me - especially I have been lecturing in
English Departments in Faculties of law in the International Islamic University in
Malaysia, University of Alexandria and University of Mansourah in Egypt - but
also because I consider it as a humbled contribution and a sacred duty towards
the students of the English Departments as well as the practitioners in the United
Arab of Emirates, such as lawyers, legal consultants, public prosecutors and
judges. They may find it of assistance and that it will be useful for them.


      In this occasion, it is adequate to express high appreciation and gratitude
to His Highness Sheikh Mansour Bin Zayed Al Nahyan the Vice Prime Minister
of UAE, the Minister of the Presidential Affairs, the Head of Judicial Department
in Abu Dhabi, who availed me this occasion to contribute with my humbled effort
in the Criminal jurisprudence field especially in English Language.


      Finally, I pray Allah to help me to the right path.




                                               Prof. Dr. M. Shokry EI-Dakkak




                                       - 5 -
- 6 -
   Part I
Criminology




    - 7 -
- 8 -
                               Chapter One

     Importance of Criminology as a Human Science

      By criminology we mean the science whose purpose is the study of the
phenomenon called criminality, in its entire extent (this is theoretical or ‘pure’
criminology) whilst side by side with this theoretical science, and founded upon its
conclusions, we have what is called practical or applied criminology. Criminology
is an inductive science which, like other inductive sciences, observes the facts
with the greatest possible exactitude, and endeavors with the aid of available
methods to trace the causes of the phenomena corning to its notice (etiology).
Vere scire est per causas scire-as Bacon has already taught us.


      The subject-matter, therefore, of the science of criminology is criminality,
i.e. the crimes which are committed and the persons who commit them; the
juridical aspect of the problem, i.e. the legal formulation of the various crimes
being at best a matter of indirect interest to the criminologist.


1. Crime and Morality
      It may be useful to state briefly what exactly is meant by crime. From the
formal or legal point of view, a crime is an action on which the community (in casu
the State) has set a punishment-a definition which, like most formal definitions,
does not take us much further. Another angle, from which we penetrate further
into the essence of the question, is the view that crime belongs to the category
of immoral actions. The question which is often asked, whether crime, per Se,


      We may, however, be justified in saying that in modern countries practically
all actions which are qualified as crimes are felt to be immoral by the great
majority of the people-albeit in different measure. Even the professional criminal
thinks of theft as of something immoral, namely when it is committed to his own
detriment, or to that of a member of his gang.


                                       - 9 -
       It is almost superfluous to add that apart from the differences mentioned
above, the degree of public disapprobation of all the countless prohibited
actions varies very widely, and ranges from a minimum-as in cases of poaching
or smuggling-to the height of moral indignation in some of the worst cases of
manslaughter or murder.


       If one asks oneself what actually constitutes the essence of an immoral
action it becomes apparent that there are two sides to it: subjectively, i.e. from
the individual’s point of view, such actions go counter to moral sentiment; while
objectively, i.e. from society’s point of view, they constitute a danger to the
interests of the community. Sociological (and, more especially, ethnological)
research does not leave any doubt upon this point: the term ‘immoral’ means-
from the stand-point of the community, ‘anti-social’.


       Thus, the utilitarians erred when they imagined they could define morality
as utility for the individual; but this view becomes correct when for the individual
one substitutes the community; for the whole of our code of morals is designed
for its benefit and protection. Man is extremely sensitive to that which might harm
the community as a whole; and broadly speaking, this instinct has but rarely
proved itself wrong (one instance of this being the persecution of witches). In
such cases it was experience which acted as a corrective. In view of the absolute
supremacy of society over the still growing and maturing individual the latter, as
a rule, tends to accept without demur the moral code prevailing in his time.


       An immoral action, therefore, is an anti-social action which is felt as such.
A prior4 one cannot speak of any action as being either immoral or criminal per
Se; there is, in fact, no such thing as a ‘natural’ offence. It all depends upon social
conditions. Some actions, however, are so obviously hostile to the interests of
any and every society that there was hardly ever a time when they were not
prohibited, as in the case of theft, because of its parasitical character. Society
is con­tinually changing-and, especially in its present phase, very rapidly. Hence


                                       - 10 -
the great changes which take place in our conception of morality, and which
are reflected also in criminal law. These, however, take time; and the tension
between a rapidly-changing morality and a comparatively static criminal law can,
at times, become very great.


       Crimes belong to the immoral actions; but they only form part thereof.
Generally speaking, one may say that they are the gravest; they form, as it were,
the kernel, the grosser but fundamental part. One might compare moral and
criminal laws, respectively, with two concentric circles, of which the former would
be the larger. The difference in size between the two may vary considerably,
according to time and place; sometimes the two circles cover each other
completely, whereas at other times their circumferences lie far apart. In the
former case this is a bad sign; any society which threatens with punishment
almost every transgression is internally weak.


       Thus we crime to the conclusion that a crime is a serious anti-social action
to which the State re-acts con­sciously. This reaction, as is already evident from
our formal definition, consists of punishment.


2. Punishment
       Punishment is to inflict pain; but it is not here that its difference from the
moral reaction to an immoral action is to be looked for, for the latter is also of a
painful nature. It does not alter matters m the least that sensitivity to this pain
varies enormously in different people, and is often very small indeed. The real
difference lies in the fact that moral reprobation emanates from one or more
individuals spontaneously; whereas punishment is a conscious action on the
part of the collectivity (in casu the State). The content of a reproof is nothing but a
moral condemnation; but when it is incorporated in criminal law, and pronounced
by a judge, it becomes a punishment.


       A similar demarcation is indicated in the other direction. Revenge, too, is


                                        - 11 -
pain caused intentionally, but it is an irrational reaction of the emotions, generally
of an impulsive nature, on the part of one or more persons, to a wrong which they
have suffered.


      Punishment, on the other hand, does not come from one or more persons;
it is meted out by the group, the collec­tivity, acting consciously and rationally.
Even in cases where nothing else is aimed at but the satisfaction of feelings
of revenge, a new and essential element has emerged, i.e. conscious reaction
emanating from the collectivity.


3. The Purpose of Punishment
      Punishment, however, did originate in revenge; and the latter has certainly
played its part in ensuring the safety of the community-be it imperfectly, and
accompanied by grave disadvantages. In primitive forms of society taking
revenge is, indeed, morally imperative. Gradually, however, as the community
begins to take over this function, the position is changed, and has now turned
the other way round: it is To criminology also belongs penology, or the science
of punish­ment. The limited size of the present volume prevents a thorough
treatment of this subject. A few remarks made here, and in the last chapter, must
suffice revenge by the wronged party which is prohibited-not only morally, but in
criminal law as well.


      Present-day punishment contains two elements:


       Firstly, it serves-as it always has done-to satisfy the feelings of revenge and
revulsion on the part of the members of the collectivity. No amount of theorizing
about ‘returning evil with evil’, etc., however ingeniously invented, can alter
this in the least. But this element, which was at one time supreme, suffered an
important check from the second.


      Secondly, it is the safeguarding of the community (la defense sociale). To


                                       - 12 -
some extent it has always been present-if only in a more or less unconscious
form. It has, however, now entered into the social consciousness, and is already
of considerable importance. Society takes certain measures against its harmful
members, one of the chief of which is, surely, the attempt to educate them with
a view to fitting them once more for social life. Punishment-i.e. the pain which it
is intended to inflict-also belongs to society’s armory; but the difference between
educative and correc­tional ‘measures and punishment is not nearly so great
as many theoretical criminologists would have us believe. The pain inflicted by
these measures is usually also of a serious nature, for it implies robbing the
subject of his or her freedom; it does not, therefore, differ so very much.


      To sum up, our conclusion is that crime is a serious anti­social action
to which the state reacts consciously, by inflicting pain (either punishment or
correctional measures).


4. The Disadvantages of Criminality to Society
      We have to do, indeed, with an extensive and deeply­rooted social
disease, which has dug itself into the very body of society like a kind of ulcer;
at times even threatening its very existence, but always harmful to the highest
degree. Countless crimes are committed, and millions of criminals condemned,
every year.


4.1. Economic Disadvantages
      Economically, the disadvantages to society are very great. For example,
the United States of America, various estimates have been made. Thus, Schiapp
and Smith, in their book The New Criminology (1928) arrive at a figure of four
billion dollars ($4,coo,ooo,ooo) per year in respect of direct damages, and
between five and six billion indirect losses (1oss of production power, cost of
police, etc.), in all between nine and ten billion a year. Other estimates are still
higher. I have no means of judging the reliability of these estimates, neither am
I in a position to form an estimate, on the same lines, for other countries; but I


                                      - 13 -
think it is undeniable that crime is a source of stupendous waste of money to
society.


4.2. Moral Disadvantages
      Next to the economic, we have, moreover, the still more important moral
disadvantages. If criminality is closely bound up with the moral standards of a
people, in return it sends out demoralizing influences towards the normal sections
of the population. And when one adds to all this the damage and grief suffered
by the victims of the crime, and also the constant menace which criminality con­
stitutes to society, the total obtained is already a formidable one. Neither ought
we to forget the suffering on the part of the criminal himself, who-in whatever
way one may wish to judge him, is after all, a part of humanity too. Superficially-
judging people sometimes try to represent the criminal classes as always playing
a winning hand in their war on the community, leading quite a pleasant life on the
proceeds of their booty. This may be so in an isolated case here and there; but
sooner or later-generally sooner-they lose the fight, and then the hand of society
presses on them heavily indeed.


5. The Reasons for Studying Criminology
      The reasons for the study of criminology should therefore be clear.
Admittedly it is a science which is widely studied for its own sake, just like other
sciences; crime and criminals are not a bit less interesting than stars or microbes.


      But this point of view is secondary as compared with the practical aspect,
just as in the case of medical science. Indeed, comparison with the latter re­
peatedly suggests itself. Criminology ought before anything to show humanity
the way to combat, and especially, prevent, crime. What is required more than
anything is sound knowledge, whereas up to the present we have had far too
much of dogma and dilettantism. Who-ever is in close touch with what is called
socio-pathological phenomena should make a note of this specially criminal
jurists, whose knowledge of the law imperatively needs to be supplemented with


                                      - 14 -
that of the subject-matter with which it has to deal.


6. The Sub-Sciences of Criminology
      Criminology is a complex science. It consists of:
(i) Criminal anthropology, i.e. the science of criminal man (somatic), a section
   of natural science; anthropology being sometimes called ‘the last chapter
   of zoology’. It attempts to answer such questions as: what peculiar bodily-
   characteristics has the criminal? What relation is there between race and
   criminality? etc.


(ii) Criminal sociology, i.e. the science of criminality as a social phenomenon.
   Its principal- concern is, therefore, to find out to what extent the causes of
   criminality have their origin in society (social etiology). In a wider sense,
   the study of physical (geographical, climatological, and meteorological)
   environment forms also a part of this sub-section.


(iii) Criminal psychology, i.e. the science of psychological phenomena in the field
   of crime. The chief subject-matter of its study is the psychology of the criminal,
   e.g. to what type or types he belongs; further, differentiation according to sex,
   age and race; and finally, collective or crowd-criminality.


      Further, what may be termed the ‘psychology of crime (motives and
checks) belongs to this section. Lastly, the psychology of the other persons in
foro (witnesses, judge, counsel, etc.), and the psychology of the confession.


(iv) Criminal psycho- and neuro-pathology, i.e. the science of the psychopathic or
   neurotic criminal.
(v) Penology, i.e. the science of the origin and development of punishment, its
   significance and utility.


These five sections together constitute theoretical or ‘pure’ criminology (reine


                                      - 15 -
   Wissenschaft). Founded on these, we have, further:


(vi) Applied criminology, i.e. criminal hygiene and criminal policy.


Taking the conception of the science of criminology in its widest sense, we should
   also include in it:


(vii) Criminalisticss (police science) -an applied science whose purpose is to trace
   the technique of crime and its detec­tion. This science is a combination of
   psychology of crime and the criminal, and of chemistry, physics, knowledge
   of goods and materials, graphology, etc.


       The present work will treat chiefly of the history of crimino­logy; The various
schools will be outlined, a few brief remarks only will be made on the subject of
criminal psychology, while certain conclusions concerning applied criminology
will form the finish.1 The limited space available in this little book will then have
been filled. The author, moreover, is not in a position to write authoritatively either
on psycho- and neuro-pathology, or criminalistics, both of which are legitimate
fields of study for specialists only.




                                        - 16 -
                               Chapter Two

               Crime as a Human Phenomenon

         We can define crime as a human phenomenon by saying that it is the
satisfaction of a human instinct in an abnormal way that an ordinary man does
not follow in order to satisfy that same instinct due to abnormal conditions that
exerted their influence on the doer at the very moment of commission of his
crime.


1. What is an “Ordinary Man”
         In my opinion the ordinary man is that whose physical and mental traits
approach those of the intermediate man.


(a) Taking the stature as physical trait, a man of ordinary stature is a man who
   is not excessively tall or excessively short in comparison with the medium
   height of the intermediate man. If he is excessively tall he is called giant and
   if he is excessively short he is called dwarf. Both are considered abnormal as
   regards the stature.
(b) Taking the intelligence as psychological trait, a man of ordinary intelligence
   is one who is not excessively intelligent and excessively dull or mentally
   retarded.


         The physical human traits can either be external or internal. The external
traits are called Morphology. Internal traits are called physiology.


         An example of Morphology ­was the stature. An example of physiology is
digestion as function of the stomach(internal body function). The intermediate
man digests three meals a day. A gluttonous man on the other hand digests twelve
substantial meals a day. The sober is contented by one meal. In comparison
with the medium state of an intermediate man, the gluttonous represents the


                                       - 17 -
excess, the sober the deficiency, and both are abnormal, because they differ
considerably from the average.


       We mentioned intelligence as a psychological trait, but this trait is one of
many that require a detailed explanation.


       It is well established that the psyche contains three interdependent
elements:


-   The mind which thinks,
-   The heart which feels, and,
-   The volition which decides.


       The human ­soul consists of thought, feeling, and volition. Whatever the
psychological act may be, it could not deviate from anything other than these
three elements. It can be a thought, a feeling or a volition.


       If a man sees a Beautiful girl, this perception is a thought. If he feels love
towards her, this is a feeling. And finally, if he decides to marry her, this is volition.


       As the emotions and passions are accompanied by beatings of the
heart, literature uses the heart in order to move the audience or reader. In fact,
experience proved that a man is pushed to behavior by his feelings much more
than by reasoning or thinking.


       We defer speaking about the defects of the mind and volition to another
place where we shall deal with the method of research in criminology.


2. Instincts as a Source of Human Feelings
       Now we face the human instincts as sources of feelings to indicate their
abnormalities which drive the human behavior.


                                         - 18 -
        The instinct is a natural innate tendency which generates certain desires
accompanied by a feeling of pain due to the lack of their satisfaction and therefore
leads to an action aiming at the elimination of that pain by satisfying that instinct.


3. Self-Preservation as the Principal Human Instinct
        Every human being has the fundamental instinct of self-preservation. This
instinct generates, for example, the pain of hunger or thirst which pushes man to
procure himself food and water.


        All human actions or abstentions emanate from this basic instinct.
Nevertheless, psychologists speak about other instincts deriving form this
principal one, such as the property instinct, the offence-defense instinct and the
sexual instinct.


I-    The property instinct is a natural innate tendency to procure oneself
     to material objects such as money and estate and moral objects such as
     academic degrees or titles of honor. All these things reinforce his sense of
     self-preservation.
II- The offence-defense instinct a natural innate tendency to speak or keep
     silent, to act or to remain inactive, all according to circumstances and to
     the need of ­protecting one-self’s material or moral existence, namely self-
     preservation.
III- The sexual instinct is -a natural innate tendency at the adult age to establish
     a relation with an individual of the opposite sex. At the adult age, a male is
     desirous of a female and vice-versa. He feels his own existence incomplete
     without her and vice-versa.


        Therefore, the sexual instinct, is, linked, to the self-preservation. On the
other hand, this instinct aims at procreation which makes parents feel that a son
or a daughter is the continuousness of their own existence. Thus, the sexual
instinct is also, an actuation of the self-preservation instinct. Thus, the paternal/


                                       - 19 -
maternal affection for a son/daughter is the most flaming human affection
because the parents’ love of their children is in fact, love of themselves. Here
altruism is reinforced by the egoism of self-love.


      On other words the power of self-love is added to, and mixed with, the love
of others. All fundamental instincts are driven by self-love.


4. Secondary Instincts
      There is what is called a secondary instinct. It is the refinement of a
fundamental instinct without abolishment of that instinct.


      Indeed, it is impossible to abolish the innate fundamental instincts. Yet a
secondary instinct could work towards attenuating its sharpness.


      But what does a secondary instinct?


      It is an innate or acquired tendency to conserve others’ material and
moral existence by abstaining from harming it during the satisfaction one’s own
fundamental instinct.


      For example, if the instinct of self-preservation is refined by a secondary
instinct, it shall not drive a person to kill another in order to preserve his own
existence.


      If the offence-defense instinct is refined by a secondary instinct it shall not
lead a person to assault or insulting another.


      If the property instinct: of is refined by a secondary instinct it shall not lead
a person to stealing other people’s property..


      If the sexual instinct is refined by a secondary instinct, it shall not drive a


                                       - 20 -
person to resort to rape in order to satisfy his sexual instinct, and so on.


       It goes without saying that a crime is the result of abnormal conditions
which exert their influence on the doer at the moment of its perpetration.


5. Abnormal Conditions
       Abnormal conditions can be divided into two parts:


-   The preponderance of promoting power that pushes to delinquency.
-   The lack of refraining power from delinquency.


5.1. The Promoting Power
       The promoting power consists of an abnormal instinctive quantity or
quality, with regard to the basic instincts and the feelings they generate.


       The abnormal, quantity could be either an excess or a deficiency­


(1) Referring to self-preservation instinct, the excess is called pride or exaggerated
    self-esteem, the deficiency is called hatred of life.


       Although the excess and the deficiency of instinctive feeling are opposites,
they lead to the same criminal result. Exaggerated self-esteem as well as hatred
of life conduce to homicide or murder. The crimes to which the hatred of life
leads, are called homicide and suicide.


       The abnormal quality relating to self-preservation instinct means a method
of life which differs from that of an ordinary man, such as the tendency to appear
rich despite one’s poverty or to appear poor despite one’s richness. Such
abnormal instinctive quality leads to deviation and delinquency.


(2) As regards property instinct, its excess is called avidity and its deficiency is called


                                         - 21 -
   prodigality. Although avidity and prodigality are opposites, they lead to the same
   crime against others’ property. Avidity is an inclination to accumulate property even
   if it belongs to others whereas prodigality is inclination to spend all property which
   leads the spender to compensate his loss of money by means of assaulting the property
   of others.



         The anomaly of quality pertaining to this instinct means the employment
of methods that the ordinary man doesn’t use in gaining, such as stealing and
fraud.


(3) Referring to, the offence-defense instinct, we can say that its excess is
   rashness and its deficiency is cowardliness.


         Although, rashness and cowardliness are opposites, they also lead to the
same crime. A rash person, for example, commits a homicide actively and the
coward participates passively in it by helping the killer.


         The anomaly of quality with regards to this instinct is called hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy is pretending to be what one is not. It could be passive or active.
Passive hypocrisy is showing approval to what one dislikes. Active hypocrisy
is struggling to attain a goal that one detests. The hypocrite appears to act in
contrast with what he really believes is right. The police officer who proceeds
to torture the political opposition of his president without approval of the latter
aiming at pleasing his is a typical example of an active hypocrite.


(4) The last fundamental instinct is the sexual one. This instinct can be affected
   by an anomaly of quantity or quality.


         The anomaly of quantity could be an excess or a deficiency of the sexual
feeling. The excess gives rise to the womanizer who exaggeratedly goes in
search of women. The deficiency on the contrary means impotency. Both the


                                        - 22 -
excess and the deficiency lead to the same sexual crime such as rape.


      The anomaly of quality consists of methods that the ordinary man does
not employ for the satisfaction of his sexual instincts. these methods can be
perverse manners or inverted manners.


      The inverted manner which means the sexual relation between two males
(homosexuals) or two females (lesbians).


      The perverse manner could be sadism, namely the sexual perversion
in which gratification is attained by torturing the loved person, or it could be
masochism which means an abnormal sexual passion characterized by pleasure
in being abused or dominated. It is clear that masochism is the opposite of
sadism. While sadism is the pleasure of giving pain, masochism is the pleasure
of receiving pain.


      Fetishism is another perverse manners. It is the fixation of erotic interest
on a specific part of the body such as the foot or a certain color or article of
clothing.


      Finally, the sexual perverse manner could be the incest which is a sexual
relation between a male and a female whose marriage is prohibited by law.


      As we have said, the power which leads to delinquency is the anomaly
of quantity or quality affecting one or more of the fundamental instincts and
preponderating over the power which refrains from delinquency.


      If the refraining power prevails, the anomaly of quality or quantity affecting
the fundamental instinct causes a pure imaginative delinquency.




                                      - 23 -
5.2. The Refraining Power
       This power consists of two inhibitions:


a- The noble inhibitions represented by the secondary noble instincts.
b- The ignoble inhibitions represented by the fear of the penalty


       When the delinquent is guided only by his basic instincts being deprived
of secondary instincts, he precipitates to the commission of his crime in such a
vehement and automatic way that he no more remembers the penalty by the law,
and if he remembers it, he hopes to elude justice.


       Such a criminal is called ‘constitutional delinquent’, because his psychological
constitution is characterized by the lack of secondary instincts.


       In conclusion we say that the causal factor of delinquency is a criminal predisposition
which leads to crime in circumstances that do not conduce to it the ordinary man. S u c h
criminal predisposition is the constant or accidental prevailing of instinctive anomaly of
quantity or quality with continuous or temporary missing of secondary noble instincts.


       Continuous predominance of criminal predisposition characterizes
the constitutional delinquent, while its temporary prevailing gives rise to the
‘occasional delinquent’ who is the nearest to the ordinary man.


6. Other Factors of Delinquency
       Besides the predominance of basic abnormal instincts, there are factors
which awaken the criminal predisposition and contribute to its formation. We call
these factors the ‘animating factors’.


       A causal factor of delinquency can, alone and by itself, produce a crime.
An evildoer who is dominated by an excess of offense-defense instinct, will
tempt others to quarrel with him. He will then seize this occasion to assault or kill


                                          - 24 -
somebody as he finds his delight such fights.


      On the contrary an animating factor -such as drinking alcohol or consuming
narcotics- does not produce by itself delinquency unless it joins and awakens a
criminal predisposition inherent in the person who drank or consumed narcotics.


      The abnormal quantity or quality of basic instincts derive from heredity. It
remains with the delinquent from childhood, especially in absence of correction
and education.




                                     - 25 -
                             Chapter Three

                    Schools of Criminology

1. Preliminary Attitudes of Criminology
      Criminology has a long history which goes back to the period of Greek
philosophers such as Hippocrates, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle. These
philosophers ascribed the crime of the criminal to a corrupted soul deriving from
physical deformities in his body.


      This trend persisted till the Middle Ages where it gave birth to a belief that
the character of a person could be discovered by the examination of his hands
and legs, of the features of his face and even of his umbilicus.


      This theory was followed by another which linked the crime to the planets
and made the destiny of man dependent on the planet which was dominating the
day of his birth according to whether it was good or wicked. In 1586, Della Porta
composed a book or criminology which linked the crime to an individual nature
revealed by physical defects which are visible in the face whether in the eyes,
the forehead or the nose. His theory, was sustained by natural philosophers like
De La chambre and Darwin.


2. The Eighteenth Century Until the French Revolution
      Criminal law in the latter part of the Middle Ages, the sixteenth, seventeenth,
and the greater part of the eighteenth centuries was exclusively intended to serve
as a deterrent and attempted to achieve -this purpose by means of the most
cruel punishments. The death penalty, in its most barbaric variations (generally
preceded by some sharp form of torture, e.g. the rack) and corporal punishments
were quite usual forms; the idea of general prevention of crime being the chief
consideration. The person of the criminal was not recognized; he was an object
serving as a ‘terrible example’ to others, and the purely objective element of


                                      - 26 -
social danger inherent in the offence was the final consideration. Penal laws
were vague (analogy in criminal law), and their formula­tion ambiguous. The
procedure in criminal cases bore a similar character. It was inquisitorial, and the
accused was looked upon as a mere object of investigation; it was conducted in
secret and chiefly according to documentary evidence. The law of evidence was
highly arbitrary, and confession was con­sidered the best form of proof; hence
the torture-bench.


2.1. The Call For a Criminal Law and Criminal Jurisprudence.
      The grand opposition movement of the third estate against the Ancient
Regime also drew criminal law and criminal juris­prudence into its scope. Some
intellectuals began to shine in this field too. The Rights of Man were, henceforth,
also to apply to the criminal. Montesquieu (1689-I755) started the attack, with his
Esprit des Lois (1748), in which he entered the field against the arbitrariness and
severity of the punishments, and their undue frequency. The voice of humanity
was heard for the first time. Rousseau (1712-78) also joined in the opposition
to the cruel treatment meted out to the criminal. Voltaire (1694-I778) enters the
lists in 1762, on behalf of the innocently condemned and executed Jean Calas,
and becomes one of the doughtiest fighters against the arbitrariness of criminal
jurisprudence of his day.


      The principal personality in this movement was C. Beccaria (1738-94),
who, in his world-famous book Dei delitti e deipene (1764) gave an exposition of
all the objections against the existing criminal laws and punishments; while G.
Filangieri (17S2-88), author of Scienza della legislazione (1780-85) was one of
his best-known allies.


      Besides the above-named authors we may mention, for England the
jurist-philosopher Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) founder of uti1tarianism (‘the
greatest happiness for the greatest number’). His chief work is Introduction to the
Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780). He pub­lished a plan for a new kind of


                                      - 27 -
prison in 1791, under the title of Panopticon, or the Inspection House. Bentham,
amongst others, was one of the first protagonists of correctional punish­ment.


2.2. The Impact of the Development of Criminology
       Already before the French Revolution the work of these authors had not
been entirely without some results. In 1780 torture was abolished in France. In
this, Frederick the Great had already preceded France in the year 17402. Joseph
II abolished the death penalty, and other facts of this kind might be mentioned.
However, the greatest changes occurred during the French revolution.


       Although the death penalty and corporal punishment were the rule, prisons
had been erected here and there, from about the middle of the sixteenth century
(e.g. in Amsterdam towards the close of that century). For prisoners on remand
these had, of course, always been necessary. Conditions in those prisons were
usually shockingly bad, both from hygienic and moral standpoints. We owe
an enormous debt of gratitude to John Howard (I726-90), for having drawn
attention to this state of things, in his work The state of the Prisons (1777); chiefly
relating to England, but, in later editions, dealing also with other countries. In
the seventeen-eighties a number of prison societies were founded in the United
States, under pressure from the Quakers, with a view to putting an end to the
highly detrimental effects of detention in association. Punishment in cells-which
was to provide the proper atmosphere for intro­spection-was to take its place. In
1786 capital punishment was abolished in Pennsylvania.


3. From the French Revolution Until the Nineteenth Century
       In 1791, the French revolution, with its Code Penal, put an end to the
criminal law and the criminal procedure of the Ancient Regime. A measure of
uniformity, system, and precision of formulation was introduced into the new juris­
prudence (no more ‘analogy’); all persons became equal before the law, and with
this the rights of man were recognized in this field also. Confiscation of property
and corporal punish­ment were abolished; capital punishment was confined to


                                       - 28 -
a considerably smaller number of offences, and performed with­out previous
torture; while detentionary punishments were introduced more frequently than
had hitherto been the case. The lack of moderation in punishment which had
prevailed during the preceding period was checked, and there was an attempt to
fix the punishment proportionally to the crime. The proportion itself remained, of
course, an insoluble problem; but still, the practical result was that punishment
was not nearly so frequent, nor so severe as formerly.


3.1. Changes in Criminal Law, Criminal Procedure,
and Punish­ments
      The greatest improvements effected were those in criminal proce­dure.
Proceedings were held in public during the final stages, when they took on a
direct and accusatorial character. The arbitrary power of the judge was put an
end to, and the law of evidence was better regulated.


      After having been started in France, these reforms were also propagated
and carried through elsewhere; first of all in those countries which came under
French influence or rule. Thus, for example, the ‘Criminal Code of law for the
Kingdom of the Netherlands’ was introduced there in 1809, to be replaced shortly
after, when Holland was incorporated into France, by the Code Penal. England
went its own way; but there, too, under the influence of Bentham and Samuel
Romilly (1757-1818), author of Observations on the Criminal Law of England
(1810), important changes were introduced.


      Conditions in English prisons (but elsewhere, too) were bad, and generally
remained so, during this period. Howard had, already long before this, been
raising his voice in protest against this state of things, and others now came to
his supporters, for instance, Bentham, Romilly, and Elisabeth Fry (I780-1845).
An extensive literature began to appear; official in­vestigations took place, and
even laws were passed, which, however, were rarely put into execution. Only in
the United States important changes were effected.


                                     - 29 -
       As early as 1791 a prison consisting of cells was erected near Philadelphia
by the Quakers, in which the demoralizing influence of detention in association
was put an end to; but where the utter misery of loneliness took its place, the
prisoner not being even allowed to work! In 1823 the so-called ‘Auburn’ system
was intro­duced in New York, under which prisoners worked, in com­pany, during
the day-without being allowed to talk-and passed the night in their cells.


      In the Dutch prison conditions were re-organized as far as the material
side was concerned, in 1821. Vide about the Netherlands.


      The improvements which the French Revolution has effected in criminal law
and procedure should not be under-rated. On the other hand, too much should not
be thought of their importance either. The ‘injustice’ of the preceding period had
been abolished. Lip-service was paid to a certain ‘ab­stract’ humanitarianism; but
of any actual humanness there was, as yet, but little evidence. Punishments still
remained extremely severe and hard, and the human factor in the criminal was
quite ignored. Once his guilt was established he became a ‘case’, to be treated,
as all other ‘cases, to a certain-generally very large quantity of punishment.


      Improvements were, indeed, usually of a juridical or formal character,
while little or no modification was made in the actual content of the sentences.
Next to sheer ignorance, the whole of the new social system must be blamed for
this. In the new social order all men were equal, but only formally: their material
differences were greater than ever before. True, the Code Civil does not speak
of ‘rich and poor’, but this does not alter the fact of their existence, nor that this
fact constitutes the most fundamental contrast in society. And it is just as great a
fiction to put down as equals all criminals who commit the same sort of offence.
They are not equals; the motives which lead them to commit a given crime are
not the same, and they should not, therefore, be treated in the same way.


      Punishments were mollified somewhat in the Code Penal of 1791. This,


                                       - 30 -
however, was not to be for long. The French Revolution got into the hands of
the extremists, ‘the men with the hot heads and the cold hearts’; and these men
inaugurated a most bloodthirsty and arbitrary criminal law policy, which, indeed,
vied with that of the Ancient Regime. Then, again, the period of reaction which
followed (as usual), led to a renewed sharpening of punishments. The Code
Penal of 1810 was a step backwards as compared with that of 1991. Branding
was reintroduced, as well as, in some cases, torture prior to the execution of the
death penalty.


      In England we see the same picture. A theft of 5s. was punished in those
days with death, and the same applied to more than 160 other offences.




                                     - 31 -
  The Appearance of Schools of Criminology

                        The Positive Schools

4. The Biological Theories
      These theories gave interest to the biological traits of the delinquent
and its impact on delinquency. The pioneers of these theories are Lombroso,
Garovallo, and Ferri.


4.1. Theory of Lombroso
      Lombroso’s theories first appeared in his book “L’uomo Delinquente” (The
Delinquent Man). According to Lambroso, the animal kingdom appears on the
criminological stage. Actions of one species of animal towards the other -also
towards man- are cited; even to the classic example of the cat stealing the fish.


      Coming to animals of the same species, it is, of course, only among these
that crime could ever be thought of -Lombroso mentions the fight for the female
(sexual selection), and for the position of leader of the herd. But surely, to qualify
all these acts as having even the remotest connection with crime, one must, so
to speak, wear a permanent pair of criminological spectacles in one’s views of
nature.


      Lombroso, of course, acknowledges this, up to a point; and mentions, as
genuine equivalents of crime, those instances in which animals living in herds
(horses, cattle, elephants, etc.), occasionally expel troublesome specimens of
their kind. Admittedly, one might, with a large dose of good will, agree that here
is something remotely comparable with a case of pathological criminality.


      This theory was upheld after the Vililla incident. Vililla was an aggressive
man who had a strong inclination to aggression. After his death, Lambroso took
his corpse and ran an autopsy. He discovered that there was dimple in the rear


                                       - 32 -
of his skull bigger than the average person. This dimple almost resembled that
of a Gorilla.


        Lambroso concluded from this discovery that the criminal is qualified as a
primitive monster in which reappears by means of heredity characteristic that go
back to the prehistoric ages of mankind. He named such a monster the “criminal
man”.


        After the Misdia Incident (Mesdia was a solider who suffered from epilepsy.
During one of his epileptic episodes he murdered fifteen of his colleagues),
Lombroso surpassed the bodily apparent defects to the functions internal organs
and the psychological conditions of the criminals, stating that there is a strict
relation between their delinquency and an organic trouble and a psychological
defect in them. He included such new observations in the second edition of his
book qualifying the criminal as a “psychological lunatic”.


        Finally, Lombroso took into consideration the state of a criminal who was
well-known as perpetrator of violent and blood crimes, and he deduced from it
that the crime is due to nervous “acts of epilepsy” that lead to violence.


        Thus the figure of the criminal in the opinion of Lombroso, evolved from the
primitive monster to the psychological lunatic and finally to the nervous epileptic.


        Thus, according to Lombroso, the delinquent is a primitive creature which
can be compared with animals.


        The way was clear for primitive humanity to be drawn into the scope of the
argument. Now, according to Lombroso, aboriginal man must be looked upon as
a born criminal:


        ‘……(among savages) crime is not considered an exception, but practically


                                       - 33 -
as the general rule; in fact, nobody looks upon it as such; on the contrary, its first
appearances are, rather, ranked in the same class with the most irreproachable
actions. Lombroso then proceeds with an attempt to prove this thesis.


      Without the slightest notion of ethnology, with an utter lack of critical sense,
and often from the worst possible sources of information, a few facts are dragged
in to prove that primitive man was a born criminal (thief, rapist, murderer), and
primitive woman a prostitute.


However, Lambroso’s opponents made the following
observations:
(i) Lambroso’s bold analysis is wholly and absolutely untrue. In the first place,
   Lombroso evidently still takes up the stand­point of natural law. He is a
   complete stranger to the notion that moral conceptions are never fixed, but
   change according to time and place. To take only one instance: infanticide
   occurs fairly frequently among the most primitive peoples (nomads); and is
   not considered by them as immoral. This is to be explained by the difficult
   circumstances under which they live, and which may force them to adopt this
   course of action. If they acted differently the whole group to which they belong
   might perish. There is no question of any inborn hard-heartedness at all, or
   even of a lack of love for the children.


      Other writers proved that primitive peoples have great devotion and
parental tenderness for any of their children which they are in a position to rear.
An analogous case is the killing of the aged (or their suicide) among nomadic
peoples.


      Both these moral conceptions and practices disappear com­
                                                              pletely as
soon as these nomads become settlers, and take to agriculture, whereby they
are enabled to rear more children and maintain their aged.



                                       - 34 -
(ii) In the second place, Lombroso makes no distinction between actions
   within, and outside, the group (this pheno­menon was called by the Russian
   sociologist Kulischer ‘ethical dualism’). Various facts mentioned by him relate
   to other groups than the one to which he who committed the act belonged,
   and therefore rank with acts of war, and not with crimes at all. Within the group
   itself crime is a rare excep­tion, and mutual care and devotion attain a very
   high standard. The available material evidence of this is simply overwhelm­
   ing; and I may confine myself to quoting one or two summary judgments:
(iii) ‘…. the normal savage exists only as a devoted member of the group whose
   customs he respects and whose every interest he defends; the savage is a
   great lover of child­ren,’ says Steinmetz in his L’ethnologie et l’anthropologie
   crimin­elle.’


      Hobhouse sums up his opinion in the following words:


      ‘The typical primitive community . . . is a little island of friends amid a sea
of strangers and enemies.’


      As a matter of fact, in modern sociology the hypothesis that the primitive
man was fundamentally a-moral and only grew into a moral being as time went
on, must be considered fatuity. The known facts of ethnology and history, as well
as of psychology, are too flagrantly in contradiction with such ideas.


(iv)Hardly less erroneous are Lombroso’s pronouncements on ‘the criminal in
   the child’; they are also quite in keeping with the same line of thought. Here,
   he presents us with the following amiable picture of the human child:


      ‘……that the germs of moral abnormality and criminal nature do not occur
as exceptions, but as the rule, in the first years of human life; exactly in the same
way that we find, regularly, certain forms in the embryo which-if they occurred
in grown-ups-would rank as abnormalities; so that the child would appear to be


                                       - 35 -
a human being lacking in moral sense-what alienists call morally defective; but
what we prefer to call a born criminal.’


        He then cites a number of instances of children’s mendacity, cruelty,
jealousy, etc.


       Now, modern child psychology has made way of this repre­sentation of the
child as being either a little devil or an angel.


       There is no point whatever in attributing to children an inborn knowledge
of the content of moral dicta; but this failing has no more sinister meaning in
regard to their morality than lack of know­ledge has in regard to their intellectual
endowments. Besides, children are impulsive-functioning primarily-owing to
lack of experience of life, which is just as little proof of their moral inferiority;
and as everyone knows they are often just as impulsive in acting altruistically.
Cruelty in children is, more often than not, entirely unconscious; they inflict pain,
for instance on animals, without knowing it, and they change their conduct as
soon as they understand what is actually happening. True, children are very
often untruthful in their statements; but this, too, is in the majority of cases quite
unconscious and has its origin in their uncontrolled imagina­tion. And when they
do tell real lies this cannot possibly be of anything like the same gravity as in the
case of adults; they just cannot realize its seriousness and implications. There
are, of course, children-but they are very rare-who resemble the picture drawn
by Lombroso; but in these cases one has to do with moral idiots or imbeciles,
and not with children of sound mental propensities.


(v) Taking the views out-lined above as his starting-point, Lombroso then
   proceeded to examine anthropologically a large number of criminals in various
   prisons-more especially their skulls. The con­clusion which he drew from these
   examinations was that, in the criminal, peculiar anthropological features are in
   evidence. Thus, for example, the capacity of the skull (especially in the case


                                        - 36 -
   of thieves) is held by Lombroso to be smaller than that of normal persons,
   while, in addition to this, there are supposed to be several other anomalies
   about the criminal’s skull.


      In the brain, too, Lombroso notices deviations from the normal, which
remind him of animal formations-although he was unable to point to any specific
‘criminal’ deviations. Further, their physiognomy was also supposed to differ from
the nor­mal: large jaws, crooked faces, receding foreheads, etc., he found to be
of frequent occurrence. Finally, low sensibility, and tattooing-as among primitive
peoples-were frequently found to exist.


      The conclusion to which Lombroso came was that in the majority of cases
the criminal is an entirely separate species of human beings (genus homo
delinquents).


      This innate tendency, moreover, may be recognized in out­ward peculiarities,
according to Lombroso, a criminal type, which we are actually able to diagnose.


      ‘Crime, therefore, would appear to us to be a natural phenomenon’-these
are the final words of his L’uomo delinquente.


(vi)The question now arises, how can the origin of this kind of abnormal being be
   accounted for?


      In his attempt to solve this problem Lombroso hit on the following quite
ingenious hypothesis. Granted that primi­tive man was a-moral, and only acquired
his moral qualities in the course of time, then the criminal must be an atavistic
phenomenon, a throw-back; i.e. he suddenly shows again those peculiarities
which his immediate ancestors had lost, but which his remote ascendants had
possessed. We may call this ‘throw-back heredity’.



                                     - 37 -
       This hypothesis, however, was just as erroneous as it was ingenious. In
the first place-as we have already seen-its starting-point is untenable from an
ethnological-sociological view-point-which rather makes the whole hypothesis fall
to the ground. In the second place, it was attacked from medico-anthropological
quarters; and shown-apart from the numerous errors and inexactitudes which
are usual features in Lombroso’s investigations-to rest upon an entirely wrong
interpretation of the facts.


       However, Professor Ramsis Behnam upholds Lambroso’s theories in
general and rebuts the foregoing observations of his opponents as follows:


(1) Lombroso’s opinions were misunderstood, due to the unawareness of the
   four latter editions of his book successive to the first one. He did not restrict
   himself to the physical and organic states of delinquents. In fact he examined
   their psychological conditions. He did not assert that physical defects were
   exclusive mark of delinquents, but he meant that they are more diffused and
   acute among criminals than among non-criminals and that, in most cases,
   they accompany their psychological anomaly.
(2) According to his view the criminal heredity does not mean the definite fall in
   delinquency, but a hereditary inclination which does not lead to delinquency
   unless it is associated with certain factors which could not occur and therefore
   it remains latent without conducing to any crime. Lombroso added that such
   an inclination could be acquired after birth.


4.2. Theory of Garofallo
       In 1880, Raffaele Garofalo, who was judge in the court of Naples and
a disciple of Lombroso, came up with a new theory according to which the
delinquent was not an abnormal human phenomenon but rather an abnormal
psycho who lacks mercy and honesty.


       The lack of mercy leads to crimes of persons and the lack of honesty leads


                                      - 38 -
to crimes against property.


       He asserted that the penalty must aim at the punishment of the criminal
namely to prevention and not at intimidating of public, namely the general
prevention.


       These last steps paved the way for the uprising of the modern Italian school
of criminology and penal law, namely the positive school headed by Enrico Ferri,
Fern exerted his school’s influence on the different penal legislation of the world.


                 The Modern Positive School

5. Theory of Enrico Ferri
       Although Enrico Ferri was a disciple of Lombroso, he achieved the task of
his teacher by showing the importance of the social environment in the genesis
of crime. This came in his famous book on criminal sociology written in 1881 and
published in 1929 in Turin.


       In this book, he attributes crime to three kinds of factors:


(1) A cosmic Factor,
(2) An organic Factor
(3) A social Factor.


       He defined crime as the result of interaction between the criminal’s inner
personal factors, on one side and the external material factors of the natural
geographic environment and social spiritual factors in social relations on the
other. In such an interaction the proportion each factor differs according to the
different crimes and criminals. This interaction between the three factors gives
birth to the so-called law of criminal ­density.



                                        - 39 -
       According to this law, when certain social conditions are associated with
certain personal and environmental condition, they produce, in a certain society,
a certain number of crimes in such a way that it is impossible that more or less
than that number of crimes could be committed. Hence the crime rate represents
the degree of saturation of that society with criminality.


       Consequently the author states that crime is not only the premise of
certain results but is also the result of certain premises. It is the definite result of
certain factors under the influence of which the criminal is unable to avoid the
commission of such crime. The criminal, as any man like himself, commits his
same crime if he is under his same cosmic, organic and social conditions.


       This means that the criminal is compelled to his crime and that he has
no freedom of choice. Hence he does not deserve to have any measure taken
against him counting his responsible for his crime. Nevertheless society has the
right to defend itself against any crime threatening its integrity even if a mentally
disturbed person originates the crime.


       Subsequently, Enrico Ferri substituted the moral responsibility of the state
with a legal one according to which society has the right to defend itself against
any criminal even if he is mentally disturbed


       Such a defense could be through preventive measures instead of the
repressive measures. The mentally disturbed, from whom a crime is expected,
represents the same danger to society as the mentally stable criminal. Yet
penalty is applied to the mentally stable (although he may have been compelled
to commit his crime) because it is assumed that the effect of the pain punishment
operates on his organic, namely his inner character.


       This modern positive theory of Enrico Ferri, exerted its influence on the
States of the world especially because it ascribed the function of social defense


                                        - 40 -
against criminality to punishment instead of the function of social retribution of the
delinquent’s sin. It drew the attention of legislators to the necessity of providing
a security measure to be pronounced by the judge as regards the crimes of the
mentally unstable.


      The same theory drew the legislators’ attention to the necessity of:


(1) The prevention of the factors that lead to delinquency
(2) The individualization of penal treatment according to the conditions of each
   crime and each criminal
(3) The modification of penal execution in order to adapt it to the re-socialization
   of the criminal


      In short, it promoted what is called the individualization of the penal
sanction in the fields of legislation, judgment and execution.


      But to this day, the positive theory did not acquire approval as regards its
statement about the criminal being compelled man and the denial of his free will
and consequently of his moral responsibility as the basis of application of penal
law even towards the mentally stable criminals.




                                       - 41 -
                        The Social Schools

6. Theory of Colayanni
      After Enrico Ferri, the sociologist Colayanni in 1889 asserted that the
social factor is the only origin of crime and that crime is a definite result of the
social factor alone.


      On the contrary, Ferri attributed the crime to other factors as we saw.
Colayanni said that even the personal psychological factor of crime is due to the
social conditions, which surrounded the life of the criminal especially from the
economic perspective. He added that the criminal is susceptible to correctness
by the elimination of the bad material conditions which surround his life. Note
that Fern also required the elimination of the crime social factors.


7. American Theories
     American authors too are not keen to recognize the
hereditary inclination in the genesis of crime. They are
as follows:

7.1. Donald Thaft
      The American criminologist Donald Taft wrote a book on criminology in
1945 in New York. He said that the criminal is produced by the society itself,
that heredity is not a part in the genesis of crime. He said that man is like raw
material that is shaped by his life since his birth, and that his delinquency comes
about due to the corrupted environment in which he was born and grew, namely
to the social factor alone. Thus, if somebody undertakes the task of looking for
those who gave rise to criminality in order to knock at their doors, he arrive at
the end to knocking at his own door. The negligence of citizens in combating the
factors of criminality, namely the poverty, the ignorance and the disease, gives
rise to criminality as an issue which is harmful to their co-existence.



                                      - 42 -
7.2. Thorsten Sellin
      He ascribed delinquency to doctrinal conflict between the criminal and
the law in the sense that the criminal is impregnated by a culture which derives
from the environment that surrounds him and which is in contrast with the social
attitudes.


7.3. Cliford Shaw
      He stated that the crime rises from certain origins that are usually the
lower standard parts of the cities. He calls such areas “ delinquency areas”.


7.4. Sutherland
      He explained the crime by saying that the criminal learnt it from a certain
social group.


8. The Opponents of the Social Schools
      The above said point of view is criticized by the fact that culture does not
have that effect on individuals and that the effect of the environment depends
upon the susceptibility of those living in it to commit crime. And that delinquents
rise from different environments and could not be limited to a certain class or
environment. Hence, it is inevitable to take into consideration the personal inner
factor of the criminal in the genesis of his crime.


      After Lombroso, criminology realized a scientific progress due to the Italian
scientists and psychiatrists especially Niceforo Patrizi and Sergi.


      They provided that crime originates from the abject entity of the human
soul when it predominates upon the sublime one.


8.1. Sergi’s Theory
      This in particular is distinguished by the division of human character into a
fundamental character and a supplementary character.


                                      - 43 -
(a) The fundamental character is the result of heredity added to the personal
   organic conditions of the individual. It is divided into a an profound (original)
   part that goes back to the primitive life of human beings and a less profound
   part that reflects the life of the race and family to whom the individual belongs.
(b) The supplementary character is that character which is derived from the
   circumstances that the individual encounters in his life and which modify his
   character fundamentally or even partially.


      We also mention in brief Freud’s and Adler’s theories.


8.2. Freud
      Ascribes the crime to a guilt complex, which pushes the individual to
delinquency in order to obtain the deserved punishment.


8.3. Adler
      Attributes the crime to the individual’s attempt of freeing himself from
an inner struggle comes about due to an inferiority complex. Evidently the two
theories do not offer a general criterion of delinquency.




                                       - 44 -
The Renaissance of Criminology in the Modern Ages

      Criminology did not actually flourish until the end of the first half of the 20th
century as a result of the efforts of Italian physicians and scientists who adopted
all scientific methods of examining the human personality, whether one is a
delinquent or not, through many experiments in the preventive and repressive
delinquency in Rome.


9. The Italian Efforts
      Among them we mention especially Pende and Benigno Di Tullio.


9.1. Pende
      He was a universal physician who is specialized in glandular disease. He
drew attention to the importance of human typology science in the clasification
of criminals into categories, each characterized by certain common symptoms.


9.2. Benigno Di Tullio
      Taking part in the above mentioned experiments Doctor Benigno Di Tullio,
Professor of criminal anthropology in the university of Rome, crowned his efforts
by a book which appeared in 1945 in Rome and which established his new
theory on the so-called “criminal constitution or predisposition”.


      According to Di Tullio’s theory, that although crime is the result of
interaction between the human soul as an internal factor and the circumstances
encountered by the man in the external world, experience indicates that there are
individuals who possess a tendency or inclination to delinquency, which doesn’t
exist in others, and that the external circumstances which provoke their criminal
tendency and leads them to delinquency, does not produce the same effect on
the part of ordinary persons. Such circumstances animate and exteriorize their
criminal inclination that is connected to a certain constitution that they have. This
constitution, which is simultaneously physical and psychological, distinguishes


                                       - 45 -
them from any normal man, and differs according to their criminal category. Di
Tullio classified them, following the example of Pende, into different categories.
He separated constitutional delinquents from occasional delinquents whose
delinquency is due more to the external factor than to the internal one.


      On the other hand, Di Tullio views the criminal constitution of occasional
delinquents does not attain a pathological nature. Namely it does not deserve
the quality of a disease. That is why he distinguishes between the constitutional
and occasional delinquent on the one hand and delinquent whose criminality is
due to a mental disease or insaneness on the other.


      As regards the mentally disturbed delinquents, Di Tullio separates the
insane who is a delinquent from the delinquent who is insane. The first is a
delinquent because of his insanity, in such a way that his delinquency could be
eliminated by his treating him from insanity. The second is a delinquent because
of a constitution which is previous to his insanity and which aggravated the latter.
In order to cure him it would not be enough to treat his insanity but his criminal
constitution must be treated at first.


      Di Tullio adds that the criminal constitution is characterized by the fact that
its symptoms appear at an early age and that it leads to grave crime implies the
desire of repeating the crimes finding delight and pleasure in committing them.


      In order to discover the criminal constitution the personality of the individual
has to be examined from three points of view namely in three fields:


(1) The field of morphology (the external organs of the body),
(2) The field of physiology and endocrinology (the internal organs of the body)
(3) The field of psychology (the human instincts)


      We approve Di Tullio’s theory as regards the explanation of crime as we


                                         - 46 -
have explained the characteristics of the constitutional criminal in the above
mentioned three fields when we defined crime as a social reality and when we
indicated the causal factor of criminality.


10. The French Efforts
       The French theory of Jean Pinatel is less detailed than Di Tuillo’s theory.


10.1. Jean Pinatel
       Pinatel speaks about the central nucleus of criminal personality. This
nucleus is composed by four elements:


(1) Egocentrism
(2) Quick drifting
(3 Aggressiveness
(4) Affective indifference


       He asserts that there are four obstacles that stand in the way of crime.


(1) The first obstacle is the social opprobrium towards the criminal
(2) The second is the legal threat of punishment
(3) The third consists of the difficulties that probably surround the execution of
   the crime
(4) The fourth is the horror of the figure which is given by this execution.


       The first obstacle (the social opprobrium) is overcome by the criminal’s
egocentrism which makes him live by his own rules and follow his own believes
which are contrary to the social integrity. Surpassing this first obstacle leads to
what Pinatel calls “the acquiescence to the criminal idea”.


       The second obstacle (the legal threat of punishment) is surpassed by
the criminal due-to his quick drifting. The Surpassing of this second obstacle


                                       - 47 -
produces what Pinatel calls “The decisive acquiescence to the criminal idea”.


       The third obstacle (the difficulties that surround the execution of the crime)
is surpassed by the criminal’s aggressiveness. Pinatel calls the Surpassing of
this third obstacle the “crisis state” (psychological dangerous crisis)


       The fourth obstacle (the horror which makes the ordinary man withdraw
the execution of his decision is surpassed by the criminal due to his affective
indifference. This surpassing produces what Pinatel calls “the passage to the
act”


11. The German Efforts
       Hermann Mannheim explains the origin of criminality by saying that in
each crime there is an organic physical factor and a social economic factor
which do not produce the criminal unless they are deflected to it by a mental
psychological factor.


       However, professor Ramsis Behnam views that this deflecting factor does
not differ from what Di Tollio calls “The Criminal Predisposition”




                                      - 48 -
                              Chapter Four

           The Animating Factors of Delinquency

      We have explained the causal factor of delinquency namely a criminal
predisposition that leads to crime under circumstances which do not conduce
to a crime n the case of the ordinary man. Such criminal predisposition is the
constant or accidental prevailing of instinctive anomaly of quantity or quality with
continuous or temporary missing of secondary noble instincts.


      On the other hand, the criminal predisposition as a causal factor of
delinquency can be awakened by animating internal and external factors which
we face now.


1.The internal animating factors of delinquency

These factors are as follows

1.1.The Sex
      The feminine muscular power is approximately half that of the masculine
muscular power. This is probably the reason that when a woman commits
homicide, she is more probable to resort to a cunning means such as poison
rather than using violence and relying on her own physical strength. Is woman
is also more probable to be an accessory to a crime rather than be the principal.
Consequently, the masculine crime rate is consequently about six times higher
than the feminine rate.


      Women also undergo sexual phenomenon which distinguishes them
from men such as menstruation, pregnancy and childbirth. This phenomenon
can simulate a latent criminal predisposition. In Germany, statistics show that
approximately 61 percent of the women caught shoplifting were undergoing


                                      - 49 -
their menstruation cycle. This state awakens the theft tendency if the woman is
affected by an abnormal property instinct.


       On the other hand, women may commit infanticide through abortion due
to their fear of the pain of childbirth or to hide the shame of an illegitimate child.


1.2. Age
       It is rare for a child to commit a crime before the age of twelve unless that
child is affected by a constitutional criminal predisposition.


       The Egyptian law presumes that a seven year old child is capable of
committing a crime or felony. But the importance of age as animating factor
starts with the puberty which comes at about fourteen in boys and about twelve
in girls. Because Puberty wakes the sexual instinct, the pubescent could commit
obscene acts and even sexual assaults on persons of the opposite sex. He
begins doubt and discuss all what he learned since his childhood. Thus, puberty
is a critical period which requires the parental attention.


       Between the age of twenty-five and thirty-five the violent acts appear.
Grave thefts and passion homicide take place between the age of thirty-five and
forty-five.


       Obscene acts reappear at the age of sixty, as compensation of the
decline sexual potency in youth. The criminal activity of the doer diminishes as
he gets older, although he may commit accessory delinquency. Yet we do not
mean that every man commits the above said crimes under the influence of his
age. Criminality depends on the abnormal fundamental instincts and the lack of
secondary noble instincts.




                                       - 50 -
1.3. Alcohol and Narcotics
1.3.1.Alcohol
      Drunkenness is harmful because it eliminates or at least disturbs
consciousness. Moderate use of wine, beer or whisky is harmless unless the
drinker has a strong sensibility to alcohol.


      Even a slight quantity of alcohol becomes dangerous when it sensitizes a
latent criminal predisposition. When recidivist violent criminals drink, even a little
quantity f alcohol, they become ready to aggression even if there is no reason
to be aggressive and they commit horrible crimes against public authority or
against individuals.


      Alcohol increases the desire of crime by eliminating the fear of punishment
facilitating the execution of criminal decision, and prevailing the promoting power
to crime, not only as regards crimes against persons but also in relation to crimes
against property.


      Even thieves, pickpockets, embezzlers, drink alcohol before committing
their crimes, in order to become more audacious.


      The most dangerous individuals are those who have both the criminal
predisposition and the addiction to alcohol, because the latter continuously
awakes their inclination to crime, and consequently they require an efficacious
treatment of both their inclination to alcohol and to delinquency.


      Addiction to alcohol could lead even to insanity and if the latter is added
to a previous criminal predisposition, it aggravates this predisposition otherwise
it becomes in itself a source of delinquency.


      French statistics indicate a strict relation between drunkenness and crimes
of homicide, assault, arson, sexual assaults and negligence crimes.


                                       - 51 -
       Between 1946 and 1955, the cases of death due to chronic and heavy
addiction to alcohol, death due to the liver disease caused by alcohol addiction
and mental and nervous disorder due to alcohol addiction, increased enormously.
In 1955, the addiction to alcohol produced eighteen thousand cases of death,
while the cases of death due to tuberculosis attained twelve thousands, and
those due drunk driving accidents reached eight thousands.


1.3.2. Narcotics
    Narcotics, they are always harmful even if they are
taken in little quantities. They awaken latent criminal
predisposition. Narcotics are divided into two kinds:

*   One kind generates infuriation and tendency to violence even to homicide
    such as cocaine and cannabis (hashish).
*   The other kind causes a general state of idleness and indifference as well
    as a fall of mental faculties such morphine and heroin, These narcotics
    produce a sensation addiction of the drug. The victim feels a physiological
    unsupportable thirst for it. This desperate need for the drug causes mental
    confusion spasms, sweating and an eagerness for money that could even
    lead to homicide in order to pay the price of the narcotic.


       Poisonous substances other than drugs exist in the atmosphere of certain
factories or mines. At a certain degree, they arouse the criminal predisposition
in some workers. That is why scientists advise factory and mine owners to put
the atmosphere of such factories and mines under control in order to avoid the
stimulation of workers known for their criminal predisposition.




                                      - 52 -
1.4. Certain Disease
      Tuberculosis upsets body and soul equilibrium and could lead especially
to sexual delinquency, if it awakens a latent criminal predisposition. The same
can be said as regards syphilis, typhoid malaria and even influenza.


      We repeat that the simple fact of being affected by such diseases does
not lead by itself to delinquency. These diseases throw poisons into the body
that upset the physical and psychological equilibrium of the body. Yet these
poisons do not provoke the ordinary man to delinquency. They do not give rise
to delinquency unless they excite a latent criminal predisposition of the patient.


      Encephalitis causes brain inflammation. It disturbs the nervous system
of the body, induces to violence, sexual abnormalities and larceny. It is more
dangerous; when it affects the person in his childhood and awakens a criminal
predisposition


1.5. Disorder of Glandular Secretion
      Glands are parts of the body, which secrete certain substances needed
by the body into the blood. An example of a gland is the thyroid gland, the
pituitary gland, the thymus gland, the sexual gland, the liver, the kidneys and the
pancreas. Their secretion exerts influence on human behavior. For example the
abundance of thyroid gland secretion contributes to rashness and aggression.


      That is why Hirsch suggests the amputation of a part of the thyroid gland
pertaining to violent recidivist criminals in order to reduce their inclination to
aggression.




                                      - 53 -
1.6. Emotion and Passion
       Emotion is an interruption of the equilibrium of feelings. Becoming angry is
an emotion, becoming happy is another emotion. When anger prevails for a long
time, it is transformed into the passion of hatred.


       Thus, emotion is a temporary interruption of feeling equilibrium, while
passion means continuousness of this interruption. Every man is exposed to
emotion and passion. Yet one commits a crime under this influence only if he is
affected by a criminal predisposition.


1.7. Autosuggestion
       Autosuggestion is the passive obsession to any external influence of a
criminal idea. Imitation of the crimes of others is an autosuggestion that becomes
dangerous when it is in harmony with one’s personal criminal predisposition.


2. The External Animating Factors of Delinquency
External animating factors of delinquency are divided into two categories. They are the
natural surroundings and social surroundings.


It is clear that any human being receives a motive of delinquency from the external
surroundings. This motive does not become a effective unless it meets an approval with
the doer. Thus an external animating factor is transformed at first into an internal factor
in order to induce to an action.


2.1. The Natural Surrounding
       Natural Surrounding comes as follows:


2.1.1. The Weather
       The relation between weather and delinquency is proved by criminal and
meteorological statistics. In hot regions the increase of temperature irritates
the population and arouses the tendency to violence. It awakens the abnormal


                                         - 54 -
offence-defense instinct and consequently leads to violent attacks against
persons as well as rape and suicide.


      On the contrary cold regions absorb any tendency to violence, because
their inhabitants go in search of heat and warmth themselves. Therefore, those
who undergo abnormal property instinct calmly trace plans to commit for burglary
for example while the owners of houses are sleeping deep under their covers.
Moreover, it is possible to draft a calendar showing the seasons delinquency.
Such calendar indicates that in winter, crimes against property prevail, in spring
and summer, crimes against persons, sexual crimes and suicide predominate
especially because daytime being longer that nighttime. People interact with
each other much more frequently than in winter. Revolutions usually occur in
summer. Take the French and Egyptian revolutions for example. They took place
in July, the first and the second on twenty third.


      The Egyptian General Security Administration Statistics show that in Upper
Egypt -where the climate is hot- crimes against persons are much more frequent
than crimes against property, while in southern Egypt where the climate is colder,
crimes against property prevail in comparison with those against persons.


2.1.2. The Food
      There are many arguments which sustain the effect of food on behavior.
If one tries to read a book while he is are hungry, he feels unable to concentrate
on what he reads.


      Professor Di Tullio noticed that a group of juveniles was unquiet and
undisciplined, and when he ameliorated their nourishment, their behavior was
improved. Furthermore, the discovery of stimulating substances such caffeine
in coffee and tea as well ass that of tobacco and alcohol was accompanied by a
change in the behavior of men.



                                      - 55 -
      The physician can also prescribe a kind of food that animates the sexual
potency. Vegetarians are characterized by a docile character which differs from
that of those who eat red meat.


2.1.3. The Dwelling
      It is well known that there are slums of poverty that form areas of delinquency
in all European, American and Oriental capitals because they are inhabited by
exoduses in search of work. These slums are called “The Underworld”.


      As slums are deprived of sunshine and fresh air, their inhabitants rush to
the street fleeing from the suffocative and unsanitary conditions of their dwelling,
and juveniles as well as young men form gangs due to poverty and envy.


2.2. The Social Surroundings
      While the natural surroundings mean the material existence around the
human body, social surroundings are the spirits that dominate his soul. These
spirits consist of the following factors:


2.2.1. Disorganized Family
      Family is the basic group of society. It is the first group that the human
being encounters after his birth. Corruptive factors in family could be either
passive or active.


* Passive corrupting factors are:
(1) Disunion of family members especially if the mother works out late thus
   disregarding the child who is in need of her affection and care.
(2) Death of the father and the presence of a stepfather who often disfavors the
   stepsons and stepdaughters.
(3) Death of the mother and the presence of a stepmother who often disfavors
   the stepsons and stepdaughters
(4) Dispute or discordance between parents as it distorts their attention to their


                                      - 56 -
   child. It becomes more harmful it divorce or separation puts end to it.
(5) Lack of a maintainer who takes care of the illegitimate child.
(6) Numerousness of children that exceeds the financial and sentimental capacity
   of parents preventing them from giving each child the due care.
(7) Ignorance of education methods on the part of parents.
(8) Illegitimate sexual relations of either parents, or both of them, with a stranger.


       These factors prevent the child from being nourished with the affection
that renders him affectionate toward others and the whole society in his future


* The active corruptive factor
       The bad example given by a deviate behavior of either parents or both of
them, setting a bad example and rationalizing bad habits such as addiction to
alcohol or narcotics or gambling, the provocation to delinquency or vagabondage.


       Both passive and active corruptive factors make the child abandon his
family to commit larceny. It could also make him wander in search of some body
who would love him better than his parents and thus he falls into the hands of
criminals who teach him the art of delinquency in order to deploy his in making
illegal profits.


2.2.2. School, Friendships and the Job
       If the child is unable to go to school due to his parents’ poverty, he tries
to learn manual labor under the supervision of a boss. He does the same if he
fails at school.


       It is untrue that evil friendships lead to evil inclinations. It is the evil
inclination that leads to evil friendships in the first place. Anyhow, if the criminal
latent criminal predisposition is left unguided and uneducated, an evil friendship
will aggravate it.



                                       - 57 -
2.2.3. Economic State
       Although criminals often belong to poor economic standards, poor and
honest people are still numerous. The rich also have their own criminality.


       If the poor person is affected by a criminal predisposition awakened by
envy from the rich, it and leads to delinquency. But envy does not, by itself,
produce delinquency. A poor person’s strong will and determination to become
rich could dominate and eliminate their sense of envy and hate towards the rich.


2.2.4. Widespread Beliefs
       In Egypt (especially Upper Egypt) and in many other countries such
as Southern Italy, there is a popular belief which necessitates retribution and
returning evil for evil.


       According to this belief, every killer must be killed by a male from the
victim’s family if this male is ready to do so. If he is of young age, his mother fills
his mind, since his childhood with his duty to avenge his relative’s death (father,
brother, cousin…etc).


       If the male, who is ready for vengeance, does not take his revenge, the
public despises him and doubts his manhood. Sometimes the family of the
victim denies that the killer ever murdered their family member (i.e. clearing
the murder’s name before the public authority themselves) in order exclude the
public authority from their family feud so that they may avenge the death of their
family member themselves.


       Another widespread belief in Upper Egypt is that of revenge against the
honor and virginity of the female. Females differ from males as regards the sexual
freedom. If a female looses her virginity without marriage, her act implicates a
breach against her family’s honor. Her father, her brother or her cousin could kill
her as well as her lover.


                                       - 58 -
      Taking into consideration such believes, we can say that they act as
stimulation of a latent criminal predisposition. In the case that this criminal
predisposition is not provoked into an actual crime, the above said believes
could simply produce an imaginative delinquency.


      Consequently, families exchange revenge against each other till the
complete death of all their males. That is why the public authority intervenes to
make peace and prevent these family feuds from taking over the role of the state
in crime punishment.


2.2.5. Mass Media
      Mass-media is any instrument of publicity for spreading knowledge be that
knowledge in writing (such as newspapers, magazines and books), heard (such
as radio broadcasting), or seen (such as television, cinema and theatre).


      These instruments of publicity are a strong source of autosuggestion when
it comes to young men and to those who are affected by a criminal predisposition.


      Any story, be it is based on real events or composed by literature, contains
a dark side, which is developed as part of social objective reality, and a good
side in harmony with human conscientiousness. Showing the horror of evil side
accentuates the goodness of the good side.


      The arrest and punishment of the evildoer at the end of the story is an
example of the story’s good side. Unfortunately, young men and the potential
delinquent stress upon the dark side of the story without meditating upon the
good side or the moral purpose or end that the story affirms.


Consequently, autosuggestion of delinquency occurs in
three forms.
(1) One form is based upon a deviation of moral conception either by giving to


                                     - 59 -
   crime the appearance of a just legitimate act of social struggle and heroism, or
   by considering the delinquent an innocent person and excusing him from his
   crimes because he was unable to predominate over an irresistible abnormal
   psychological state that is out of his will, or by demonstrating the easy profits
   he acquires as a result of his criminal of his authority, and his success with
   women who admire his criminal life style.
(2) A second form of autosuggestion is based upon a passionate love of fame.
   The vast diffusion of the criminal’s name and photography seduces potential
   criminals to commit the same act in order to obtain the same fame.
(3) A third form of autosuggestion is the perception of mistakes carelessly
   committed by the criminal in the execution of his crime and how the public
   authority succeeds in discovering the criminal because of these mistakes.
   This perception opens the mind of potential criminals in order to avoid such
   mistakes in the execution of their future crimes and therefore to elude justice
   by a more prudent criminal execution. In short, it stimulates the criminal
   thinking of the potential criminal towards the scheming of the perfect crime.


      The effects of news of suicide broadcaster through he press or
cinematography are worth mentioning. In fact, while suicide is an aggression
against oneself, homicide is an aggression against another person. Statistics
indicate that suicide acts are more numerous than homicide acts.


      If we analyze suicide we will find that it is the modification of the subject
of aggression, making oneself one’s own victim. The person who kills himself
punishes himself for another’s fault, instead of punishing the latter. But why he
does so? He knows that the great publicity given to suicide will transform great
numbers of the public into judges who will judge and condemn the person who
drove him/her to suicide.


      Young pubescent are more exposed to autosuggestion, because their
capacity of criticism is not mature enough. That is why they imitate what they


                                      - 60 -
see the television screen in real life..


       Potential delinquents too receive the autosuggestion of delinquency more
than anyone else, as the bad and corrupt sides of news and literature stories,
attract their attention rather than the good and moral sides.


       But just as the press, broadcasting and cinematography are necessary
to entertain people in their leisure time, and to renovate their energy, we cannot
submit their enjoyment to the condition of showing only the good and flowery
sides of life. Hence, the suggestive effects of mass media seem inevitable and
for this reason the State could not abolish them.


       All that can be done, is the sponsoring of such films before showing them,
and of articles before their publication. The state can also prohibit those under-
aged youths from viewing certain films.


2.2.6. Illiteracy and Instruction.
       We cannot claim that illiterates are evildoers nor can we claim that literate
persons are examples of probity.


       It is true that narrow-minded and illiterate persons could, in ignorance, fail
to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimacy acts.


       Moreover instruction could eliminate crimes that are committed due to the
ignorance of their perpetrator, whether this ignorance comes on the doer’s part
or on the victim’s part. For example an ignorant person could commit the crime
of rape being affected by the chimerical idea that such an act protects reassures
him against doubts of his impotency. Furthermore, ignorance could lead the
victim himself into crimes such one who is easily hustled out of his money due
to his ignorance.



                                           - 61 -
      Instruction, whatever its fruits may be, fills the mind with knowledge without
refining the feelings of the heart. As a matter of fact, instruction provides the mind
with theoretical knowledge about what is right and what is wrong, yet it does not
make the instructed person love all that is right and hate all that is wrong.


      Education addresses the mind while the instruction addresses the heart
and tries to generate and animate secondary noble instincts.


      When instruction is obtained by immoral persons, it widens their circle of
their delinquency and makes them innovate new forms of criminality. It allows
them to discover its methods and secrets.


      Edgar Moover, the manager of American Federal Investigation Bureau
gave two loud sounding examples of such persons in his book. Moran who
was a well known physician, helped Dillinger, the head of an American gang
of murderers, by healing the gunshot wounds of his gangsters at high prices,
making masks to disguise them, and altering the patterns of their finger prints for
the same purpose. He helped in the circulation of narcotics and stolen money.


      Mr. Piquett was the Attorney General in Chicago, and the legal counselor
of the killer Dillinger and his strongest secret partner who planned his escape
and hideout from the American police


      These two examples prove that instruction is often more dangerous than
ignorance. This is why, schools should spend equal efforts on both instruction
and education. Instruction is like a seed. It will produce good fruit if it is planted
in a good soil.


      But How can we explain the failure of the United States in the elimination
of delinquency in spite of the huge expenditures spent on instruction? The
diffusion of primary and secondary instruction led, on the contrary, to an increase


                                       - 62 -
of delinquency.


      Consequently, we can say that schools could not eliminate delinquency
on their own.


      In the past, the inclination to delinquency in students has been accompanied
by skipping school. But today school attendance is compulsory, instruction
became so even for young potential criminals who add to their dangerousness
by acquiring knowledge which they will abuse in the execution of their criminal
schemes.


      One could claim that delinquency is characterized by illiteracy and that
crimes are more frequent in illiterate regions and that there are more illiterate
criminals than educated criminals in prison.


      But this objection does not mean that ignorance is the motive of
delinquency because both ignorance and delinquency could be the product of
the same factor such as poverty, inherited defects or mental retardation.


      On the other hand statistics do not register all committed crimes because
many of crimes are covered and hidden by the more intelligent perpetrators.
These crimes represent what is called the “Dark number of statistics”.


      Professor Carrara says that prisoners learnt reading and writing in prison
and when they were released. They used this minimal instruction in writing letters
to threaten others in order to extort money from them.


      In short, we can say that culture provides the immoral person and the
latent criminal with the knowledge that would make him a more formidable threat
to society. A science without morals will produce horrible and ingenious crimes
that are harder to track. The criminal will always come up with a new scheme to


                                     - 63 -
execute, and even logically justify his crime before society.




                                     - 64 -
                              Chapter Five

                     The Dynamics of Crime

1. Dynamics of Crimes Against Property
      A larceny could be committed either accidentally or because of criminal
predisposition. This has been noticed in the field of juveniles.


      A child could steal a loaf of bread because of his hunger. He could also
commit “compensating larceny” as a reaction to a situation in which he feels
himself abandoned or in need of care. He could commit “consolatory larceny” in
a situation in which he feels himself victim of an injustice like being deprived of
toys that were given only to his brother or sister.


      Such larceny, if it is accidental, disappears with the growth of the child. But
if it derives from a criminal predisposition it will reappear in an advanced age.


      Even in the field of adults, larceny could be either be occasional or
constitutional.


      For example, in cases of war, mutiny or economic depression when
alimentary supply decreases, thefts could be committed either by occasional or
constitutional delinquents.


1.1. Difference Between Constitutional And Occasional
Delinquents
      Concerning crimes against property, the two groups differ from each other
from the following points of view:


(I) The constitutional delinquent does not hesitate before committing his
   crime even under ordinary and normal circumstances. He precipitates to


                                      - 65 -
   its commission under exceptional circumstances. On the other hand, the
   occasional delinquent, due to his secondary sublime instincts that balance
   his fundamental instincts, does not steal before undergoing a long and painful
   period of hesitation and a struggle against his conscience.
(II) The occasional delinquent finds it difficult to repeat his crime, while the
   constitutional delinquent repeats his crime easily and numerously.
(III) While the occasional delinquent feels repentance after the commission of
   his crime, the constitutional delinquent expresses delight and pride in his
   success in delinquency.


       In crimes against property, the criminal constitutional predisposition has
certain symptoms that reveal the abnormal quantity and quality of the instinctive
feelings relating to property instinct.


These symptoms are as follows:
(1) The personal belief that theft is permissible like any other legitimate job in
   society.
(2) The need for an easy source of revenue that enables him to satisfy his
   voluptuous desires which could not be satisfied through the income of a
   legitimate job.
(3) The firm belief that legitimate work is unable to satisfy the minimum life
   requirements.
(4) Adventurousness and love of gambling
(5) A feeling of delight and pleasure accompanies the execution of theft.
(6) Pride and dislike of begging.
(7) Incapability of enduring the physical and psychological effort that a legitimate
   occupation requires.


       The constitutional inclination to theft differs from pathologic theft known as
“Kleptomania” which means irresistible desire of theft. While the constitutional
thief uses the stolen profits to satisfy his needs, the kleptomaniac is obsessed


                                          - 66 -
by the idea of theft, which relieves him psychologically. He feels an irresistible
hunger for larceny. He steals even if he doesn’t need to steal. He may even
dispose of the stolen object instead of using it as the constitutional delinquent
does.


(IV) The constitutional inclination to theft could lead to armed robbery when the
   anomaly of the property instinct is added to an anomaly of offence-defense
   instinct too.


        Sometimes that inclination is specialized in certain kinds of crimes against
property such as the pickpocket who is specialized in picking pockets, the burglar
who is specialized in breaking and entering into houses and the armed robber
who is specialized in using violence to steal.


        Moreover, a delinquent specialized in one field of larceny despises his
fellow thief who is specialized in another field of larceny. An armed robber
despises the pickpocket and one who is specialized in robbery feels incapable
of embezzlement although both are two sides of the same coin which is larceny.


        An example of the latter is offered by a woman who was imprisoned for
thefts committed outside the house in which she worked as a maid. She was
incapable of committing larceny inside that house because she was honest
towards the jewels of her employer.


2. Dynamics of Crimes Against Persons
        These crimes are a result of a continuous or temporary preponderance of
abnormal quantity or quality of offence -defense instinct.


        The continuous preponderance of such anomaly means the missing or
the weakness of secondary sublime instinct and it gives rise to the constitutional
violent criminal.


                                       - 67 -
      The occasional violent criminal is endowed with a secondary noble instinct
that counteracts, the anomaly of fundamental instinct, but for a sudden exception
of an external factor, such as an offensive provocation, this balance between the
two instincts is interrupted and therefore that anomaly becomes the motive of a
criminal violent action.


2.1. Difference Between Constitutional and Occasional
Delinquents
      Concerning crimes against persons, we have to notice the following
differences between the two groups of violent criminals:


(1) The period of hesitation between the promoting and refraining power does
   not exist in the case of the constitutional violent crime, while it characterizes
   the accidental occasional violent crime.
(2) Trifle provocation awakens the constitutional violent delinquent and sometimes
   he commits his crime without any other reason than their violent inclination,
   but the factor which arouses the accidental occasional crime should be of a
   certain exceptional gravity.
(3) The occasional violent crime is always proportionate to its external motive,
   while the constitutional crime is exaggeratedly disproportionate to its motive.
   There was an incident in Egypt where a buyer fruits eviscerated the seller
   with his knife because the latter claimed a half piaster more than the price.
   Another example is that a savage constitutional killer drinks the blood of his
   victim or mutilates his corpse.
(4) The constitutional violent crime is followed by a sense of satisfaction while
   the occasional crime is followed by remorse and a sense of guilt that
   accompany the doer even after his condemnation or acquittal. While waiting
   for his sentence, the constitutional violent criminal can have a sensation of
   blameworthiness that disappears after his condemnation.




                                      - 68 -
3. The Animating Factors of Crimes Against Persons
      The criminal predisposition of violence (that is to say the abnormal quantity
and quality of offence-defense instinctive feeling) is awakened by the following
factors:


3.1. Vengeance
      There is an innate inclination to vengeance in mankind, even in children
and animals, namely a punishment inflicted in return of an injury or an offense.


      Someone thinks that this inclination derives from the feeling of internal
reaction against cruelty used towards the child by his father. But this is not the
origin of that inclination which is a residue of the primitive life preceding the
appearance of the State. In ancient times, the only means of self-defense, under
the disposal of individuals and tribes, was to prevent future damage by answering
to the perpetrator of actual harm with the infliction of an equal or more serious
damage to the wrongdoer. Thus, vengeance was not only a right but also a duty
namely a means of realizing self defense in relation to the future.


      Vindictive retaliation, namely returning evil with evil, explains the
persistence of vengeance until today. A vindictive person is usually proud, full of
self-esteem, and has a tendency to interpret the acts of others as offensive while
they are not so. He feels disturbed and until he takes his vengeance he remain
disturbed until it is taken, then he regains his quietness.


      A subculture of violence sometimes dominates young men. It makes them
carry knives. They think that violence is a courage and intrepidity. This drives
them to use these knives in a dispute.


3.2. Doing Evil For Love of Evil
      This tendency exists especially in women who delight in poisoning their
dishonest husbands. Such a malevolent woman feels maximum delight in


                                      - 69 -
poisoning and watching the symptoms of agony appears on her victim.


       There is also the man who suffers at the hands of others, and then,
consequently, he feels the tendency to make others suffer the same as he did.


3.3. Sexual Jealousy
       This jealousy is not only linked to sexual instinct. It has a connection with
the property instinct too, because it means the fear of loosing exclusive authority
over the beloved person.


       Jealousy is a residue of the absolute power that the head of Roman family
was exerting upon his wife a which was authorizing him to kill her, according to
Roman law.


       Till nowadays, the husband looks at his wife as a personal property that
does not enjoy any freedom. If looks at a handsome man other than him1 he
feels disturbed, and if she thinks in her way without blindly obeying him, he feels
irritated.


       This attitude contradicts the modern women liberation movement that
recognizes to the woman the exercise of her own personality and legitimate
freedom.


       On the other hand, jealousy does not mean love, because it is an abuse
of marital influence, unless it is founded on lads that really justify serious doubts.


       Real love is based upon mutual trust, exchange of ideas and sentiments,
truthfulness, reciprocated care, and spiritual affection. Sensuality in comparison
with affection must have a lower position.


       Reasonable jealousy as well as unjust one, drives to violence either of the


                                       - 70 -
husband towards his wife or the wife towards her husband, especially when it
awakens a latent criminal predisposition. It can lead even to homicide There is
an insane jealousy which is a kind of madness.


3.4. Feeling of a Physical or Psychological Inferiority
Complex
       When a person suffers a deformity or ugliness of a member of his body, he
imagines that others despise him. This imagination drives him to maltreat them
and generates his aggressiveness towards them.


       The same happens when a person suffers an idiocy and thinks that others
do not respect him


3.5. Pride and Delight in Seeing Fire
       Some persons are affected by a feeling of exaggerate self-esteem like
to attract others attention to themselves and enjoy seeing fire flames. They find
delight in burning and setting on fire.


       Emperor Nero, found a great pleasure in burning Rome and enjoyed
seeing its flames while he was playing his guitar.


4. Dynamics of Mass Delinquency
       Collective psychology cannot be separated from individual psychology.
Both the two explain masses delinquency. We have said that the choice of a
certain group to be inserted in, depends upon personal constitutional tendency If
one self-tendency is evil, it makes him choose evil companions and vice -versa.
To start a rebellion one must have a rebellious tendency


       Extremist persons form extremist groups. But a mere formation of a group
does not lead by itself to delinquency. In order to give rise to delinquency this group
must be dominated by a common revolutionary emotion because its members


                                          - 71 -
suffer together economic difficulties or participate in a political social struggle, or
protest against the decline of moral values. Then a collective consciousness of a
same suffering must unite the members gathered by the group, otherwise 4heir
assembly does not represent any dangerousness.


4.1. The Animating Factors of Mass Delinquency
4.2. Inclination to Aggression
       Each individual making part of the revolutionary group feels pushed by a
desire of assault that could produce even a homicide.


4.3. The Tendency to Imitate
       An individual affected by the same emotion of a group of which he takes
part, imitates the members of this group If all what they do with such a docility,
that he commits act of violence equal to their acts, and when afterwards he
separates himself from the group and regains his quietness, he wonders how
such acts emanated from him.


4.4. The Prevailing of Evil Spirit
       Revolutionary popular mass makes its members ten( to bad actions
instead of good deeds because it sensitize their fundamental instincts and
makes disappear the secondary sublime ones.


4.5. The Paralysis of Intelligence
       The intensity of emotion increases when those who feel it are more
numerous. That is why the members of delinquency and feel paralyzed their
intelligence in such a way that they kill whatever person tries to stop their action
even it he was in the beginning one of the instigators and felt the desire of
attenuating their extreme direction.


       A strange characteristic of revolutionary masses is that they become
dissipated because of trifles such as drops of a threatening rain


                                       - 72 -
4.6.The Bad Conditions of Life
       Bad conditions of life encourage the formation of revolutionary popular
groups. That is why government leaders must do their best always to improve
people’s conditions of life.


       Historical events prove that a people can venerate their leader and put
his photography inside houses. But after the surpassing of a crisis of social
and economic depression due perhaps even to misfortune his veneration is
transformed into contempt. Population then tears his photo and perhaps arrests
or even murders him.


       This happened in Italy in second world war while Germans and Americans
were occupying Italy and making war against each other, with great harms for
the Italians.


Either American bombs or German ones fell on the Italians, killed many of them and
devastated their belongings.


That is why the Italian people rebelled against Fascist government and its foreign policy
under the leadership of Mussolini. The latter was murdered by popular masses.


4.7.The Feeling of Omnipotence
       When a person takes part in a revolutionary group, he feels strong with
the other members collaborating with him and a certain feeling of omnipotence
dominates the whole group which thinks that it is insuperable. Each member
because of his union with others, imagines that nobody can overcome his group
or ask him account of what he does and therefore commits acts that he cannot
perpetrate when he is alone.


4.8.Presence of Elements That Facilitate Delinquency
       A revolutionary group gathers different persons among whom there are


                                        - 73 -
juveniles, women and constitutional criminals. Juveniles are easy instruments
in the hands of adults. They are their executive agents. They throw stones for
example obeying the order given to them by adults, break windows of buildings
as well as facades of shops, and hurt persons like the policemen.


      Women abandon themselves to violent emotions and commit acts which
are more horrible than those of men Constitutional delinquents who were released
at the time of rebellion join the revolutionary group and seize this occasion to
commit crimes such as devastation, pillage and burning.


      Criminal popular mass, looks like criminal gang from the point of view
that both the two contain an obeyed master called “incubus” and an obedient
subordinate called the “succubus”.


      But there are differences that distinguish a criminal popular mass from a
criminal gang.


      Members of a criminal popular mass, meet each other by accident without
necessary previous acquaintance. But the members of a gang are acquainted
with each other and selected by the chief gangster.


      On the other hand, one could not guess in advance the crimes to be
committed by a criminal popular mass.


      On the contrary gangs are characterized by the perpetration of certain
known crimes which represent their criminal specialization and are preceded by
traced plans.


5. Dynamics of Sexual Crimes
      We have yet spoken about quantitative and qualitative anomaly of sexual
instinct. This anomaly drives to crimes such as rape or obscene acts, when it


                                     - 74 -
is not balanced by sublime secondary instinct, namely when it forms a criminal
irresistible predisposition


      Even when secondary sublime instinct exists, the above said anomaly
such as sadism, masochism and fetishism leads to an imaginative delinquency
without concrete realization.




                                   - 75 -
                               Chapter Six

           The Source of The Causal Factor (Heredity)

      We have said that delinquency emanates from a causal factor that could
be accompanied by an animating factor.


      The causal factor, we repeat, is the preponderance of quantitative or
qualitative instinctive anomaly either permanently or accidentally, because of the
complete missing or the temporary defeat of sublime secondary instinct.


      We called such predominance “the criminal predisposition” and ‘causal
factor of delinquency’


      But what is the source of this causal factor or criminal predisposition?


      We are convinced that it comes from heredity and in addition from the fact
that inherited defects were left without education since the childhood.


1. Arguments in Support of Heredity
      American criminologists deny that heredity is the origin of criminal
predisposition. They think that this predisposition is the fruit of environmental
factors that surrounded the child until his growth.


      But we do not mean that crime itself is inherited, that a thief gives birth to
a thief or that a killer produces a son who is killer like him. What is inherited is
not the crime, but the mere tendency to it. This tendency could not be eradicated
Even if it is subject to education, it is counteracted without being exterminated.


      Children are not angles. Before that ambient affects them, you find among
them who is docile and who is stubborn, who is quiet and who is unquiet, who is


                                      - 76 -
egoist and who is altruist.


       This difference could not be explained unless by heredity.


       Heredity is the transmission of physical and psychological traits from
an ancestor to his descendant through procreation which occurs by means of
fecundation. Fecundation means the union of a male sperm and a female ovule.
This ovule produces a fetus that obtains nutrition from the mother’s body and
grows becoming within nine months at most a baby. It is evident that this baby
holds the characteristics of both the male and the female who gave birth to him
or to her.


       The baby’s features resemble to those of his or her parents, and he or she
has the same tastes of them and the same diseases.


       Heredity action is proved by the following arguments:


(1) Evidently it is the inherited inclination that guides the child to the choice of his
   human ambient. A good child is attracted by good companions. A wicked child
   likes and chooses the company of bad fellows. All people are exposed to the
   microbe of tuberculosis but only those who have a weak structure succumb
   to it and fall sick. Even after the dis7covery of bacteria, Pasteur said “Bernard
   is right, the microbe is nothing, the ground is all”.


       The microbe of tuberculosis resembles to the temptation of crime. The
strong chest which is refractory to this microbe represents the psychological
moral constitution impregnated with secondary sublime instinct that cannot yield
to crime temptation.


       The weak chest strengthened by vaccination is resists tuberculosis
microbe, as the fragile hereditary moral constitution fortified by education rejects


                                        - 77 -
the temptation of delinquency.


      But a criminal innate predisposition left since childhood without education
yields to crime temptation, as the weak chest left without vaccination surrenders
to tuberculosis microbe.


      Hereditary inclination to crime does not lead inevitably to it, because it
can be neutralized by education, so that no crime emanates from it, although its
complete elimination is impossible.


      Hence hereditary inclination to crime does not mean inevitability of crime,
but the inheritance of a ground that is favorable to its occurrence.


(2) Italian scientist Margugho submitted       to   the international congress of
   criminology held in Rome on 1938 a case which proves heredity action. It
   was the case of a boy aged twelve years who was living since his birth with
   his mother, his stepfather and stepsons. His family ambient was of high
   morality. Nevertheless, he was different from his stepbrothers who were
   educated because he was undisciplined, inclined to theft and to the use of
   stolen money in gambling. Investigations discovered that this boy was the
   fruit of an illegitimate love relation between his mother and a robber released
   from prison after the death of her first husband and before her marriage with
   the second one.
(3) The twins, who derive from one ovum that was divided into two parts after
   fecundation, resemble to each other in physical and psychological traits as
   if they were the right part and the left part of one person. Each one has the
   same tendency of the other even if it is an inclination to a crime. Each one
   is in accordance with the other as regards the criminal inclination, the time
   namely the age of its apparition1 the kind of crime it leads to, the method of
   execution of this crime, its gravity and the occurrence of recidivism.



                                      - 78 -
       The accordance between these twins remains in relation to their
fundamental instincts even when they grow in different ambience. This fact could
not be explained unless by heredity,


(4) Experience shows that criminals belong to families of criminals. The
   explanation of this reality is the fact that no woman accepts the marriage with
   a delinquent, unless she is member of his family and one of his relatives. It is
   well known that the marriage between relatives transmits the defect affecting
   the husband or the wife to their descendant.


       Then this defect appears in the descendant in a state which is worse than
that in which it was in the ancestor.


       But in order that this marriage gives birth to a weak and defective
descendant one at least of the parents must have a defect, otherwise it does not
lead to this effect. The Pharaohs’ families in ancient Egypt used to make a sister
marry with her brother without producing a weak descendant because neither
the sister nor the brother was having a defect.


       Then delinquency as a defect is inherited as inclination from ancestors
who were delinquent relatives.


       Dugdale gave an example proving heredity, of a family produced by a
drunken husband fond of women called Max Juke and a wife who was a thief
called Ada Yalkes. Both were born on 1720. Seven successive generations
emanating from this family contained 76 delinquents, 142 vagabonds, 128
prostitutes, 91 illegitimate children, 131 impotent idiots and mentally sick and
46 sterile.


       This family cost many millions of dollars that the budget of the State spent
in courts, prisons and hospitals.


                                        - 79 -
      Inherited criminal predisposition consists of a quantitative or qualitative
instinctive anomaly as we said. It could be either of certain or uncertain direction
as regards the crime to which it leads.


      Heredity could be direct from a father to his son, or indirect when two or
more generations separate the heir from his ancestor.


2. Identical and Similar Heredity
      It could be identical heredity or similar heredity. Identical heredity means
the inheritance of the same trait existing in the ancestor, for example when both
the heir and his ancestor are killers, thieves or embezzlers.


      Similar heredity means that the heir does not receive the same trait of his
ancestor but a similar one, for example when an ancestor who is mad, epileptic
or drunk has as successor one who has not the same defect as his, but the
defect of delinquency.


      The same heredity is that which a delinquent has as successor a prostitute,
or an insane. An epileptic ancestor can have as successor a precipitate.


3. Heredity and The Pre-Pregnancy Period
      The action of heredity is terminated by fecundation Hence, the factors
affecting the fetus other than heredity are called prenatal factors. These factors
could be concomitant with fecundation or successive to pregnancy.


      The following factors could accompany the fecundation and give rise to a
defective baby.


(1) The bodily or psychological exhaustion of both the husband and his wife or of
   one of them.
(2) The pregnancy before the age of twenty years or after the age of forty five, or


                                      - 80 -
   when there is great difference of age between the husband and his wife.
(3) The pregnancy occurring while both the Husband and his wife or one of them
   is drunken.


The drunkenness of the father is more harmful than that of the mother, because
   alcohol damages the sperm more than the ovum.


(4) The pregnancy during war or after war.


4. Heredity During Pregnancy
      If the wife becomes drunk during her alcohol poisons the fetus and leads
to his death. In such a case, the proportion of alcohol in the blood of the fetus
was found equal to its proportion in the blood of the mother.


      When pregnancy occurs while one of the parents is drunk, it leads to the
death of the born child at an early age, and even when the child lives till his
growth, he could not resist against some diseases like tuberculosis and he could
be delinquent, idiot or epileptic.


      Drugs have the same harmful effects of alcohol. If the parents consume
drugs such as cocaine and morphine before the intercourse, these drugs damage
the fetus. Even after the birth of the child his contact with parents who are addict
to drugs, produces bad effects on his character.


      There are factors which harm the fetus during pregnancy. They are:


(1) The profound psychological depression of the pregnant, whatever is its
   cause.
(2) The state of great panic such as accompanies the explosion of bombs.


      Any disturbance of the pregnant woman’s peace produces harmful effects


                                      - 81 -
on her pulse, her respiration, her blood circulation and her glandular secretion.
These effects harm the fetus and could cause an abortion or a birth before its
normal time.


       If this does not happen, the physiological organic changes in the body of
the pregnant exert a bad influence on the physical and psychological formation
of the child.


       The panic and economic depression that dominate during the war give
birth to those who are called in Europe “sons of blockade”, “sons of bombs
attack” or “sons of panic”.


(3) Severe blows on the abdomen of pregnant woman could harm the psychological or
   bodily formation of her child.




                                     - 82 -
                              Chapter Seven

          Methods Of Research In Criminology

       We have said that criminology is subdivided into three min branches which
are criminal anthropology, criminal sociology and criminal psychopathology.


1. Criminal Psychopathology
       As criminal psychopathology deals with the madness which produces
delinquency, and this branch belongs to medical science, we shall not study
it although it gives us certain data that could clarify the delinquency of same
persons too. As a matter of fact, madness is an enlarged figure of what exists, in
minimized one, with ordinary persons.


       We have seen that criminal anthropology employs as method of research,
the medical examination either of the body internally and externally or of the
psyche.


       In addition to medical examination it needs social investigation to determine
the delinquents precedents in his family, at school and during his military service.


       Social investigation indicates also if there delinquents or sick persons
among his relatives.


       Moreover, the delinquent’s file of inquiry must be studied to answer, as
Professor Soelig says, to the following seven interrogations who, what, where,
by what, for what, How and when.


These interrogations mean respectively, the following:


(1) The victim (who) could have had a part with which he contributed to the


                                        - 83 -
   occurrence of the crime and which could be taken into consideration in the
   evaluation of the doer’s dangerousness.
(2) The object of the crime (what) could have had a characteristic that facilitated
   the commission of the crime, such as its smallness that makes easy its
   hiding (like jewels for example), or its being exhibited in such a way that
   demonstrates its value and tempts others to take it, or its abundance in a
   store, or its importance from the economic point of view like ailments in time
   of crisis and cash money in times of monetary stability.
(3) The place of the crime (where) could have been deserted or badly illuminated
   or easily accessible, hence it facilitated the commission and hiding of the
   crime.
(4) The means of executing the crime (by what) could have been a poniard, a
   revolver or an instrument for fracture, etc. The inquiry indicates its kind, how
   the doer obtained it, its efficiency, and his capability of using it.
(5) The motive of the crime (for what) is indicated by the inquiry which
   demonstrates the instinctive origin of it.
(6) The modalities of crime execution (how) mean the situation in which the doer
   committed his crime. Such situation could invite the doer to commit it, like
   finding a purse of money in a deserted place or receiving from the bank by
   mistake an undue banknote on the occasion of reimbursing a check, or the
   fall of a testament in the hands of the testator’s son who discovers that his
   father gave in favor of his female lover a great donation. The first and second
   situation induce to a theft and the third drives to a destruction.


      These situations generate, in occasion of committing a crime.


      In other cases the occasion of generated by the doer himself, breaking
into a house to steal.


      But sometimes, the situation is neither inviting nor created by the doer, but
it is intermediate namely inviting and created in the same time. An example of


                                       - 84 -
such situation is the mass mutiny as it is an inviting occasion and a created one.
The evildoers seize this occasion to commit pillage and destruction.


(7) At last the time in which the crime was committed, and whether it was
   nighttime or day time, is an important element in the evaluation of the doer’s
   dangerousness.


      In conclusion, the methods of research in criminal anthropology are: the
medical examination the social investigation and the study of inquiry tile.


      In criminal sociology, the methods of research is the statistics by means
of which the relationship between delinquency and the other social phenomena
is measured.


      This measurement of social phenomena is accomplished by counting,
while the measurement of physical phenomena is achieved by units of length,
weight temperature etc. Counting is the means by which the measuring of human
phenomena approaches to the exactness of measuring physical ones.


      We mean by counting, the proportion of delinquents in each category of
individuals characterized by every social phenomenon such as bachelorhood
and marriage, poverty and richness, urban life and rural one, high and low social
class…etc


2. Criminal Sociology
      we have treated the criminal anthropology and now we treat the second
category of criminology which is criminal sociology.


      Concerning criminal sociology, we approach the relation between
delinquency and other numerous social phenomena. They are as follows:



                                     - 85 -
(1) The economic state
(2) The social Class
(3) The degree of civilization
(4) The kind of life
(5) The kind of job
(6) The civil status
(7) The war and post-war period
(8) Industrialization


       In this study we shall suffice with the first Four points.


2.1. The Economic State
       Both general welfare and general economic depression lead to delinquency
as they animate the criminal predisposition.


       Rich men are deprived of this predisposition because they often spend
their time in entertainment and leisure, which distracts them from employing their
riches in useful enterprises.


       On the other hand, poverty could lead the poor person to commit the crime
of armed robbery in order to get the Rich’s money.


       As a matter of fact, organized criminal associations, such as the Mafia,
commit their crimes in under any economic circumstances.


       But, in order to identify the impact of the economic state on the behavior
of people, the population should be divided into economic degrees, to determine
the proportion of delinquents in each degree. Each degree could be divided into
groups containing each ten thousand individuals for example


       A sign of economic graduation, could be the number of persons sleeping


                                       - 86 -
in one room. If the family is characterized by the fact, that in each room a single
person sleeps, this means that it is in an economic prosper6us state. If two sleep
in each room, this means that the family is less prosperous, and so on.


      The fiscal situation is also a sign of economic state. Those who are
exonerated from the payment of fiscal d6ties represent a section of poverty.


      Those who pay these duties could be divided into economic sections
according to the amount which they pay.


      The research should not be limited to prisoners, but it must be extended to
the whole population if you find among prisoners of a village five rich delinquents
and twenty poor ones, this could mean seemingly that poor persons are more
delinquent than rich ones, but this significance will be completely changed if all
rich persons in the village are ten and all poor persons are hundred. Then the
proportion of delinquents among rich men considered globally arrives at fifty
percent while it does not exceed as regards poor men, twenty percent. This
example proves that the concentration of the research in the field of prisons
leads to erroneous results.


      Therefore, the right method of statistics is the division of the entire
population into graduated sections, according to the economic state and the
age too. Each section is composed of individuals having the same age and the
same economic state. The delinquents of the same age and economic state are
referred to their section to determine their proportion that could be expressed in
relation to thousand or ten thousand persons. In this way


      We can compare between the different economic sections as regards the
extent of delinquency in each.


      Evidently, the population is a mixture of different ages, and if delinquency


                                      - 87 -
is referred to its entirety, there will be a confusion between the effect of different
ages and that of the social phenomenon in question. In order to isolate the effect
of age and to maintain only that of the social phenomenon the different economic
sections should be divided into the different ages to discover separately the
effect of economic states.


       We have seen that delinquency increases in juvenile ages and decreases
with the advance in age.


       The connection between delinquency and economic state is in need of
clarification locally and universally.


       We have explained the statistical way of resolving this problem and we
propose to take this way in different countries in the same time and in different
times in the same country. As reality is the same, everywhere comparative
investigations confirm it or contribute to its discovery.


       Professor Niceforo assimilates the temptation of crimes against property
to the magnet.


       The population exposed to this temptation is assimilated by him to the
scrapings which are subject to the attraction of the magnet.


       Those who are refractory to the temptation of crime correspond to the
wooden scraping that the magnet is unable to attract.


       Those who succumb easily to that temptation correspond to the metallic
scraping that the magnet attracts instantaneously.


But if a violent storm blows, it pushes by force to the magnet even the wooden scraping
as the exceptional circumstances of crises lead the ordinary man to the commission of


                                         - 88 -
an occasional crime.


2.2. Social Class
      The social class is the synthesis of culture, richness and job combined
together. It is the fruit of interaction between these three elements. One of these
elements which is richness has been studied in isolation as regards its relation
with delinquency Culture has been studied also in its connection with delinquency
when we spoke about instruction and illiteracy. The relation between job and
delinquency could be studied separately too.


      But now we face the social class as the combination in each person of
those three elements.


      A person of high culture could be of high job but of low richness. Another
who is excessively rich could be of low culture (and perhaps could be illiterate)
and of low job.


      Jobs are always of equal usefulness to society but they are not of the
same rank because they differ from each other as regards the requisites of their
exercise and the skill they require.


      From this point of view, a janitor has a low job in comparison with a
surgeon.


2.2.1. The Relation Between Social Class and human Behavior
(1) The measurement of physical capacities: The physical capacities of the individuals
   of high, intermediate and low social classes, in the different phases of age,
   demonstrated that the average of these capacities is higher in high classes
   than it is in low ones, and that the defectives of body and mind are higher in
   low classes than they are in high ones. For example the height of stature, the
   dimensions of the head, the weight of the body, the muscular power and the


                                       - 89 -
   power of lungs-which are bodily characteristics-have in the individuals of a low
   class and a certain age. An average which is lower than that characterizing
   the individuals of the same number and age belonging to a high class.
(2) The measurement of psychological capacities: Psychological capacities are
   measured by IQ (Intelligence Quotient) tests, the same result appeared. The
   field of such measurement is composed of the pupils at schools, the young
   men in military service, the inhabitants of poor districts in comparison with
   those of rich districts, the families of simple workers in comparison with those
   of specialized workers.


      On the other hand, the same measurement indicated that the number of
defectives of body and mind are more numerous in low classes than in high ones,
and that the number of endowed persons is more numerous in high classes than
in low ones.


      This means that defective persons exist in all classes but their number is
more in low classes than in high ones.


      The explanation of this phenomenon is that the continuous pressure of
poverty (as lack of richness) of narrow mind (as lack of culture) and of abject job
(as lack of a high one), causes from generation to generation, the submission to
a big burden of misery, unsanitary dueling, bad nutrition and lack of readiness
to listen to morality stimulants, and all these factors produce a weak body, an
irritated soul, a tendency to violence and an obscuration of morality sense.


      The continuousness of these adverse factors through the time gives birth
to physical and psychological defects in the descendants.


      Therefore, the weight of the born child as well as the length of his body
for example depend of his mother’s social class, her health, and her quiet or
troubled pregnancy.


                                     - 90 -
2.2.2. The Results of this Relation
(a) As the material gain of a person deprived of richness depends upon his
   bodily and psychological capacities, the defective person of body and mind
   has less gain than that of a same person.
(b) Experience proved that the unemployed persons in normal times, contain
   many defectives of body and mind. The unemployment of such persons is not
   due to what is called “bad luck”, but it is the result of a bodily and psychological
   disability of work.
(c) Mendel examined the case of eighty-five vagabonds in Berlin and he found
   six of them mentally retarded, five defectives, eight epileptics and fifty two
   mentally disturbed.
(d) In order to clarify the relation between delinquency and social class, we have
   to remember the distinction between the constitutional delinquent and the
   occasional one.


      The constitutional delinquent as we said, commits his crime because of
the permanent preponderance of his fundamental instincts, while the occasional
delinquent falls in delinquency because of an accidental prevailing of them.


      The criminal constitution could have existence in a rich person as well as
in a poor one, in an instructed person as well as in an ignorant one, in one who
has a high job as well as in one whose job is low.


      The same is true, as regards the occasional criminality too.


      The secondary sublime instincts could be either innate or acquired by
means of education.


      But the state of poverty, ignorance and abject job makes the person so
engaged in seeking the satisfaction of his life requirements, that he cannot listen
to any preachment and therefore he could not acquire any secondary sublime


                                       - 91 -
instinct.


       On the other hand, the comparison that he makes between himself and
the individuals of high class generates his envy.


       We repeat here the same remark which we have made as regards the
economic state. The research of the relation between the social class and
delinquency did not yet reach the exactness of scientific method. As a matter
of fact, this method requires the division of the people into classes according to
the degree of richness, culture and job, and the determination of the proportion
between the number of delinquents in each social class and the whole number of
its members. In addition, the kind of crimes committed by the members of each
social class should be indicated. But this scientific research has not yet been
undertaken all over the world.


       Nevertheless it is incontestable that the members of low social class are
not all of them delinquents. Among these members, there are those who are
endowed with physical and psychological gifts, listen to morality stimulants and
therefore they become rich after poverty cultured after ignorance, and ascend
to a high job.


       On the contrary, those who belong to a high social class but are defective
of body and mind descend to a lower class, because of their expenditure and
carelessness.


       This phenomenon is called “the ascending and descending” between
social classes, and it is characterized by secrecy and graduation. it is neither
patent nor sudden and it is very useful to human society and it is the fruit of the
natural low called “survival for the fittest”.


       Such movement of ascending and descending operates permanently but


                                        - 92 -
it could be harmful to human society if it acts in an unnatural way by being very
slow or very precipitate.


       Its slowness leads to the accumulation of defectives in high classes and
of endowed in low classes.


       Its speed makes ascend to a high class persons who should remain in
their low class, or makes descend to a low class those who should remain in their
high class. In both cases, social peace and progress requirements are violated.


2.2.3. The Conflict Between Classes
       The Italian scientist Professor Niceforo says that envy makes the man
suffer the sight of others richness more than suffering his own poverty, that the
envious man makes a comparison between himself and those who are in a
better condition than his, hence he hopes the fall of that condition even if this fall
doesn’t implicate any improvement of his own condition.


       Moreover, he gives the following details as consequences of his right
principle saying that:


(a) Each group that finds itself in a bad condition in comparison with the condition
   of another one claims rights it pretends that they are essential and were
   enjoyed by the other group since long time. When it obtains these rights it
   claims another ones and so on.
(b) The continuous claiming of rights is due to a psychological factor that dominates the
   behavior of individuals and groups and it is the fact that each goal when it is
   attained, looses the brilliance it was having in the eyes of who was trying to
   reach it and seems in its reality less than what it was in the imagination of who
   was searching it. This phenomenon is, called the “deceit of desires”.


       Moreover, a natural trait of mankind is the instability of desires. When a


                                        - 93 -
man obtains a gain, he continues his struggle to reach another and so on.


(c) When the group obtains rights of which it was while a another deprived group
   was enjoying them, it tends to be completely equal to that other group in all its
   rights, but this equality does not satisfy it as it continues its struggle to prevail
   upon other groups.
(d) Then each group hates any other which is in a better condition than its one,
   the miserable find their delight in seeing all others miserable like them without
   considering that this delight does not change their own miserable condition.
   They want to see all others unlucky like them instead of searching luck for
   themselves.


      This is the secret of sufferance in society, because envy generates
sanguineous battles and criminal actions.


(e) As each group tends to prevail upon the others, it employs slogans having
   the appearance of being noble while they hide personal ambitions that have
   nothing to do with public interest. But each group commits actions that were
   blameful in its opinion when they emanated from other groups.


      This fact, according to Professor Niceforo, explains not only delinquency
but also the political history of populations.


      Each nation passes from dictatorship, to the autocracy of a. certain number
of masters, to the democracy, and each form of government leads because of its
abuse to the other one in a vicious circle. As Machiavelli says good follows evil
and evil follows good incessantly.


      Professor Niceforo denies that he is pessimist and says that human life
goes on so.



                                       - 94 -
      To clarify the relation between social class and delinquency whether in
its’ quantity or quality, a statistical research should be done, dividing into social
classes the whole population, and indicating the proportion of delinquents in
each class.


2.2.4. The Role of Culture, The Job and The Financial Status
      Taking culture as basis of statistics, the number of illiterates, should be
determined as well as that of those who read and write according to each of
instruction degrees.


      Taking the job as basis of statistics, the number of managers should be
determined as well as that of subordinates.


      Taking the financial status as basis of statistics, the population should be
divided into sections according to the amount of fiscal duties paid.


      These three elements should be joined with each other to draw the division
of individuals into social classes. But we have to notice that those who occupy
subordinate jobs are young men while those who are managers are of advanced
age. We know that delinquency flourish between young men and decreases in
old ages. Hence if we find delinquency more numerous among subordinates than
among managers, this could be explained by the effect of age independently
from social class. To obtain exact results about the influence of social classes,
these should be divided according to the age.


      After the above said division statistics should show the number of
delinquents among the whole members of each social class and draw the
proportion of delinquents in each class and the kind of crime committed by it.


      Such scientific research is not yet undertaken all over the world.
Notwithstanding, it has been noticed that the quantity of delinquency is greater


                                       - 95 -
in low classes than in high classes and that delinquency is characterized by
violence in low classes and by deceit in high classes.


      The member of a low class, affected by a criminal predisposition, commit
homicide, assault, arson and armed robbery, while those of high classes, when
they are affected by criminal predisposition commit embezzlement and hustling.


      Someone says that delinquency seems of an apparently greater number
in low classes than in high one because members of high classes succeed in
hiding the crime after its commission and in a voiding conviction when they are
put in trail because of their personal influence and their possibility of charging
great advocates for the defense of themselves.


      But Professor Niceforo explains the success of high classes in eluding
justice, saying that they are more clever and intelligent than the members of low
classes and that their prosper condition enables them to commit deeds that are
not crimes but are more dangerous and wicked than crimes.


      Some writers explained the prevailing of violence in the criminality of
low classes by saying that these classes correspond to humanity in its ancient
primitive state which was characterized by violence. But we can admit that
violence could prevail even in modern societies during certain periods of crisis.


      That is why Professor Niceforo finds the explanation of that phenomenon
in the feeling of envy that dominates them towards high classes.


      From what the above, we draw the conclusion that each miserable person
should straggle to obtain wealth instead of hoping the misery of wealthy persons.


2.3. The Degree of Civilization
      Civilization means the people’s standard of living as regards its material,


                                     - 96 -
intellectual, moral, political and social life.


       Hence civilization could be material, intellectual moral, political or social.


       Material civilization consists of material instruments that make life more
comfortable for human beings.


       For example, in the past, men were using in transport donkeys and horses,
but now they use motorcars and airplanes. The ladies were washing their clothes
by their hands, but now they use washing machines.


       The degree of material civilization differs from a country to another and
from a region to another in the same country.


       In some countries like the United States, there is nearly a motorcycle for
each individual or at least for each family. But in other countries there could be a
motorcar for each hundred individuals or fifty.


       The material civilization of the southern part of a country could be less
than it is in its northern part.


       As a matter of fact material civilization, has been progressive and continues
to be so with the discovery of new inventions and it could be represented in the
graphic by an ascendant line.


2.3.1. The Effect of The Material Progress of Civilization
on The Quantity And Quality of Delinquency
(a) “Intellectual civilization” means the people’s standard of culture. In order to
   measure this civilization, there are many Signs that could be subject to the
   statistics aiming at that measurement. In Italy, for example one of such signs
   is the number of spouses who signed their contracts of marriage, in each


                                         - 97 -
   hundred contracts.


      It is easy to establish the proportion of illiterates in the population, as well
as the proportion of those who can read and write, those who achieved their
primary study, those who obtained the preparatory certificate, those who have
the secondary Certificate, those who have a university degree, those who have
a Ph.D. degree, and the proportion of each group in the whole population.


(b) “Moral civilization” can be measured by the quantity and quality of crimes
   committed, the number of civil cases submitted to the courts, and the
   proportion of each number in relation to the whole population.
(c) “Political civilization” means the system of election and the part it gives to the
   people in the government of itself.
(d) “Social civilization” means the methods followed by the people in spending its
   leisure time.


      It can be measured by the number of songs, poems and prose, works of
art, newspapers and magazines, plays in theatres, films showed on the television
and cinema, music concerts and sport competitions.


2.3.2. Observation
      As regards the civilization, Professor Niceforo gives the following
statements:


(1) There was a progress in the material civilization because of the previous
   inventions and of those which are expected in the future. This progress does
   not consist of creations. It consisted and will consist of discoveries which
   reveal more secrets of the creation and new ways of drawing advantage from
   them.


      The intellectual civilization was and will be progressive through the


                                       - 98 -
expansion of instruction and knowledge.


      Both the material and intellectual civilization could be represented in the
graphic by an ascendant line.


      But no progress has been registered neither in the moral civilization nor in
the political or social progress.


      The moral civilization did not extend itself along the time because wicked
persons existed in the past and will remain and even increase in modern times.


      The political civilization of humanity did not realize any progress because all
forms of government have been practiced: dictatorship, democracy, communism
and socialism.


      The social civilization in all its signs existed since ancient times. There
have been music, poetry, prose, legends theatres, songs. The radio, the cinema
and the television belong to material civilization as new instruments of extending
news and knowledge.


      Therefore, moral, political and social civilization could be represented in
the graphic by a horizontal line.


(2) If it is illusive to say that the progress of civilization delimits delinquency,
   it would be more erroneous to say that this progress leads to its complete
   suppression.
(3) The progress of material civilization, such as improvements of material
   instruments of comfort, appeared especially between the end of the
   nineteenth century and the beginning of twentieth century and was called
   modern civilization. But it did not spread over all countries or all regions of
   each country or all citizens of each, as it was enjoyed only by high classes of


                                      - 99 -
   the people.
(4) Even in the field which attained the material civilization, delinquency was
   neither suppressed nor diminished. All what happened was the transformation
   of violent crimes into deceit ones, as persons used in their delinquency their
   minds instead of their bodies.
(5) Such transformation of delinquency into deceit crimes is not always constant. It
   can be interrupted by periods of relapse in which violent criminality reappears
   and dominates.


       By following political evolutions in the history of nations and their effect on
delinquency, the following phenomenon came out, namely the fact that the acts
which are criminal by nature, prevail delicta mala in se unless the government
is autocratic, because the acts which are considered crimes then, are not so
by nature but only because they were prohibited by the law delicta mala quia
prohibit.


(7) The modern civilization accelerated the ingress of young men in the campaign
   of social practical life, therefore the juvenile delinquency and the acts of
   suicide increased.


Moreover, as women abandoned their homes and were obliged by the struggle for life to
do the same work of men, women delinquency increased too.


(8) Whatever can be the progress of material and intellectual civilization,
   no progress is expected in the field of moral civilization. Men appear in
   concordance while each of them is for his fellow a wolf. Homo homini lupus.
   Their interests are always in conflict. They are dominated sometimes by a
   feeling of contentment and sometimes by a feeling of discontent. They are
   always divided into two categories, one is high and contains the fortunate
   persons, and other is low and contains the unfortunate.



                                       - 100 -
      Envy flourishes between the two categories. That is how the relations
between men, go on, in all times and places.


      People in society are submitted to the law of forest according to which it is
unexpected that a wolf dwells in peace with a lamb habitabit lupus cum agno, or
that a tiger lies together with a male sheep pardus cum haedo accubabit


2.4. The Kind of Life
      We mean by the kind of life whether the life goes on in a town or in a
country, namely whether it is urban or rural.


      We indicate now the ways followed for the distinction between urban life
and rural one.


(a) The first way is the classification of administration centers according to the
   number of their inhabitants. If the inhabitants of the center are less than five
   thousands it is considered rural, while the centers the inhabitants of which are
   more than five thousands are considered urban.
(b) The second way is the study of the economy of each center. If it is based
   upon agriculture, the center is considered rural, and if it relies upon industry,
   the center is considered urban.
(c) The third way is to consider urban the capital of each administrative center
   and rural the regions other than the capital.
(d) The fourth way is to count the number of persons occupied by agriculture in
   each center to determine their proportion in relation to the whole number of
   its inhabitants and to consider the center rural when this proportion reaches
   a certain limit and urban when it is beneath this limit.


2.4.1. Statistics
      As regards the statistics indicating the relation between the kind of life and
the quantity and quality of delinquency two methods could be followed: one takes


                                      - 101 -
into consideration the individuals and the other takes into account the places.


      The first method indicates the proportion of delinquents among those who
are occupied by agriculture and the same proportion among those who have
other occupation.


      The second method determines the proportion delinquency in the urban
centers and in the rural ones.


      We mean by the proportion in the first method the number of delinquents in
each hundred thousand farmers and the number of delinquents in each hundred
thousand.


      The Italian statistics indicated too that the quantity of delinquency is greater
in the capitals of administrative provinces than in the rest of their parts, that it
is more numerous in industrial centers than in agricultural ones, and that the
prevailing delinquency in the towns is the deceit crime while it is in the country
the violent crime.


      Then the number of crimes committed in the town is greater than it is in
the country.


      Ancient researchers noticed that when wealth increases suddenly in
rural regions, the number of offences against property augments. For example
Joly says that as soon as poor farmers transformed the arid lands into fields
of grape, and the prices of agriculture products were raised, because of the
installation of railways those farmers began to long for others’ property, looking
like who frequented once the bourse and won, then his only worry became how
he obtains much more money.


      We allude now to the theory of the French Professor Tarde, called the


                                      - 102 -
“economic cycle”. According to him, delinquency is not due neither to poverty nor
to wealth, but to the sudden descend to poverty or to the sudden ascendance to
wealth. He says that the economic life of individuals and societies passes through
three phases: a phase of imitation and repetition, a phase of insurgence and
uprising (namely of imitation in the opposite sense) and a phase of conformity
and uniformity. In the first and third phase of economic life, the individual does
not find a motive to deviate from the natural behavior.


       But when the second phase emerges, his deviation takes place.
Whenever a new need arises and interrupts the habitual going on of conformity
and uniformity phase, because of the appearance of a new invented article or of
a new kind of work, a momentary and unavoidable rupture of that phase occurs
and originates a momentary economic distress which leads to criminal actions.


       Therefore in order to maintain individuals and societies in good moral
health, the stability of economic conditions as regards production. and
consumption is required.


2.4.2. Urban And Country Societies
       We have to remark that for the exactness of statistics concerning the effect
of the kind of life on delinquency, the inhabitants of the town and the country
should be divided according to the age, so that the age does not obstruct the
revelation of the influence exerted on delinquency by the kind of life is considered
in isolation.


       Now let us explain why the quantity of crimes in the town, is greater than it
is in the country. There are three opinions that give this explanation.


       One opinion explains that phenomenon saying that the police are more
alert and active in the town than in the country.



                                      - 103 -
      Another opinion explains it saying that the inhabitants of the town are
heterogeneous while those of the village are homogeneous. Those of the town
embrace immigrants from the country who are in search of work, beggars,
professional criminals. These live in the underworld that does not exist in villages.


      A third opinion stresses upon the difference between the inhabitants of the
town and those of the village, in relation to their psychological traits.


      Countrymen differ from townsmen as regards the psychology and we
mean by countrymen the owners of small land properties and the exploiters by
means of crops sharing.


      These countrymen are characterized by the following traits:


(a) Patience and forbearance.
      As a matter of fact, the cultivation, plantation and irrigation of the soil
make the peasant give time to time. He ploughs the soil, spreads the fertilizer,
disseminates the seeds, irrigates and waits till the plant appears grows and gives
its fruits, then he is occupied by gathering the harvest. That is why the peasant
does not feel annoyance.


(b) Conservation. avariciousness and opposition to change
      The peasant is linked by ancient habits and traditions. He is attached to
his soil, desirous to increase its area even with an acre. For this desire, he is
a miser and exaggerates in saving. He dislikes politics and he uses ancient
methods of cultivation and he is very slow in adopting new modern and useful
methods.


(c) The affection for the most useful son
      The peasant considers his family as an economic and productive unit. He
feels the most affection for the most laborious of his sons.


                                       - 104 -
(d) Isolation and lack of contact
      The peasant remains in his field far from his neighbor’s one. The cultivation
of his soil takes up all of his time that he has no time to get in contact with others
and from the denunciation of committed thefts.


      On the contrary, townsmen are always in contact with each other and they
care about reporting any theft as soon as it is committed.


      Nevertheless, the contact of a townsman with others dissipates usually any
evil intention which emerges in his soul, while the lack of contact characterizing
the countryman contributes to long meditations and to the fermentation of evil
intentions. This is why violence is much more frequent on the side of countrymen
than on the side of townsmen.


      After having explained why delinquency is less in the country than it is in
the town, we face now the explanation of its increment in the town.


      Professor Niceforo alludes in this connection to the existence in great
towns of an underworld that lodges vagrants, beggars and criminals. Such
underworld does not exist in villages.


2.4.3. The Increase in Urban Crime and its Factors
(1) The first factor is the accumulation and agglomeration of persons in the abject
   districts of the town. A young man who is in company with others commits
   crimes that he is unable to perpetrate alone.
(2) The second factor is the attractions the nightclubs and the charms of the city
   as they induce many countrymen to the exodus from the country to the city.
   They are different from other ones, because their ambitions are not limited by
   the narrow career of agricultural soils and they are agitated by the desire of
   adventure in search of new things. As they come to the city, their sort depends
   upon their personal ability. Some of them ascend to the top of society and


                                       - 105 -
   some others descend to its bottom and perhaps to the prison.
(3) The third factor is that the conditions of life in the city push the juveniles to an
   anticipated entrance in the practical life and they behave in a way which is
   not in harmony with their age and could lead to their delinquency, like drinking
   alcohol.
(4) The fourth factor is that the nature of life in the city induces to kinds of
   deviance to which the life in a village does not give birth, such as begging
   pander, bribery, forgery, fraud and stealing from pockets.




                                        - 106 -
                               Chapter Eight

           Criminology as an Applied Science

1. Criminal Policy
       The first demand of criminology is that the criminal’s mental health should
be examined; and if this is shown to be disturbed, treatment should follow
accordingly. Although, of course, punishment is not excluded in such cases, the
rule should be that medical treatment is indicated, under judicial guarantee, of
course, that the safety of the community remains assured.


       The first thing to ascertain for criminals who are sound in mind, is whether
or not restriction of their personal liberty is absolutely necessary. If this is not the
case, a fine will generally be the punishment indicated. Providing it be suit­able to
the financial circumstances of the offender, and collected by a suitable method of
payment, it has been proved to be a very effectual punishment. In certain cases,
even a conditional fine may have its uses.


       In cases where a mere fine is not sufficient, a threat of restriction of liberty
(conditional sentence; when accompanied by special conditions, this amounts
really to treatment of criminals in free society) is indicated. This was first intro­
duced early half a century ago. It was later applied uni­versally, and has proved a
great success. The conditional sentence has been a great lesson to those who
saw the only remedy in severity of punishment as well as to those who thought
that the mere threat of punishment was not an efficient brake on criminality.
The imposition of fines and conditional sentences tends to effect a considerable
reduction in the number of short-term imprisonment. These then remain in
reserve for those cases in which a good effect may be expected from a sharp
correction; i.e. cases in which little or nothing can be expected from educative
measures, and which, accordingly, demand cellular imprisonment.



                                        - 107 -
2. Reformatory Measures
      There remain the more serious cases. Here, the first thing to ascertain is
whether any good result may be achieved by ‘forced’, i.e. reformatory, education.
In the case of children, this is always imperative; with young persons very often,
and in cases of young adults frequently advisable; the thing is, in these matters,
not to despair too soon. Numerous criminals are neglected individuals, who,
after all, should have one good chance of learning how to adapt themselves to
the demands of society. The results in those countries where this re­formatory
education exists, are encouraging.


      In cases where the idea of interfering by means of reforma­tory education
is misplaced, ordinary detention should ensue. The difficulty of fixing the duration
for this is considerable, and will always remain so. Any fixed length of time for it
will always be more or less arbitrary. A correction of this has been found in the
form of the ‘conditional discharge’ (on parole) which ends the detention when it
is no longer thought necessary in view of the safety of the community.


3. The Application of Punishment
      The method to be used in applying detentionary punish­ments form one of
the most tricky problems with which practical criminology is faced. Punishment of
criminals in a body, without selection and education, has proved in practice to be
a great mistake it has indeed, not without good reason, been called ‘the criminal
university’. The reaction to this-cellular imprisonment-has proved an error only
slightly less serious. Weakened both physically and mentally, unaccustomed
to ordinary work, which in present-day society is hardly ever done alone by
anybody, unaccustomed also to human intercourse, the discharged man leaves
the prison, more poorly equipped than ever for the struggle for existence. The
solution is probably to be found in a combination of what is suitable in both these
systems: a limited and selected com­munity, and isolation during the night. This
method will also provide opportunities for the application-be it in a limited form of
the educative idea, which always has its value. Doctors do not talk straightaway


                                      - 108 -
of ‘incurable’ patients either; and it would be a good thing if their example were
followed in the field of criminal law. Working in a well-appointed factory, or on the
land, more closely resembles ordinary life in freedom, and offers a better chance
of success after discharge, than cellular labor does. For those who feel, or prove
to be, unfit for communal life, the cell remains the place indicated during meals
and recreation time.


      There remain, now, the very gravest of cases; the professional and habitual
criminals. For these people, long-term detention (called in England ‘preventive
detention’) is imperative, however much mitigated one may imagine the regime
to be. An unjust reproach is frequently leveled at modern criminology, namely
that it has wanted to be too soft in dealing with the criminal. This reproach should
be returned to whence it came: the classic school has been too severe towards
ordinary criminals, for they are often more troublesome than dangerous, and too
soft with the really dangerous individuals, especially with professional criminals.
In some cases, of course, we have to be severe, but only when experience
shows that it is necessary. Sometimes, too, the judge is not in a position to leave
out of consideration entirely the thought of general prevention, and is obliged to
act more severely than the case which has been submitted to him would, in itself,
have necessitated. Whoever might stamp this as a reactionary view does not
know the psychology of some classes of criminals, nor realize the dangers which
threaten society from that quarter. The final consideration in all this, how­ever,
should never be the desire for revenge, but, solely, social necessity. Severity-
which is sometimes necessary-and humanity are not mutually inconsistent or
exclusive. Doctors too, may be permitted one more comparison with their pro­
fession-are not infrequently obliged to interfere drastically, and not spare the
patient a certain amount of pain in order to prevent worse.


      The same applies to criminal law. Providing always, that one deeply
realizes the tragedy which is part of the nature of crime; providing, also, that one
keeps dearly before one’s mind’s eye the fact that criminals are among the most


                                      - 109 -
unhappy of our fellow-beings, and that, therefore, it is our duty to exercise the
greatest humanity in our treatment of them


4. The Legislative And Judicial Individualization of Punishment
         Upon criminology depends the individualization of punishment in the
legislative, judicial and executive phases, as well as the treatment of juvenile
deviation and delinquency in order to avoid the aggravation of juveniles’ adverse
conditions with their growth in age.


         As an example of legislative individualization we can mention the case of
the husband who surprises his wife while she is committing a flagrant adultery
and kills her or her lover or both of them. The taw mitigated his punishment
prescribing for him the imprisonment as a penalty instead of the perpetual or the
temporary hard labor as a penalty of homicide (art. 237 of the Egyptian penal
code).


         Another example is the accompaniment of imprisonment with compulsory
labor, in the treatment of convicted thieves in order to teach them a legitimate
job.


         The judicial individualization means that the judge determines for each
culprit the deserved penalty according to his individual dangerousness, between
the maximum and minimum of the penalty.


         Another example of such individualization is the possibility that the judge
replaces the imprisonment of a thief who has a previous criminal record with the
installation in an establishment of labor whenever their emendation requires this
replacement (art. 52,55, 54 of the penal code).


         Judges practically ignore the psychological analysis of the culpable and the
degree of his dangerousness. That is why advanced countries such as England,


                                       - 110 -
Germany Italy and the United States established offices for penal experts who
help the judge in the study of each criminal’s culpable dangerousness and
present their reports to the judge enabling him to choose the suitable means of
treatment to be pronounced towards the culpable for his emendation.


       In Italy, the penal expert cannot intervene in the trail, because his
intervention is required in the executive phase to trace the method of treatment
that the jail officers must follow towards each prisoner according to his personal
special case.


       Examples of the executive individualization are offered by the separation
of female convicted persons from male ones, the interdiction of executing the
penalty of hard labor towards convicted women and those men who surpassed
the age of sixty years. These persons undergo their punishment in the general
jails, not in the jails of hard labor.


       Penal experts suggest whether the conditional release could be ordered
in favor of prisoners and those who are submitted to security measures such
as insane delinquents. They control the post-care namely the assistance of the
released prisoner in order to avoid his relapse into delinquency.


       Furthermore, criminology permits the diagnosis of juvenile delinquents or
deviated and suggests the methods of their treatment in order to realize their
emendation before they become more dangerous.


       What we explained till now concerns the practical usefulness of
criminology after the commission of crimes post delictum namely in the field of
penal treatment. But we add now its importance in the field of prevention namely
before the commission of a crime ante defictum.


       It is undeniable that criminology opens continuously the door of social


                                         - 111 -
reform. As it discovers the sources of delinquency whether they are individual or
social, it attracts the attention of the nation and its government to the necessity
of collaboration in the combat of delinquency. All ministries, each in its d6rnain,
participate in this combat in order to suppress or at least to delimit the occurrence
of criminality or deviation, by means of legislative and administrative measures.
Thus, criminology is the pioneer of social reforms and legislation.


      Moreover, due to its psychological analysis of individuals whether they
are normal or abnormal, it makes each person comprehend himself and the
others with whom he gets in contact and therefore he does not damage others
or become damaged by them.




                                      - 112 -
                               Chapter Nine

            The Subdivision of Penal Expertise

      Experience showed and aroused the necessity of expertise in penal
matters analogously to its recognition, since the last century in civil affairs.


      That is why the international society of criminology organized an
international symposium op 1980 in Syracuse (Italy) about penal expertise. It
was held in the international Institute of criminal sciences.


      This symposium gave the right conclusion that penal expertise are divided
into the following four branches:


(1) Psychiatric expertise
(2) Medico-legal expertise
(3) Criminology expertise
(4) Criminal expertise.


      Psychiatric, medical-legal and criminal expertise are recognized expertise
and they operate since ancient times, but criminology expertise is not universally
extended.


(1) Psychiatric expertise studies the mental capacities of a culpable to establish
   his sane or insane perception and volition. If he is insane namely mad, this
   means that he was irresistibly pushed to the commission of his crime and he
   must be acquitted but interned in a psychiatric hospital.
(2) Medico-legal expertise studies both the culprit’s and the victim’s body and
   position in the moment of crime, how the assault happened, with what
   instrument, and the cause of death in cases of homicide.
(3) Criminal expertise examine the crime scene, collects the traces of the criminal


                                       - 113 -
   such as his finger prints, the blood stains in the victim’s and the suspected
   person’s clothes, the smell of the criminal for example in a handkerchief left
   by him. The examination of the material traces is undertaken by the criminal
   laboratories and police dogs. A part of Criminal, is the examination and
   identification of handwriting and forged documents.
(4) The criminology expertise as an ideal future system, consists of medical
   physical and psychological examination to be undertaken by a physician,
   a psychiatrist, a doctor of psychological and nervous diseases a forensic
   doctor, a specialist in Criminal, namely by all of them together in a team work.
   Criminology expertise hence, must be the summary of interaction between
   the opinions of a group composed by the above mentioned specialists,
   unless one specialist collects in himself all required specialty. It is difficult to
   find anywhere such a sapient specialist. That is why criminology expertise is
   not easy and it is not available unless in a few countries.




                                       - 114 -
 Part II

Penology




  - 115 -
- 116 -
                               Chapter One

                The Significance of Penology

1. Definition
       The word “penology” is derived from the word “punishment or penalty”. It
is an ancient denomination issued since the time of struggle for prisons reform.


     As the imprisonment was accompanied by abuses
in the treatment of the prisoner, reformers tried to
eliminate these abuses and their efforts led to the
following results:

(1) The possibilities of the prisoner to claim justice in front the court.
(2) The disciplinary sanction could not be applied unless after a disciplinary
   regular trial in which the prisoner’s defense is heard.
(3) The suppression of any discrimination due to race, religion or social position.
(4) The freedom of religious belief and performing its rites.
(5) The interdiction of any cruelty or savage treatment
(6) The abolition of flagellation
(7) The suppression of the iron chain which was attached to the prisoner’s legs.
(8) The teaching of a job that the prisoner exerts after his release or the
   improvement of the job exercise when the prisoner has yet a job.
(9) The prohibition of medical experiments on prisoners without their consent.
(10)The attenuation of freedom restrictions before release
(11)The right of vote in the general elections.
(12)The right of studying and passing instruction examinations
(13)The right of maintaining contact with the exterior social ambient of relatives
   and friends by receiving their visits exchanging correspondence with them,
   and going out of the prison for a short stay.



                                       - 117 -
      All these reforms mean that the prisoner should not suffer any pain other
than that of loosing freedom.


      The energetic movement of human rights contributed to the adoption of
the above said reforms. Hence penology as a science meant in its origin the
indication of the ideal methods of treatment in prisons, and it was the worry
of international penal and penitentiary foundation. The first United Nations
international congress for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders
(Geneva 1955) established minimal rules to fallow in the treatment of prisoners.


      But now, as the struggle against criminality uses not only penalties but
also security measures and pure social methods, the denomination of penology
became anachronistic. We prefer to it the name: “science of struggle against
delinquency”.


      This science could be divided into prevention science and treatment
science. The prevention science operates before the commission of the crime,
while the treatment science takes place after the occurrence of the crime to
emend the criminal and avoid his recidivism.


      As the science of struggle against criminality suggests the ideal methods
of prevention and treatment, therefore it traces the ideal criminal policy.


      It could not be confused by the national criminal policy because the latter
differs from a country to another while the science of prevention and treatment
(struggle against criminality) substituted to penology, indicates a criminal policy
which is ideal namely it should be followed by all countries whatever could be
their respective criminal policies.


      In conclusion we mean by penology nowadays a substitute which we
call “science of struggle against criminality” that means the ideal methods of


                                      - 118 -
prevention and treatment as regards criminality.


      Then we shall face at first the prevention and after that the treatment
whether its method is legislative, judicial or executive.


1. Crime Prevention
      Prevention of delinquency concerns either the causal factor of it, namely
the criminal predisposition which is hereditary as we said, or the animating
factors of it whether they are internal or external.


1.1. Prevention of Causal Factor
      As the causal factor is hereditary, its prevention means the avoidance
of bad heredity. For this purpose, some scientists suggested the protection of
posterity through the three following methods:


1) The medical examination of engaged persons before their marriage, in order
   to prevent their marriage when they have defects that could be transmitted to
   their posterity.
2) Sterilization by closing the fallopian tubes of the female and the ejaculation
   tube of the male.
3) Castration which means the removal of man’s testicles or of woman’s uterus.


      Between 1907 and 1909 the United States promulgated laws which
imposed the sterilization of criminals and insane persons, after that, Canada,
Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden and Finland did the same and Germany also on


      The German laws fixed imitatively the cases which require sterilization.
They are the hereditary disease like mental debility, idiocy, schizophrenia,
depressive mania, epilepsy, nervous diseases, serious addiction to alcohol,
grave physical defects, blindness and deafness simultaneous to the birth.



                                      - 119 -
       According to these laws, sterilization is pronounced by technical courts of
specialized physicians.


       The international congress of penal law and penology held in Berlin on
1935 as well as the congress of criminal biology held in Hamburg on 1938
favored the above said laws and it was said that sterilization recovered sexual
constitutional criminals.


       We have to notice that castration is more harmful than sterilization.
Sterilization does not affect neither the bodily appearance nor the psychological
structure nor the sexual gland function or stimulant while castration affects
the sexual function and changes the appearance of the body as well as the
psychological condition.


       Anyhow the above said three methods were not approved by Italians,
because they violate the human bodily integrity.


       The Italian scientist Anile declares with regard to castration and
sterilization, that heredity is submitted to secret and not controllable laws, that
sometimes even the apparently sane person has hidden defects that he does not
perceive, that it is not indispensable that defective men transmit their defects to
their heirs as the woman has a compensate role which hinders the transmission
of the defect to the descendant. Therefore one should not be proud of his health,
and should not exaggerate his pessimism when he sees apparent bodily and
psychological defects in another.


       Consequently that scientist affirms that nature regulates heredity without
any need of castration and sterilization which violate human bodily integrity and
that medical hygienic and treatment methods strengthen the descendant either
before or after birth.



                                     - 120 -
         As regards medical examination before marriage it could not be imposed.


         Therefore, Italy is of the opinion that the expansion of medical knowledge
among citizens makes them understand that diseases and defects could
be inherited and that every person who is willing to marry must cure himself
physically and psychologically before marriage in order not to give birth to a
defective son.


         The medical knowledge is necessary not only before marriage but also
after it and during the period of pregnancy to avoid what could affect the physical
and psychological formation of the embryo.


1.1. Prevention of Animating Factors
         It is a duty of the State to improve the general life conditions 6f the people
by:


(1) Raising its standard of life, eliminating misery, unemployment, small wage and
      encouraging charity associations by giving them subsidy if this is possible.
(2) Setting up a social system that provides poor men with gratuitous medical
      treatment either for diagnosis or medicament.
(3) Enlightenment of citizens as regards the harms of addiction to alcohol.
(4) Fighting against the consumption of drugs by creating a popular consciousness
      of their damages, through the cinema and television, the instruction at school
      and in the university, the foundation of a museum that exposes the various
      kinds of narcotics indicating the damages of each kind for the individual and
      public health.
(5) The construction of dwellings for the workers coming from villages to the town,
      the assignment of work to them and the organization of their entertainment
      during their leisure time.
(6) The expansion of constructed popular dwellings to distribute among
      poor persons, the facilitation of their furnishing, and the impediments of


                                        - 121 -
   constructions without permission in order to avoid the neighborhood of
   criminals.
(7) The dissipation of widespread believes that conduce to delinquency such as
   that of vengeance.
(8) The control of jobs’ polluted atmospheres.
(9) The control of films and press.
(10) The expansion of preaching, religious guidance, music, fine arts and sportive
   competitions.
(11) The control of arms and harmful substances.
(12) The foundation of prevention clubs in popular districts to engage young men
   in order to avoid their criminal agglomerations, to dissipate their adversity
   towards society and to get in contact with their families. Such prevention
   clubs have had a great success in France.
(13) The efficient combat of vagrants, suspected persons and of those who
   possess instruments that could be used in the perpetration of crimes.
(14) The progress of glandular medicine.


1. Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency And Youth Crimes
3.1. Some trends and factors
       During the regional preparatory meetings for the Ninth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, countries
in every region reported sharp increases in juvenile delinquency and youth
crime. In most cases, the average age of the offenders is also dropping. These
facts coupled with the estimation that by the year 2000 more than fifty percent of
the world’s population will be under the age of fifteen highlight the seriousness of
the juvenile and youth crime problem.


Crimes committed by juveniles run the gamut from petty larceny to murder. The reasons
for these offences vary. While it is possible to group the identified risk factors loosely
into economic and non-economic ones, in reality, they often create a vicious circle of
deprivation, alienation and delinquency.


                                        - 122 -
In developing countries, economic factors are the most likely to incline youth toward
crime. The offences arise primarily out of a need for the basic necessities of life. This
survival crime has been termed “subsistence delinquency” by the regional meetings.
Deteriorating economic conditions also place additional strains on family units, and
contributes to broken homes, dysfunctional families and homeless children. However,
even in the most affluent countries, economic factors play a role in the development of
delinquency.


The stratification of the poor in urban areas creates dense pockets of under-skilled
individuals and precipitates unrest; when such stratification is coupled with constant
bombardment of images of wealth and power, via the media and personal encounters,
the possibility of violence is dramatically increased. Rising unemployment, with a
deteriorating labor market for young workers, a failing educational system and a dearth
of other opportunities, reinforce the belief that these goals are unattainable by legitimate
means. Many children who may initially believe in the possibility of success through
acceptable channels lose that hope in the face of continued adversity and bleak prospects.
Expectations of failure can begin to develop in very young children, and if consistently
reinforced, may force a child to abandon longer-term goals to pursue more immediate
gratification, possibly though delinquency.


       Unfortunately, a developed national economy does not necessarily reduce
the risks to the young, nor the rate or severity of juvenile delinquency. In fact,
there are many more serious youthful offenders in some of the most economically
developed countries, though they generally come from disadvantaged areas.
One recent report shows a nineteen percent rise in violent offences by juveniles
in the United States in the past ten years, and attributes more than one quarter of
the increase in murders, forcible rapes and robberies to juveniles. These findings
are consistent with those presented for some European countries. Even if the
perceived increase in violent juvenile offending is routinely greater than the actual
increase, the situation is still cause for alarm. While most juvenile delinquency
still consists of petty crime, the range of delinquent acts is increasing. The violent


                                         - 123 -
nature of much delinquency and youth crime poses a greater threat to society
than lesser property crimes, bringing with it a heightened level of public fear
which negatively affects the quality of life.


      Studies have shown that violence and delinquency are related to relative
deprivation, and indeed, countries with greater income disparities seem to be
experiencing a higher level of violence. This is also the situation in the former
Soviet Union. The distance between the “haves” and the “have-nots” has
increased dramatically, and the juvenile crime rate has risen commensurately.
From a relatively low delinquency rate, there has been an eighty percent increase
in juvenile crime over the last decade, and juveniles now account for twenty
percent of all violent crimes.


1. Children Particularly at Risk
(1) Working children
      Many young children in developing countries are forced to work to
support themselves and their families. Historically, children have worked in most
cultures, which often helped their socialization. However, today’s child labor is
less structured and more time consuming and exploitative. A large percentage of
the children start full4ime jobs at eight years of age or even younger, unprepared
for separation from their families. Some enterprises rely wholly on child labor;
for example, carpet-weaving factories in Asia use full-time child labor, recruiting
under the guise of offering youngsters a “better life”. These jobs require constant,
hard work, and the material, educational and socialization benefits are usually
minimal. A substantial portion of these children eventually enters into illegal
activities as a means of survival.


      The Special Rapporteur on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and
Pornography has pointed out that many exploitive practices are driven by sex
tourism demand, and criminal networks which orchestrate the supply. The
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, at its third session,


                                       - 124 -
decided that the Ninth Congress, under items 2 and 4 of the provisional agenda
should give the international traffic in minors. The curtailment of social services
in response to economic constraints imposed by stringent adjustment programs
has also endangered child welfare. There is often multiple victimization, since
the children used for coercive labor or sexual exploitation are generally lured
from the lowest social strata (for example, untouchables in South Asia and other
marginalized populations).


      The prevalence of ruthless child labor practices has also prompted the
recent appointment of a Special Rapporteur on the Exploitation of Child Labor
and Child Bondage, practices which are considered to be a modern form of
slavery. In 1931 the Commission on Human Rights adopted the Program of
Action on the Elimination of the Exploitation of Child Labor, which advocates a
number of measures, particularly at the national and local levels. These include
information campaigns to. raise awareness of the problem, educational and
vocational training to prevent the exploitation of child labor, social action to help
families and their children, development aid, the stipulation and application of
labor standards, the adoption by States of appropriate policies and programs as
well as support from international agencies.


      The Asia Regional Seminar on Children in Bondage (Islamabad, November
1992) adopted a Program of Action Against Child Bondage, which, inter alia,
targeted children pledged in partial payment of debts, those lured away from
their families and those kidnapped or confined. Young children with an illegal
status are often forced into hazardous work with high accident risk in sweatshops
and brothels, and are compelled to work in exploitative conditions. The seminar
urged a series of measures, including legislative reviews, with the simplification
of sanctions, victim compensation, enforcement machinery, enabling provisions
for special courts, adverse publicity for violators, education and rehabilitation for
the children, as well as effective prohibition and prevention, advocacy and social
mobilization campaigns.


                                      - 125 -
(2) The Problem of Street children
      Children without families, or whose family links are tenuous, are particularly
at risk, especially when they spend most of the time in the streets. Aside from
the daily fight for material survival, they are subject to abuse, exploitation and
other depredations, including disappearances, trafficking and outright killings.
The numbers of street children are staggering, estimated at 100 to 150 million in
the world, and seem to be increasing. The situation is particularly acute in Latin
America and parts of Asia, but the numbers in Africa are also growing as a result
of civil strife, rapid urbanization, and economic recession and the dwindling
social supports. The problem is now being felt in countries in transition as well.


      Street children are often compelled to engage in marginal activities and
delinquent acts to meet their basic needs. Most survive by making their way in the
informal sector as street vendors, petty hawkers, shoeshine boys, scavengers
of raw materials or even thieves and street prostitutes. Their drug involvement
ranges from glue sniffing to being cooped into the drug trade. Since they generally
lack access to the necessary health or social services and education1 they are
in serious emotional and physical danger. HIVIAIDS is spreading, especially
among those drawn into prostitution, exacerbating their ill-treatment.


      In some places, older youth have begun to form gangs as a means of
self-protection in a hostile environment. The coercion of children into organized
criminal activities is particularly insidious, as it exploits the precarious material
and emotional state of conscripts, who may crave human relationships and a
sense of loyalty or belonging.


      Street children and working children are in special need of protection from
danger, access to services and opportunities for personal development and a
productive life. This includes support for families, to communities and to children
themselves, through outreach activities, UNICEF-assisted programs and joint
initiatives. In Sao Paulo, Brazil, for instance, communities have been assisted


                                      - 126 -
by the Pastorate for Children to mobilize protective services for their children.
The UNICEF Urban Basic Services Program is now seeking to include the
reinforcement of family and community solidarity and protection.


      Attempts to help street children have often focused on their immediate
needs, including the provision of institutional facilities, which can usually
accommodate only a small number and may not adequately prepare them
for future life in society. They cannot tackle larger problems of inequity and
deprivation, though they can serve as focal points for efforts to reclaim the children
and integrate them into the mainstream. Probation centers have been suggested
as a means of providing street children with proper support and training. The
authorities could undertake the civic education of leaders, residents, street
children and delinquents. The children themselves, who in some countries have
organized themselves into associations, including an advocacy role, are helping
these efforts. Preventive strategies are also being pursued, with the help of non-
governmental organizations, as reflected in the lntergracion Infantile project
in Santiago, Dominican Republic, for “potential street children. The African
Foundation has also sought to mitigate the problem by providing counseling
and education40. International guidelines and special training for community
workers and all those involved should help to mount more effective preventive
and remedial action for street children and others in very difficult circumstances
such as those caught in armed conflict.


(3) Children in Armed Conflicts
      Although they are to be considered as a “zone of peace”, protected by the
Geneva Conventions, children have been prime victims of armed conflicts and,
as such, designated by UNICEF as “children in very difficult circumstances”.
According to UNICEF, in the past decade, 1.5 million children have been killed
in armed conflicts, and a further four million have been disabled, maimed,
blinded and brain-damaged. At least five million have become refugees and ten
million more have been uprooted from their communities. The rape of girls has


                                       - 127 -
been used as a weapon of war, and millions have been killed through female
infanticide. Orphans and street children have been special targets of perpetrators,
sometimes in collusion with par police services. In many parts of the world,
children have been tortured or forced to watch or participate in atrocities, given
drugs and weapons and have been desensitized to others’ pain. Uncounted
youngsters are said to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorders. Children have
been conscripted into the front lines in times of war and crippled by land mines in
local hostilities; they have often served as pawns, especially when their families
have perished or when they have become lost, or have witnessed the abduction
of their parents, leaving permanent scars.


       One of the main problems, even in the advent of peace, is not only how
to relieve the effects of their suffering but also how to reorient them to peaceful
pursuits. In some countries where they have served in liberation movements
(for example, in Uganda), this is being attempted in special schools. Elsewhere,
the transition to peacetime has been accompanied by a crime wave, with the
weapons now used as tools of crime and for the pillaging of those displaced by
war. Trigger-happy, poorly trained police often contribute to the problem, setting
a dangerous example. How the young can be helped to make the necessary
transition to the “culture of peace” under these circumstances is a problem facing
the affected countries and the international community.


(4) Urban “War Zones”
       It has been found that children learn basic ways of dealing with stress
and conflict very early in their lives; indeed, the best predictor of future violent
behavior is a history of violence. Without prompt and proper intervention, early
manifestations of aggression will commonly escalate into subsequent violence
and broaden into antisocial behavior. Social and cultural influences (along with
family) shape the course, which is, however, not inevitable. Efforts are under way
to identify the protective factors that prevent children from following a negative
trajectory, in spite of possible risks.


                                          - 128 -
      While no single experience is decisive, the adverse settings, climate of
violence and pervasive insecurity surrounding youngsters in their daily lives
in inner city ghettos and other marginalized areas place them at grave risk.
Especially where squalor, drugs and weapon use are common, and where crime
is a constant fact of life, the inhabitants are exposed to chronic danger and
stress. Rather than being safe havens, the home and school are often part of the
battleground, and negative peer pressures, especially gang intimidation, pose a
very real threat. Such areas have not improperly been called urban war zones.


(5) The Instrumental Use of Children
      The mounting concern about the dangers posed by the instrumental use
of children was reflected in General Assembly resolution 45/115, adopted in
accordance with the recommendations of the Eighth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders. It also motivated the
convening of an expert group meeting on the problem, hosted by the Government
of Italy (Rome, 8-10 May 1 992).


      As pointed out by the experts and the regional preparatory meetings,
there are a number of factors conducive to the instrumental use of children,
which must be addressed if it is to be curtailed. Among them are the lack of
specific legislation for the penalization of adults who exploit children and, where
legislation exists, a lack of proper enforcement. There is agreement that the
recruitment, organizing or entrapment and use of children for criminal purposes
by adults should be made a specific criminal offence.


      Since criminal justice systems have rarely dealt with the child element in
serious offences, existing child exploitation legislation should be reviewed and
appropriate reforms promoted, taking into account the United Nations instruments
for juvenile justice and delinquency prevention, and with full regard for human
rights standards. Since children are often helpless to resist exploitation, legal
aid and assistance need to be made more accessible to them. Alliances can


                                     - 129 -
be usefully established with children’s and youth organizations, to disseminate
information and monitor abuses. Safe houses, emergency placements, telephone
hotlines and more sympathetic law enforcement agents could help juveniles to
avoid such perils. Mobile units, staffed by professionals, can visit high-risk areas,
and the collaboration of child protective agencies and targeted citizen groups in
planning, implementing and evaluating projects should be encouraged.


      In order to curb such predatory activities, however, comprehensive
action must be taken at the national and international levels, to strengthen their
prevention and control. Technical cooperation, advisory services, the training of
personnel and pilot projects can help countries stem the wide-ranging abuse, and
should be more extensively provided. The envisaged publication of the United
Nations manual on juvenile justice instruments should provide a key training aid.
Computerized data banks, the exchange of information on offending syndicates
and mutual cooperation in such matters of this kind should be pursued


1. Mitigating Predisposing Risk Factors
      Strategies to safeguard children at risk are needed all along the continuum
of development It has been pointed out that piecemeal attempts to deal with
delinquency problems have been doomed because they have not paid adequate
attention to the urban environment that spawn them. The vast numbers of children
and youth at serious risk necessitate broad-based strategies, targeting the family
and vulnerable communities or groups. Various measures to strengthen the
family have been suggested in the context of the International Year of the Family.
They need to be implemented. Communities suffering from violence and anomie
are a breeding ground for delinquency. They must be salvaged and revitalized,
providing hope as well as concrete opportunities for youth, so that they do not
adopt criminal lifestyles.


5.1. Strengthening Families
      This includes measures to discourage teen pregnancies and to improve


                                      - 130 -
access to critical support services, such as childcare, home visitor programs
and multipurpose resource centers that facilitate service delivery and self-help
efforts. Good parenting is not easily taught, but essential parenting skills can be
imparted in primary health facilities, maternity clinics or community settings. The
focus should primarily be on dysfunctional or single-parent families, where role
models may by missing, discipline erratic, absent or excessive, and mistreatment
likely. Early intervention can help to break the cycle of abuse that continues
across generations, and the related likelihood of delinquency. The United Nations
Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency (the Riyadh Guidelines)
indicate the directions to be pursued; they need to be more widely known, and
practical action models provided.


5.2. Strengthening Communities
      Economic growth may not reach those most in need, whose children
are at greatest risk. Special measures are needed, such as skills training,
entrepreneurial or other assistance and the creation of economic development
zones. Ways in which communities can be mobilized for more effective crime
prevention have been noted before. Young people can be closely involved in
efforts to reclaim anemic and dangerous neighborhoods. In some places, youth
leaders and “social facilitators” are being trained with this aim in mind, as part of
multi-faceted local revitalization schemes. Social solidarity is demonstrated in
various ways, including group supervision of youth in situations of risk.


      Structured cultural and recreational activities can help to bind young
people and offer outlets for their energies. Worthwhile community projects can
be pursued with the participation of youths, both as helpers and those to be
helped.


5.3. The School And Transition to Work
      Schools have a crucial and perhaps impossible mission; not only to impart
knowledge and to develop know-how, but also to offset and even compensate for


                                      - 131 -
societies and parental failings, by providing a propitious environment for human
growth. However, rather than doing so, schools in many places have themselves
become scenes of violence and delinquency. Instead of being safe havens
and places of enlightenment for the young, their attendance may be fraught
with real danger that even intensified security, with in-house police protection,
cannot control. At the same time, the educational role of the school is being
questioned, because, inter alia, of rigid, abstract curricula, unsuited to modem
requirements, the failure to gear education to development and market needs
and poor teacher training. Inadequate attention to learning difficulties, lack of
relevance to the often harsh realities and barriers facing children who must gain
a livelihood have undermined school attendance and contributed to the high
drop-out rate, increasing the likelihood of delinquent short-cuts to the acquisition
of daily necessities or prized consumer goods.


      Yet, education of different kinds, formal, non-formal and informal, has
almost infinite potential in helping to prevent delinquency and crime. The early
years are crucial for psycho-social development and the formation of a moral
conscience, especially where suitable role models are lacking at home and
where discipline is erratic. At a time of pervasive social changes, lack of stable
norms and conflict of values (for example, in second generation immigrants), the
school must also impart a moral and civic education. In recognition of this need,
moral education is now part of school programs is some countries (for example,
in Chile and the Netherlands), and efforts are underway in others to evaluate the
effectiveness of such methods, including legal education. At a time of waning
religion or its radicalization, the school must nurture the qualities of tolerance,
empathy, fairness and respect for others. It can also help to detect emotional
problems and learning difficulties, to develop the capacity for self-control and
to teach non-violent conflict resolution as an alternative to aggression. The
Scandinavian countries have introduced anti-bullying programs - the Wallenberg
Foundation supports a non-violent heroes module - and there are initiatives in
various countries which train teachers to prevent misbehavior through “social


                                      - 132 -
contracts”, or to manage it when it does occur and to better deal with chronically
disruptive students. Practical demonstrations show how to resolve conflict
situations non-violently, and develop interpersonal and self-management skills.


      Some forms of early intervention seek to maximize individual potential,
to compensate for initial disadvantage and to provide developmental support.
The Head Start program in the United States and a UNESCO-sponsored
Scandinavian program for youngsters from disadvantaged zones in Santiago,
Chile have yielded positive results, including reduced delinquency. Programs
to reduce truancy, viewed as “pre-delinquent behavior”, such as the PINS
adjustment program and the multi-agency Project Hope in California (involving
the school district, county probation department, county social service agency
and police department), have reached the twin goals of keeping students in
school and reducing daytime crime. Some, like project DARE (Drug Abuse
Resistance Education), have successfully used peer pressure and a variety of
techniques.


      In many places, schools are increasingly becoming multipurpose
organizations, providing diagnostic and health services, counseling, sports
and recreational facilities (also in extended time frames, for example, midnight
basketball), basic skills training and vocational guidance. School-based
community centers with comprehensive programming for youth and their
families are also envisaged as “safe havens”, open all day throughout the year
and offering a range of educational, cultural and recreational activities, as well as
access to social services. These centers should be concentrated in communities
identified as having the greatest number of youths at risk.


      One of the key problems for many youths is bridging the gap between
school and work. The lack of coordinated planning of educational and
employment opportunities has increased the numbers of young unemployed,
whose aspirations have been raised without legitimate ways of fulfilling them.


                                      - 133 -
In some developing countries, there is even a surplus of university graduates
unable to find suitable jobs in the deteriorating economic climate. A more
organic approach to education and integrated human resources development
might reduce the structural imbalances that frustrate youthful expectations and
lead to illicit shortcuts. Vocational training and apprenticeship programs for those
who will not pursue academic careers have been found most useful in imparting
the necessary skills and work habits to succeed in a competitive job market.
Businesses and trades have been encouraged to invest in apprenticeship
programs, through tax incentives and other means. Programs facilitating
employment and the empowerment of high-risk youths have also been found
successful in preventing delinquency and recidivism.


5.4. The role of the media
      There has been a long-standing debate on the relationship of violence in
the media, especially television, to heightened aggressive behavior in children
and youth. Evidence has been mustered on both sides to stress or contest the
links between them. Recent research, including a comprehensive study of 200
students, offers convincing evidence that the observation of violence in everyday
television entertainment does affect the aggressive behavior of viewers.
According to the study, all types of aggressive behavior, including criminal
violence and other illegal acts had significant associations with exposure to
television violence, giving serious cause for concern. However, questions persist
about the causal relationship, the permanence of any possible side effects, the
importance of whether television violence is punished or rewarded and whether
high levels of neighborhood violence reduce the effects of television violence.


      Governments should also provide resources for the establishment of
apprenticeship programs.


      The policy debate on the need for media regulation thus continues. Western
European countries1 for example, have government agencies that monitor


                                      - 134 -
television and films and do not permit the showing of excess violence. Where
there is no such regulation, for example, in the United States, major television
networks agreed in December 1992 on a common set of standards regarding
the violent content of their programs. Since working parents and single-parent
families cannot exert sufficient control over children’s viewing habits, social
controls over programming have been urged. However, the voluntary standards
adopted, which do not apply to films, have apparently been unsuccessful in
reducing television violence.


      A broader effort to enlist the cooperation of all the media, including
journalists and programmers, is clearly needed to reduce sensationalism, which
affects not only children but the public as a whole, raising levels of fear and
inuring people to human suffering. The media, through responsible reporting
and special educational campaigns, have a crucial role to play in socialization,
delinquency prevention and empathy with victims from the early years on.


6. Reclaiming Delinquents
      There is wide support in the juvenile justice field and apparently among
the public for the stipulation in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Administration of Juvenile Justice (the Beijing Rules) that detention should be
used only as a last resort and for the shortest period of time, and that alternatives
should always be considered. These can be close supervision, intensive care,
foster home placement, at-home detention and placement in an educational
setting. If detention in a secure correctional-type facility becomes unavoidable,
basic standards should be met and juveniles held separate from adults and from
adjudicated juvenile offenders. The use of objective risk assessment criteria to
inform detention decisions has in some jurisdictions drastically reduced the daily
number of juvenile detainees, without increased recidivism or failure to appear at
trial. The use of detention as “shock incarceration” or short-term commitment is
a violation of their rights, and has proved ineffective. For adjudicated offenders,
the principle of minimizing incarceration is also applicable.


                                      - 135 -
6.1. First-time Offenders
      This is certainly the case for first-time offenders and even some repeat
cases unlikely to pose major danger. In Africa and other developing regions,
indigenous approaches, such as restitution and community service, could
be more widely used instead of incarceration. Probation, supervised by local
authority figures, is another option. The seminars on the prevention, control and
correction of juvenile delinquency in the region have sought to advance this aim.
The expense and negative impact of confinement underline the position that
its use should be an exception rather than the rule. In many countries, such a
reorientation will be part of broader juvenile justice reforms, whose promotion
is a key task of the United Nations regional institutes, which seek to promote
alternatives to imprisonment for offenders, including young adults, and especially
for juveniles. Thus, the United Nations Latin American Institute for the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (ILANUD) has been carrying out a
project on the improvement of the juvenile justice systems in Central America
that combines policy-oriented research, assistance with actual reforms and
training, consonant with the United Nations guidelines and the United Nations
Convention of the Rights of the Child.


      In many countries, the juvenile justice paradigm has shifted from
“rehabilitation” to accountability” and sanctioning, but this need not reduce
the use of diversion (at various stages of the juvenile court processing) and
the reliance on non-institutional options, including work programs, probation,
community service or other forms of “creative restitution” or participation in
a counseling or substance abuse treatment program, to name only a few
possibilities. Evaluations of such measures have been mixed and require further
research; however, preliminary findings indicate that the younger the offender,
the more likely that diversion will have a positive effect, and the more frequent
the number of contacts between youth and the service provider, the greater the
positive effect on outcome measures



                                     - 136 -
       The negative consequences of this approach include its possible net-
widening effect, which presumably increases the total number of young people
subject to the juvenile court’s services or control. This is very much the case
for status offenders, who may require protective measures and crisis or family
intervention.


       But others argue that the promise of diversion has in fact not been fulfilled
because of poorly developed program rationale, failure to select the appropriate
youth, professional resistance and organizational dynamics. To overcome
these shortcomings, better targeting of youth for diversion programs has been
suggested, the agreement among the various professionals concerned (police,
prosecutors, judges and program staff) and referrals to appropriate community
agencies. Greater attention must also be paid to due process and the human
rights of juveniles.


       For diversion and alternatives to work properly, a whole array of community
interventions should be available and individual youths matched with the most
appropriate services. Programs should be run without stigmatizing participants,
and should be suited to their particular needs. Further research will be important
in order to determine what alternatives work best for which types of youth, who
responds best to certain interventions, how interventions can be structured for
ready replication, if they prove promising, the agency context, organizational
requisites, professional qualifications and program rationale.


6.2. Serious and Persistent Offenders
       Research has found that “chronic offenders” are responsible for the
majority of violent offences. The alarm caused by the brutality of some youthful
crime has led to some juvenile offenders being treated as adults, which can
confirm their “criminal” identities and impede rehabilitation. Related studies have
identified developmental pathways to chronic delinquency: an overt pathway
(from aggression to fighting to violence), a covert pathway (from minor covert


                                      - 137 -
behavior to property damage to serious delinquency) and an authority conflict
pathway (from stubborn behavior to defiance to authority avoidance). Problem
behaviors, such as delinquency and drug use, often occur together, even before
a child reaches the teens, and the earlier they are manifested, the more likely
is the progression to more serious and extensive delinquent and drug-using
careers


      Special efforts are being made to ensure more effective apprehension,
prosecution and treatment of such serious or chronic offenders, including
“vertical prosecution” (a single prosecutor follows the case), limited charge
-and sentence-bargaining, assistance to victims and witnesses and special
correctional services for convicted youth. A series of recommendations has also
been developed regarding serious juvenile offenders, issues facing the juvenile
court system and the possible establishment of unified family courts. In the
past decade, some jurisdictions have redefined the purposes of juvenile courts,
de-emphasizing the role of rehabilitation and the child’s “best interest”, and
emphasizing public safety, punishment, deterrence and system accountability.


      Research and experience to date suggest that a structured system of
graduated sanctions may offer the most promising approach. Rehabilitation,
the traditional offender-based sanctioning system, based on the same parens
patriae notion and medical model, has been criticized for the variable treatment
of the same offence for differing periods of time, and thus led to the “just-
desserts” approach based on the offence, degree of culpability and harm done.
Incapacitation, deterrence, and to some extent, accountability have been the
driving sanction philosophy in countries where rehabilitation has fallen into
disrepute, and where there is increased concern about escalating serious
juvenile crime.


      Contrary to the prevailing stance toward this approach, however, the
rehabilitation of juvenile offenders urged by the United Nations Rules can


                                    - 138 -
be effective, even for serious young offenders. A leading expert in this field
concludes that the emphasis in the Beijing Rules, the Rules for the Protection
of juveniles Deprived of their Liberty and the Riyadh Guidelines on minimizing
institutionalization, avoiding punishment and adopting rehabilitation as the
preeminent purpose of juvenile sanctions are well founded in current theory,
practice and research. The proper classification of juveniles is required, both
in terms of matching the needs of the juvenile to the services required to meet
them and of risk in order to decide whether a juvenile should be in a residential
or non-residential program, and whether there is a requirement for custody or for
intensive supervision in the community.


      Where confinement proves inevitable, the trend is away from mammoth
training schools and toward smaller community-based units, as recommended
by the Riyadh Guidelines. For example, the state of Massachusetts in the United
States has long replaced its training schools with a network of decentralized
community services and a few small secure-care units for violent juvenile
offenders, saving eleven million dollars a year without any increase in the juvenile
delinquency rate.


      There are also intermediate measures1 such as half-way houses, day
detention and others, that can be applied in a combination of residential and non-
residential settings, including therapeutic communities (for example, utilizing
Positive Peer Culture, where values and interactions reinforce thinking and
behavior consistent with a core culture, and Guided Group Interaction, where
an adult facilitator leads group discussions which ultimately evolve into youth
leadership). Programs deemed most effective have usually combined two or
more methods of treatment and rehabilitation. Among these are psychodynamic
and behavioral approach methods and life-skill interventions. Meta analyses of
their outcomes have concluded that those with increased staff contacts were
the most successful, and that behavioral approach methods were more likely to
reduce recidivism


                                      - 139 -
6.3. Youth Gangs
      As considered here, the term refers to a group of youths and young adults
(mostly aged between fourteen and twenty-four years) that operates primarily in
the streets and engages in a sufficient amount of antisocial activity to warrant
attention by the criminal justice system. Such gangs are usually active in lower-
class communities of inner cities or other marginalized areas. While juvenile
gangs are not a novel phenomenon, they manifest certain new features. Often
linked by common ethnic or other background, the age limits to membership
seem to be expanding, with the youngest usually doing the bidding of the gang
leaders. They may engage in various illegal activities, including car theft and
robbery. They have become morn violent in recent years1 particularly through the
illegal use of sophisticated lethal weapons and involvement in drug trafficking.


      It is also believed that gang membership has grown because it fulfills a
need for belonging and identity, which may not be met in other ways. While
gang members are still primarily adolescents and young adult males, female
members often come from even more problematic homes with a gang tradition,
and may be even more difficult to redirect. Gangs have evolved from street-
corner neighborhood groups to contemporary gangs that often define as ‘turf”
their girl friends, local skating rinks and certain shopping malls. Schools, which
used to be “neutral zones”, have in some countries become the scene of warfare
and recruitment (often through coercion and intimidation). In some places, gangs
have migrated to set up “franchises” to distribute drugs, especially in smaller
cities where law enforcement may be less stringent. The line dividing gangs and
organized crime activities has seemingly blurred in the past few years


      The relationship between organized criminal groups and gangs may well
depend on techniques and utilization of violence as a resource; top figures
have sought to distance themselves from violent acts and may increasingly
use business and monopoly tactics, distributing franchises (held by gangs) and
delegating some “enforcement” tasks to them This nefarious chain, in which


                                     - 140 -
seasoned criminals enlist younger “associates” who in turn recruit still younger
ones for proscribed and hazardous acts, must be broken. Among the preventive
approaches to gangs that should be more widely explored is their conversion
from negative to positive groups, cooped into activities designed to develop
pro-social goals. The quest for belonging and importance that often motivates
gang membership could be furled in that manner, and the social approval gained
could serve as added reinforcement. The encouragement of groups such as the
“Guardian Angels” and-of youth in community improvement teams would serve
this purpose. Even broader initiatives, such as a youth job corps, the possibility
of police training for a law enforcement career (and service as a gang expert)
and other meaningful initiatives could redirect the energies of youth to more
desirable pursuits.


      In order to mount more effective counter-strategies against gangs, both
greater specificity and comprehensiveness of approach have been called for.
The hegemony of gangs and their (literally) cut-throat tactics are making their
prosecution more difficult. Victim intimidation torpedoes many criminal trials,
especially when they occur in neighborhoods where many people are involved
in gang activity, witness killings or drug sales and know the participants; even if
in jail, gang members can count on those outside to do the gangs bidding and
coerce potential witnesses.


      It has also been suggested that, rather than engaging in causal analysis
of why young people join gangs, the focus should be on what gangs actually
do and on their differential impact, so that preventive and control measures can
be better targeted. For that purpose, a threat analysis of contemporary urban
gang crime has been developed as a systematic empirical way of assessing both
the seriousness of threats posed and vulnerability. A Strategic Law Enforcement
Plan to Deal with Gangs on that basis has been proposed, as has an International
Survey on Gangs and Threat Groups, addressed to law enforcement and
correctional authorities in various countries, and including both quantitative and


                                     - 141 -
qualitative information


7. Policy implications
      A comprehensive system response to juvenile criminality requires an array
of approaches and dispositions that take due account of both community and
individual needs, protect basic rights, provide appropriate referrals, collaborate
closely with various service providers, rely on informed and committed personnel
and try to evaluate the effectiveness of the interventions with different target
groups. Scarce resources can then be better used, resulting in both financial and
human savings.


      The double role of many young people as both victims and offenders
makes their situation particularly poignant. Some hardened young offenders may
have been subjected to grievous abuse and/or neglect, which deadened their
feelings as a survival tactic. Yet, they are rarely pitied. They must be salvaged
before it is too late, and those at grave risk reclaimed. So must be the masses of
children inhabiting city streets who are in serious danger. Imaginative and wide-
ranging action must be taken to counter this problem and that of child victims,
who may be delinquent without fault of their own.


      Juvenile justice is under scrutiny and the juvenile court under fire, but by
expert admission, the United Nations instruments for juveniles are still relevant.
How their application can be enhanced is a pivotal question.


8. The Police Role
      The most important function of the police is the impediment of crimes before
their commission. This task is much more essential than that of apprehending
criminals after the perpetration of their crimes.


      That is why the first duty of the police is that of discovering each dangerous
state to eliminate it before its transformation into a crime.


                                      - 142 -
      Therefore, the police must operate a peaceful settlement of any dispute.
It must organize traps to stop any criminal attempt before it leads to a crime and
proceed to patrols to insure public security.


      A special feminine police for juveniles should be established as we said
to pursue juvenile vagrants and fugitives from school. The Polish experience
showed the success of this police.


      The third task of the police in the field of prevention, is to pursue vagrants,
beggars, drunks, addicts to drugs, those who exert commerce in the black market,
the prostitutes and those who exploit them, usurers, those who are submitted
to the police supervision and the constitutional delinquents whose new crimes
should be avoided, and to control entertainment places in order to put into effect
the restrictions established in favor of juveniles.


      The fourth preventive task of the police is the discovery and dissipation of
dangerous agglomerations which could threaten the public peace, whether they
move masses or criminal gangs. In order to put end to these agglomerations, the
police needs four kinds of knowledge:


1) The recognition of the circumstances that give rise to such agglomerations.
2) The recognition of practical methods of investigation which are suitable to the
   purpose of discovering lie and reticence as regards the membership in the
   agglomeration.
3) The recognition of the fermented idea in the minds of agglomeration members.
4) The discovery of the agglomeration head because his removal scatters and
   dissipates all the agglomeration members.


9 . The Role of Work Principals
      The work center for those who prefer learning a manual work like the
mechanical reparation of automobiles, represents for the apprentice what the


                                      - 143 -
school does for a student. Therefore the principal of the work’ should be honest
in teaching the job to the apprentice, should transfer him to the gratuitous medical
center when he is sick, or to the medical consultative pedagogical center if he is
as juvenile affected by an anomaly or an irregular nervous state. He should not
maltreat the apprentice.


10. The Role of The Army
          The military service period is a good occasion for the treatment and
correction of recruited juveniles.


          As a matter of fact, the severe military life explores latent psychological
defects while the habitual normal life does not permit their appearance, like for
example neurasthenic, epileptic introverted, unnatural exaggerated self-esteem
or imagined persecution tendency. These tendencies lead to acts of rebellion
against military discipline and to different forms of delinquency; such as violent
actions to be explained by the epileptic tendency. The last tendency induces to
grave horrible crimes of violence called by the Italians “Misdeic acts” since Prof.
Lombroso discovered in the Italian army the soldier Misdea who was a habitual
killer.


          The military life permits the discovery of constitutional delinquents inclined
to commit violent crimes as well as thefts during their military service. The army
should treat the latter in medical pedagogical establishments annexed to it or in
its military prisons. This means that the army should be furnished with physicians
who practice, especially the medicine of nervous and psychological diseases.


11. Prevention of Negligent Delinquency
          The international congress of social defense held in Milan in 1956
noticed that while intentional delinquency tends to decrease or to maintain its
numerousness, negligence delinquency, on the contrary increases continuously
for the expanded use of machines and the extended labor and traffic accidents.


                                         - 144 -
      Therefore, the congress suggested the following methods:


1) The promulgation of accurate norms of traffic that should be taught to citizens
   since their childhood in primary schools. Juveniles should be trained in the
   application of such rules. In Holland children are charged with the guidance
   of traffic in certain days of the year Egypt does the same during summer
   vacation.
2) The organization of the traffic according to those rules after having diffused
   them among the citizens through all methods of propaganda and publicity,
   and the assignment of a sufficient staff of policemen to their application.
3) The exertion of any dangerous activity should be submitted to the delivery
   of a license that could not be conceded unless after an accurate medical
   and psychological examination which proves that the applicant is skillful
   and deserves to assume that activity, whether it is the driving of vehicles or
   another risky activity. Some persons, although their long training, reveal a
   lack of ability and should not assume the activity in question. That is why it is
   not sufficient to make a test of their driving and they must undergo an integral
   medical and psychological test.
4) A renovation of the license must take place now and then, must be preceded
   every time by a complete medical and psychological test, as the personal
   ability is exposed to debility with the advance of age.
5) In the case of a dangerous behavior, even if it didn’t cause any accident, such
   as the attempt of surpassing a vehicle without paying attention to what exists
   in the surrounding spot, the rushing in a curve without sufficient prudence,
   or the driving with excessive speed in a crowded street, the traffic policeman
   should write a marking in the driver’s license, and in the case of recidivism,
   the license could be retired.
6) As the drinking of alcohol or the consumption of a narcotic even of a little
   quantity causes an euphoria that increases the indifference of the drinker or the
   drug consumer and his love of adventure, many traffic laws as in Egypt and France
   submit both the doer and the victim in all accidents due to dangerous activity, to a


                                       - 145 -
medical biological and chemical test in order to verify if there is alcohol or narcotic
in their intestines or blood and to aggravate the penalty of the doer whose drinking
alcohol or drug consumption in the time of the accident, is ascertained.




                                     - 146 -
                               Chapter Two

         Some Aspects of The Criminal Policy

1.Procedural Legality Guarantees in all Stages of Criminal
Proceedings
       Egyptian jurists have adequately provided guarantees for the rights of the
person under criminal proceedings in all the stages, specifically, his rights during
the pre- trial, trial, and subsequent rights.


1.1. Guarantees During the Inquisition
       The period of fact collection, or the inquisition administered by a judicial
officer, is of paramount importance to the case, since it initiates criminal
proceedings. In actual practice, the manner in which the incident is reported
in the process verbal of facts and its legal interpretation affects the course of
proceedings during the examination and the court trial. The rights of the suspect
therefore must be guaranteed during this stage.


       The judicial officer administering inquisition, does not conduct investigation.
He collects the facts to describe the conditions under which the offense took
place. The inquisition report is then presented to the examining authorities. The
facts collected do become evidence except after they have been duly verified by
the final investigation undertaken by the court and thereafter become grounds for
the court to issue its judgment. The law has placed no limitations on the freedom
of judicial officers in detecting offenses and collecting information. However, they
are limited by the respect due to the rights of the person, the privacy of his
residence, general discipline and good manners.


       The judges of the Court of Cassation have established the practice
whereby the judicial officer inquires the suspect if he has committed the offense
under inquisition. The judicial officer does not examine the suspect, but registers


                                       - 147 -
his reply. The process verbal of facts is one of the elements of the case, which
the public prosecution may use as it deems fit. The process verbal of facts may
be used by the court as one of the supporting documents. Once the contents
of the process verbal have been ascertained by the court, as true and reflecting
reality, the court may use the same in the case.


        A suspect apprehended and detained awaiting trial, may remain silent.
His silence may not be construed as implying factual evidence of guilt. It is
established that the suspect has the right to speak in defense of himself in the
manner he chooses.


1.2. Guarantees During Examination
        Examination refers to the set of procedures undertaken by the competent
authority in accordance with substantive and procedural rules prescribed by law.
Examination aims at the collection and inspection of all the elements of evidence
in the light of which it is decided to pursue court proceedings or to discontinue
the criminal claim. Examination has a twofold purpose: to prove the responsibility
of the suspect for the offense and to take into consideration the guarantees of
personal freedom as set out by the law.


        Egyptian law has prescribed a number of substantive guarantees for
the examination of suspects. The examination guarantees provide inter alia
for confidentially, a written process verbal of facts and the presence of the
litigants. The litigants are entitled to accompany at all times their lawyers at the
examination. The law has established that unjustified refusal to permit the litigant
or his lawyer to read the examination report, would render the examination null
and void, since one of the guarantees related to the general system has not been
fulfilled.


        Search of persons and residences is also subject to rigorous controls
enshrined in the Constitution and emphasized in the procedures. Article 4 of the


                                      - 148 -
Constitution declares that personal freedom is a natural right which should not
be violated. With the exception of being caught in the very act, no person may
be arrested, searched, detained or in any manner deprived of his freedom or
his right to move freely except by an arrest writ duly issued for the purposes of
the examination and the maintenance of public order. The writ is issued by the
competent judge or the public prosecution in accordance with the provisions of
law. The law fixes the period of detention pending investigation.


      Article 44 of the Constitution adds to the foregoing, stating that a judicial
writ is needed for entering or searching residences. Pursuant to this provision,
the Supreme Constitutional Court ruled that article 47 of the criminal procedures
is unconstitutional. The grounds for is this ruling is that it empowers the judiciary
officer, if the suspect is caught in the very act in crimes and misdemeanors,
to search the residence and confiscate papers or other objects which serve in
uncovering the truth if he has good grounds to believe so.


      The Supreme Constitutional Court, however, ruled that in all cases,
search writs are necessary, as a measure to avoid unnecessary measures which
undermine the privacy of residences.


1.3. Guarantees During Interrogation
      Article 42 of the Constitution states that any person who is arrested,
detained or deprived of his freedom shall be treated with due respect to his
human dignity. Such person may not be exposed to any physical or moral
injury, nor detained in any place except that specifically determined by law for
such purposes. Any information given by a suspect under any of the foregoing
conditions of compulsion shall be considered null and void and not dependable.
Examination procedures therefore must be applied in accordance with the major
guarantees defined in the Constitution.


      In view of the substantial importance of the interrogation, it is not as a


                                      - 149 -
rule entrusted to judiciary officers except in cases where there is fear of loss
of evidence. The interrogation which has been reserved by the law to the
examining magistrate alone relates to the confrontation of the suspect with
different evidence, and engaging him in a detailed discussion of such evidence,
so that he would either confess or deny the charge.


      According to Egyptian law, interrogation must be orally administered and
registered in writing. The oral condition is meant as a guarantee that the words
of the suspect and others, are accurately reported in writing.


      The suspect is not required to take oath the assumption being that no
person is expected to testify against himself. The suspect has the right to remain
silent or to choose any other means for his defense. If he lies during interrogation,
he would not be accused of false testimony.


      The interrogation must be conducted under conditions which do not
compromise his will nor his freedom to speak or defend himself. The interrogator
must refrain from posing suggestive questions or resort to deceitful ways which
would nullify the interrogation or the confrontation and subsequent actions built
thereon.


      Article 124 of the Law of Criminal Procedures confirms the suspect’s right
to seek the services of a lawyer. The article provides that except in cases where
the suspect is caught in the act itself, or there be fear of loss of evidence, the
interrogator in a criminal proceeding may not interrogate the suspect nor confront
him with other suspects or witnesses except in the presence of his lawyer if he
has one. The lawyer must be permitted to have access to the examination report
one day before the interrogation or confrontation takes place unless the judge
decides differently.




                                      - 150 -
1.4. Guarantees During Detention Pending Investigation
       The arrest of a suspect creates a new legal status whereby he is deprived
of his freedom to move and communicate for a specific period of time. During this
period, he undergoes examination by the competent authority which decides oil
the stage after. Criminal Procedures regulations limited conditions necessitating
detention, to conditions of urgency to administer investigation or where there is
need to protect the society from further criminal behavior by the suspect. It is
usually difficult to administer the investigation on the same day of arrest, hence
unless the suspect is acquitted immediately, he is sent, within twenty-four hours,
to the competent public prosecution, which determines his arrest or release.


       If the interrogation reveals strong evidence; against the suspect if the
suspect escapes (in criminal and misdemeanor cases punishable by more than
three months prison ), the examining magistrate has the right to issue a detention
pending investigation writ.


       Any person arrested or detained must be immediately informed of
the charge on account of which he is arrested or detained. He is entitled to
communicate with others and inform them of his detention and seek the services
of a lawyer.


       The law has placed time limits on the periods of detention pending
investigation in order to minimize the periods of deprivation from freedom.


1.5. The Principle of Procedural Legality as Guarantees
During Trial
       Subsequent to the preliminary investigation, the trial procedures are
initiated. It is a universally accepted rule, that it is in the interest of all the litigants
to guarantee a fair trial. The requirements of fairness necessitate a legally
constituted court, established in accordance with the law, enjoying appr9priate
jurisdiction in all aspects; judges should be provided with the rightful guarantees


                                          - 151 -
against outside influence, and immunity against unjustified legal action and
arbitrary dismissal or transfer of post. Thus the freedom of judges from all and
any influence is secured save the dictates of their own consciences.


       Egyptian law adopts the principle of the presumption of innocence until
proven guilty through a fair trial adequately provided with self defense guarantees.
The task of proving guilt is the responsibility of the public prosecutor. The
defendant is entitled to be informed of his charge in a language he understands,
or else through an interpreter. He is provided with a lawyer and is entitled to
present evidence and to have access to all documents in the case. He has the
right to take part in the trial and to appeal court rulings.


       Article 32 of the Criminal Procedures prescribe that the judge shall rule
according to the opinion he has formed of the case freely and unrestrictedly.
He may not build his opinion on any evidence that was not presented to court.
Any confession by the defendant or testimony by the witnesses delivered under
compulsion or threat of compulsion is invalid. In expounding the implications
of this principle, the Supreme Constitutional Court ruled that the presumption
of innocence constitutes a fundamental principle in all stages of criminal
proceedings. On the premise of the presumption of innocence, an innocence
decision may not be revoked except by the presentation to court of conclusive
evidence. It is for the court to examine such evidence and form its opinion. The
court shall in no way be influenced by any interpretation of the evidence save its
own interpretation of the entire evidence upon which it forms its opinion. No body
or authority shall impose its interpretation of any specific piece of evidence. The
court shall at all times rely on its own opinion formed on the basis of the facts
of the case unrestricted by the opinion of the public prosecution or that of the
defense regarding the facts.


       Within such controls, criminal proceedings during the trial are strictly
defined. The court must inform the defendant of the charge against him. The


                                       - 152 -
case is registered under the name of the defendant and the subject.


      It is the normal practice for the court to carry its proceedings orally as a
hearing. The elements of the case are discussed by the court in the presence of
the litigants. The judge shall not rule in a case depending on a procedure which
has not been disclosed to the litigants, nor having availed them of the opportunity
to duly discuss the proof upon which the ruling is built.


      The defendant is entitled to speak or to be silent, to abstain from replying
to questions. Confession obtained under compulsion and likewise evidence
acquired through illegal procedures implying the violation of rights and guarantees
provided for by the Constitution and the law, are considered invalid.


      The Constitution crowns the principles cited above by prescribing in Article
57 that Any act considered as a violation of the freedom of the individual, or
interferes with his privacy or violates any of his rights and freedoms guaranteed
by the Constitution or the law, is an offense -in both criminal and civil proceedings.
Such offenses do not lapse, and the State guarantees a fair indemnity to the
person that has been wronged.”


1.6. Guarantees During the Post Trial Stage
      According to general consensus of contemporary jurists, rehabilitation of
the offender is set out as one of the fundamental principles of punishment. The
explanatory note on the Prison Regulations describes the treatment accorded to
prisoners as covering remedial, moral, spiritual and educational aspects enabling
the person to become law abiding person when he resumes his life in freedom.


      With the view to the rehabilitation of prisoners, prison procedures in prisons
have been identified as follows: examination, classification and rehabilitation of
prisoners by the application of modern techniques.



                                       - 153 -
2. The Egyptian Penal System
       Prisoners are first examined to determine the suitable type of penalty or
other disciplinary measure in implementation of the sentence.


-   Examination: is undertaken by a number of specialists to assess the biological,
    mental, psychological and social condition of the prisoner. The information
    collected is used to classify the prisoners. Examination focuses on the
    detection of personality characteristics which have instigated the offense.
-   Classification: the different categories of prisoners are kept in separate
    institutions. They are further divided within the same institution into categories
    in accordance with the type of treatment to be administered to each. The
    c1assification may be modified at the detection of any sudden personality
    changes which in some cases may necessitate the transfer of a prisoner from
    one institution to another.


       In its provisions regarding the structure of the prison system, Egyptian law
has acknowledged the separation of categories of prisoners. Jails have been
established for new inmates where they are classified. A register is kept for every
prisoner. Personal data entered in the register includes a complete case study
covering the physical and psychological condition of the prisoner.


3. Techniques for the Execution of Freedom Depriving
Penalties
       In the execution of penalties necessitates certain techniques. Since
punitive action aims primarily at rehabilitation, remedial, educational, moral
and spiritual methods used in the treatment of the prisoners are themselves
rehabilitation techniques.


4. Remedial Measures for Insane and Mentally Disturbed
Prisoners
       Persons who are found to be insane are not detained in prisons, but


                                       - 154 -
removed to mental institutions where the appropriate treatment is provided for
them. Such persons are not released until cured.


      However, Egyptian law has not provided for the abnormal prisoner, hence
it is left to the discretion of the judge to determine the extent to which such a
prisoner is responsible for his actions, and whether he is totally incapable of “
discretion or volition” being extenuating circumstances.


5. After Care
      After care is the normal extension of the endeavors for good disciplining
and rehabilitation administered during the execution of the freedom depriving
penalty.


      The “crisis of release” is the term used to describe the conditions of a
prisoner resuming his life in freedom. Negative feelings of alienation from his
environment especially in cases of long prison terms, rejection by his community
and the sense of. being left out while his peers have moved forwards are
common. In addition, a released prisoner may have no home, clothes, work or
money to lead a self sustaining and law abiding life in freedom.


      Egyptian law has therefore given due consideration to such aspects,
providing released prisoners with due care. Rehabilitation starts in prison at least
two months prior to release. Prisoners are provided with clothes before they
leave the prison premises.


      Half the amount of the remuneration due to a prisoner on account of his
labor in prison is saved and handed to him at his release. Prison social workers,
are assigned with the after care. Treatment of prisoners awaiting to be released
has been provided for by the law.


      Prisoners who have spent more than four years in detention, are accorded


                                      - 155 -
special treatment during the transitional period. The length of the transitional
period is fixed in proportion to the length of the prison sentence, at a rate of
one month per year in prison, with a minimum of six months and a maximum
of two years. The privileged treatment during the transitional period includes
removal to an institution with more relaxed discipline. During the transitional
period, prisoners are accorded equal treatment to persons detained pending
investigation in terms of visits and correspondence, and even allowed 48-hour
holidays outside the prison.


6. The Judiciary in the Execution of Penalty
       Contemporary penal systems emphasize the role of the judiciary in the
execution of the penalty. On the grounds that rehabilitation is the objective of
criminal legislation, and such objective is not realized by merely pronouncing the
sentence in court, the jurisdiction of the judiciary extends to the execution of the
penalty. The execution of the penalty should not imply the violation of the rights
of the prisoner, the safeguarding of which being the essence of the role of the
judiciary.


       While Egyptian law has not established an “executive judiciary”, it has
granted judiciary officials jurisdiction to visit prisons and check that the sentences
are served in a manner that does not violate the law. However, an “executive
judiciary” is provided for juvenile institutions. The draft Criminal Procedures
currently under review will introduce the system of executive judiciary.


       Provisions for the Extradition of Offenders and International Cooperation
in Egyptian Law


       Provisions for the Extradition of Offenders in Egyptian Law:


       Extradition has been exercised in Egypt from ancient times. We are
told that an extradition agreement was concluded between Ramsis II and the


                                       - 156 -
Hittites in 1300 A.D. Each party in the agreement pledged to arrest and extradite
offenders from the other country fleeing to its own territory.


        The practice of extradition was introduced in contemporary Egyptian
legislation by the Memorandum of the Ministry of Justice No 8 dated 8 March
1901. The decree provided for the delivery of offenders to the countries requesting
them.


        Provisions for the extradition of offenders in Egyptian law are subject to
constitutional prescriptions. The prescriptions relate to human rights guarantees
and freedoms enshrined in Chapters 3 and 4 of the Constitution. In addition the
Constitution contains provisions prohibiting the expulsion of citizens (Article 51),
recognizes the right of political asylum and prohibits the extradition of political
asylum seekers (Article 53). On the other hand, Article 151, paragraph 1 of the
Constitution, confirmed the binding force of agreements signed by Egypt, including
extradition agreements. The said article recognizes that once concluded, ratified
and published, extradition agreements have the same binding force as any law
in effect in Egypt. As a consequence, extradition agreements are incorporated
into the structure of the legal system in Egypt, and takes effect same as any
other law. Recognizing the importance of organizing the provisions governing
the extradition of offenders, keeping in step with the significant improvements in
extradition practice at the local, regional and international levels, and as a result
of interrelationships at the international level, the ease with which offenders
can move between countries and across international borders, a chapter on
extradition is currently under review for its incorporation into Egyptian Criminal
Procedures.


7. Management and Improvement of Police Systems
        Noting that the police is the first authority to which any victim of an offense
would promptly contact, and that the police constitutes the law enforcing authority
to ensure stability and social control, the Egyptian Constitution of 1971 has


                                        - 157 -
stipulated in article 184 that, The Police System is a statutory civil body, presided
by the President of the Republic, entrusted with the task of serving the people,
ensuring their safety and tranquility, diligently watching over the observance of
law, order and good conduct, discharging its duties as prescribed by relevant
laws and regulations as set forth by the law.


       The same meaning is emphasized in Article 1 of Law 109 of 1971
concerning the Police System. By virtue of the Constitution, the police system
in Egypt is a civil institution presided by the President of the Republic who is the
head of the executive authority in the state.


       The Police in Egypt is a centralized system under the jurisdiction of the
Minister of the Interior. The Ministry of the Interior formulates the general policy,
sets out policy objectives and the means for their implementation.


       The police are a hierarchical structure headed by the Minister of Interior.
The Ministry of -Interior is divided into specialized sectors, further divided into a
number of administrations. The police forces are distributed among geographical
areas, each area comprises a number of governorates. The governorate is
divided into police precincts established in urban centers, and police precincts
are further divided into police stations. Specialized police squads are responsible
for law enforcement in specific areas including national security, crime, juveniles,
‘drug trafficking, public funds, vice squads, tourism, electricity, etc...


       The law of criminal procedure confers the functions of judicial officer
on several police categories specifically, regular officers, constables and their
assistants, heads of police stations and precincts, functionaries in the Central
Information Agency and in the Department of Public Security as prescribed in
Article 23 of the Criminal Procedures Law. Police members are duly empowered
by the law to perform their duties in the detection of crimes and the prompt
seizure of offenders under the control and supervision of the general prosecution.


                                       - 158 -
       The strategy of the police is designed to realize the following objectives:


(1) To combat all forms of crime and to cleanse the society of wrongdoers.
(2) To protect the national security against elements which seek to undermine
   legality and the rule of law.
(3) To protect individual safety and to safeguard his personal freedom, rights and
   property.
(4) To protect and safeguard institutions and public facilities.


       The strategy is based on the following foundations:


(1) To protect the society against crime, harmful and subversive conceptual
   trends, and deviate behavioral patterns.
(2) To modernize law enforcement organs by upgrading their mechanisms,
   improving their cadres and providing them with up to date technical facilities.
(3) To adopt scientific methods in police operations, to develop police techniques
   and support scientific research in relevant specialized areas.
(4) To increase the effective involvement of the population in addressing crime,
   and to secure their support of policemen in performing their duties.
(5) To promote regional and international cooperation and to establish mutual
   security relations in order to develop social control mechanisms, upgrade
   human capabilities and benefit from the exchanges of experiences with other
   countries for combating crime.


7.1. Security and Social Control
       The police is entrusted with ensuring the safety and security of the people,
thus allowing them to pursue their lives peacefully. In fulfilling its task, the police
strives to prevent all forms of crime whether threatening national security such
as sabotage, civil strife, or violating general norms and standards such as the
crimes of murder, theft, etc... The police participates in emergency situations
such as fire fighting, providing relief to victims of floods, earthquakes, collapsed


                                       - 159 -
buildings, etc.. The Egyptian police played an effective role during the earthquake
that hit Cairo in 1992, and the floods which killed and stranded large numbers
of people and destroyed hundreds of rural houses in 1994. Police normally
perform their tasks by a diversity of methods including patrolling, vigilance,
ambush, surveillance of criminals and drug traffickers, etc... The Egyptian police
is developing its abilities through training and rehabilitation.


      Police authorities have exerted relentless efforts in addressing and
combating the wave of terrorism and violence in Egypt. The society has been
intimidated by deviate groups who claim to be religious but in fact nourish criminal
ideas and are greedy for power. In confronting the danger of extremist groups,
the police has applied state of the art techniques in crime fighting, scientific
planning and training. The criminal groups have shed innocent blood, inflicted
suffering on society and sought to tarnish the name of Islam, the religion of
compassion, and tolerance.


7.2. Law Enforcement Function
      The police is responsible for the enforcement of laws and regulations which
foster social order and security. The National Security Department undertakes
the. planning and coordination of efforts to combat crime in governorates.
The police collects, tabulates, analyzes and compares statistical data, about
criminals, their features and methods of operation, keeps an eye on major feuds
and hostilities and seeks to effect reconciliation.


7.3. Crime Detection, Pursuit and Arrest of Offenders
      The police applies all the necessary measures to discover crimes and to
arrest criminals in accordance with the regulations for criminal procedures. The
measures used may be summarized as: investigation, collection of evidence
by using up to date methods and mechanisms for .the detection of crimes,
verification of evidence as preliminary for the investigation of the crime by the
public prosecution.


                                       - 160 -
7.4. Emphasis on the Role of the Police in Society
      The Ministry of the Interior has recently established within its organizational
structure, a social security unit to administer the social aspects of security. The
social unit supervises the following departments: the prison department, the
drug control department, the juvenile department, vice squads, rehabilitation
department and the civil affairs department. In discharging its functions, the
social unit engages in activities to curb drug trafficking, organized crime,
prostitution and trade in pornographic and illicit materials, juvenile crime, search
for runaway juveniles from social institutions to accommodate them with foster
parents, to provide rehabilitation and reintegration services for persons released
from prisons and to cater to the needs of their families.


7.5. Promoting Social Development
      The Ministry of Interior has established an economic security unit to
address the various forms of economic crimes particularly after Egypt’s adoption
of a free market economy. Economic crimes evidently affect social stability.


      In view of the radical changes which the society has undergone over
the past few years, the emergence of new types of crimes, and the changes
in crime patterns at the international level, the Egyptian police established a
number of administrations to address offenses related to public funds, rationed
food supplies, tax evasion, domestic trade, tourism, antiquities, transportation
and communication, electricity and water bodies. Police administrations are also
responsible to address corruption in the government machinery and to monitor
irresponsible activities which pollute the environment.


7.6. Greater Involvement of the Civil Population in Support
of Police Efforts
      The police is concerned with alerting the population on the dangers of
crime and soliciting community support for addressing crime, terrorism, and
all forms of deviate behavior. The police organs provide accurate information


                                      - 161 -
about the criminal situation, highlighting the role of the public in buttressing the
police efforts to detect crime and arrest offenders. In this respect, the Ministry of
Interior has adopted the following:


-   A strategy was formulated to address violence, terrorism and crime through
    the media.
-   A modern information center was established, the center is well equipped with
    facilities for communication with the media at the domestic and international
    levels with the view to building an effective communication system for the
    rapid exchange of data. The data is used for drawing a security strategy,
    combating crime and maintaining social order.
-   Producing television material for raising public awareness of the dangers of
    drug abuse and addiction, urging drug victims to give up their habit and join
    centers for drug therapy and rehabilitation.
-   Undertaking scientific studies and public opinion surveys on various social
    strata in order to produce inputs for the formulation of a media plan to combat
    crime and deviate behavior.




                                      - 162 -
                            Chapter Three

                            Penal Treatment

       The science of treatment indicates how to deal with delinquents after the
commission of their crimes in order to obviate their recidivism.


       In the following part, we shall speak about the determination of culprit’s
degree of dangerousness, the distinction between penalty and security measure,
the items of ideal treatment policy, the methods of treatment in a closed prison,
the treatment of juvenile offenders, the treatment in open establishments , the
treatment of negligent offenders, the exclusion of some convicts from the field of
treatment and the schedule of different offenders and of the way of treating each.


1. The Degree of Dangerousness
       Criminology expertise as it has been defined previously, determines
the degree of the culpable dangerousness and of the probability of his future
delinquency so that the judge is enabled to fix the quantity and quality of his
penal treatment that obviates his recidivism


       The experts study the character of the delinquent, his motives, his
precedents, his life prior to his delinquency, his behavior concomitant or
consecutive to the execution of his crime, and the circumstances of his individual
familiar and social life.


       The report that the criminology expert presents to the judge about the
culprit’s degree of dangerousness must have a conclusion which indicates to
what extent the culprit’s future crime is expected.


       When the culprit proves to be emended by the instruction and trial
procedure in such a way that a future crime on his part is not to be expected


                                     - 163 -
at all, the expert excludes his dangerousness and the judge concedes to him a
suspended penalty or a judicial pardon.


      The expert in the other cases, must indicate, to what extent, as we said,
the culprit’s volition is tree from the pressure of internal constrain which is the
criminal constitution. In the case of this constrain, the penalty appears useless
and hence it will by replaced by a security measure (internment of the multi-
recidivist in a work establishment).


      If the freedom of volition is not seriously diminished, because it is not
subject to an inner force such as the criminal constitution, then the expert
indicates that the culprit deserves a penalty.


      If the freedom of will is completely suppressed by an inner force such as
madness or semi-madness or childhood, the penalty will be replaced by the
security measure too (internment in a mental hospital for the mad and semi-mad
and in a social establishment for the child).


      The following equations illuminate the result of criminology expertise:


1) Crime + free will + dangerousness = penalty (occasional delinquent and
   simple recidivist)
2) Crime + suppressed or seriously diminished will + dangerousness = security
   measure (mad, semi-mad, multi-recidivist, and child).
3) Crime + free will + lack of dangerousness = suspended penalty (occasional
   repentant delinquent).


      An accused individual whose guilt is not yet established should not be
subject to criminology expertise otherwise, there will be a dangerous sacrifice of
human liberty personal dignity and presumption of innocence.



                                       - 164 -
       That is why nobody should be submitted to criminology expertise unless
his guilt is proved. The international congress of penal law held in Rome on
1969 recommended the scission of the penal process into two phases one is
dedicated to prove if the crime belongs or not to the suspected person. The
second phase could not be opened unless the first one is terminated by the
guilt of the suspected person, pronounced by the judge. Only then the guilty will
be submitted to the criminology expertise. If the suspected person is declared
innocent the process procedure stops and there will be no place for that expertise.


2. Penalty And Security Measure
       Penalty is a method of treatment in which the psychological pain prevails
over medical treatment.


       This pain consists of the loss of liberty by the internment in jail. On the
contrary, security measure is a method of treatment in which, medical treatment
prevails over psychological pain or in which precaution is equal to this pain.


       For example, penalties are the imprisonment, the hard labor, the reclusion,
as well as death penalty.


       The security measure is either a curative or precaution measure. The
curative one is the internment in a mental hospital or in a work establishment.
The precaution one is for example the supervision of the police or the probation.


       In the precaution measure of security, there is a psychological pain but it
does not prevail over the nature of the measure as the part of precaution in the
latter is equal to its part of pain.


       The insane delinquent is irrefutably sent to the mental asylum.


       But the semi-mad delinquent is differently treated by the penal codes


                                       - 165 -
of many countries, because according to them, he enjoys a diminution of the
penalty accompanied by the internment in mental hospital. In my opinion this
accompaniment is faulty, because if we start, in the treatment of the semi-mad,
with the imprisonment his medical treatment will be not only retarded but also
complicated. if we start with the medical treatment, its beneficial effect will
be spoiled by the subsequent imprisonment. That is why all delinquents who
deserve a diminution of penalty such as -in addition to the semi-mad, the deaf
mute, and those who are affected by a chronic intoxication from alcohol or drugs-
should be interned in special establishments which combine the loss of liberty
with the medical treatment.


      As regards the multi-recidivists who deserve an aggravated penalty it
would be erroneous to submit them successively to this penalty and after that to
the work establishment, because it will not be suitable to insist with them on the
application of imprisonment while it has been useless. That is why the Egyptian
penal code submit them to the work establishment instead of imprisonment or
hard labor.


      But if the combination of penalty and curative security measure is not
advisable because of their different nature, it is admissible on the contrary to
combine a penalty with a precaution security measure, as when a counterfeiter
is submitted to the police supervision after the execution of his penalty,


3. Primordial Principles of Ideal Criminal Policy
3.1. The Purpose of Criminal Sanction is The Emendation
of The Criminal.
      After a long historical evolution, a primordial principle became established
namely the sufficiency of the loss of liberty as the only admissible pain to inflict
on the delinquent, without any unnecessary supplement of suffering.


      The abolition of hard labor in England, France and Germany is due to this


                                      - 166 -
principle. On the other hand, machines actually assume the hard labor instead
of men. For example the crane lifts now the heavy weights. That is why those
three countries have maintained only the imprisonment whose duration depends
on the gravity of guilt.


3.2. The Individualization of Treatment
       The penal codes should provide for different penal establishments
according to the individuality of each criminal, namely according to his kind of
man, whatever can’ be the kind of crime. In addition to mental hospital for mad
men or semi-mad, an establishment should be founded for each group of
criminals: juveniles, psychopaths, drunkards, addicted to narcotics multi-
recidivists, deaf, mutes etc... Meanwhile, if the specialized establishment could
not be constructed, specialized compartments could be annexed to available
ordinary jails.


       The most important function of the police is the impediment of crimes before
their commission. This task is much more essential than that of apprehending
criminals after the perpetration of their crimes.


       That is why the first duty of the police is that of discovering each dangerous
state to eliminate it before its transformation into a crime.


       Therefore, the police must operate a peaceful settlement of any dispute.
It must organize traps to stop any criminal attempt before it leads to a crime and
proceed to patrols to insure public security.


       A special feminine police for juveniles, should be established as we said
to pursue juvenile vagrants and fugitives from school. The Polish experience
showed the success of this police.




                                      - 167 -
3.3. Methods of Treatment in Jail
      We have yet exposed the rights recognized in favor of prisoners after the
success of prison reform efforts.


      Now we summarize the methods of treatment in jail1 stressing upon the
following means:


1) The medical treatment and the religious education
2) The instruction and professional training.
3) The maintenance of prisoners’ relation with relatives, friends, work principals,
   and the exterior social life, under the control of jail officers.
4) The suspension of sexual stimulant through suitable medicaments and
   sports.
5) The group psychotherapy which consists of organized meetings of prisoners
   where each one is invited to tell in presence of his fellows the history of his
   own criminal career and to admit during his tale an identification that makes
   himself feel his personal fault. This psychological phenomenon is called
   catharsis which means the self realization of personal guilt.
6) The attenuation of liberty restrictions to prepare the prisoner’s release and
   return to free life.
7) The post-care after release.


3.4. The Treatment in Open Establishment
      This establishment has been suggested by the first international congress
of the United Nations on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders
(Geneva 1955).


      Such establishment is characterized by the fact that it is deprived of any
precaution against flight. It has no iron barriers, no walls, no locks, no armed
guards.



                                       - 168 -
      In it the convict count upon himself to practice agriculture or industry
according to his choice, till the end of his penalty.


      To the Open establishment could be assigned those convicts whose
emendation is expected in it more than in other one, after a physical and
psychological examination and a social investigation.


      The convict could be assigned to that establishment since the beginning
of his conviction or after having been interned in a traditional jail for a certain
period.


      In the oasis of Siwa, a similar establishment has been founded to receive
prisoners who should pass their transitory period of treatment before their
release.


      The assignment to such establishment is a security measure rather than
a penalty.


      The Egyptian Siwa experiment confers to each convict at the expiration
of his penal sanction a piece of the desert land to exploit and obtain its fruits for
himself. The exploitation of desert lands in Egypt is the purpose of this method
of treatment.


4. The Problem of Short-Term Prisoners
      We mean by short term prisoner, the convict who is punished with six
months or less imprisonment.


      As this short term imprisonment exposes the convict to a mixture with
prisoners more dangerous than him, the first international congress of the United
Nations on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders, recommended
the assignment of the short term prisoner to an open establishment.


                                       - 169 -
5. The Treatment in The Field of Negligent Delinquency
      Every negligent convict who causes the death or the hurt of a victim must
be condemned to the retirement of his driving license.


      In order to obtain a new license after a certain period of time, he must be
submitted to a medical psychological examination.


      In the case of recidivism, his license must be definitely retired forever.




                                     - 170 -
Terminology




    - 171 -
- 172 -
Introduction:
Perception                                                ‫إدراك‬
Comprehension                                               ‫تفهم‬
Naturalistic sciences                             ‫العلوم الطبيعية‬
Phenomenon                                                ‫ظاهرة‬
Normative sciences                               ‫العلوم التنظيمية‬
Penal norms                                         ‫قواعد جنائية‬
Legislator                                                ‫مشرّ ع‬
Crime as a legally prohibited behavior
Representative of the nation                        ‫ممثل للشعب‬
Hence                                                     ‫بالتالي‬
Social will                                        ‫إرادة الجماعة‬
Terminology                                          ‫مصطلحات‬
Crime                                                   ‫جريمة‬
Punishable behaviour                               ‫سلوك معاقب‬
Gravity                                                 ‫جسامة‬
Whatever its gravity is                         ‫أياً كانت جسامته‬
Felony                                                     ‫جناية‬
Misdemeanour                                               ‫جنحة‬
Contravention                                             ‫مخالفة‬
Offence                                         ‫عدوان أو جريمة‬
Perpetual                                                   ‫مؤبد‬
Temporary                                                  ‫مؤقت‬
Hard labour                                         ‫الشغل الشاق‬
Armed robbery                             ‫السرقة باستخدام السالح‬
Evidently                                                ‫بالبداهة‬
To require a punishment                             ً‫يتطلب عقابا‬
Otherwise                                                    ّ
                                                            ‫وإال‬
Repetition                                                ‫تكرار‬


                                - 173 -
Firing rifles                                                    ‫إطالق بنادق‬
Wedding ceremony                                                   ‫حفل زفاف‬
Reckless homicide                                                  ‫قتل بإهمال‬
Crime as a social reality
Instinct                                                               ‫غريزة‬
Doer                                                                     ‫فاعل‬
Physical and psychological traits                      ‫خصائص جسمية ونفسية‬
Intermediate man                                                 ‫رجل متوسط‬
Stature                                                                   ‫قامة‬
Reclusion                                                              ‫السجن‬
Imprisonment                                                           ‫الحبس‬
Fine                                                                   ‫غرامة‬
Penalty                                                                 ‫عقوبة‬
Criterion                                                               ‫معيار‬
Process of incrimination                                        ‫عملية التجريم‬
Acts or Abstentions                                         ‫أفعال أو امتناعات‬
To violate                                                               ‫يهدر‬
Fundamental condition of peace-           ‫شرط أساسي للتعايش االجتماعي السلمي‬
ful social coexistence
Circumstances supporting such                          ‫ظرف مساند لهذا الشرط‬
condition
To abstain from                                                      ‫يمتنع عن‬
Treaching                                                               ‫نصب‬
Embezzlement                                                     ‫خيانة األمانة‬
Median height                                            ‫ارتفاع القامة المتوسط‬
Giant                                                                  ‫عمالق‬
Dwarf                                                                     ‫قزم‬
Dull                                                                     ‫غبي‬
Mentally retarded                                                ً‫متخلف عقليا‬
Morphology                                               ‫علم األعضاء الظاهرة‬

                                - 174 -
Physiology                                     ‫علم األعضاء الباطنة‬
Gluttonous                                                     ‫شره‬
Sober                                                          ‫قنوع‬
Deficiency                                                   ‫نقصان‬
Excess                                                        ‫إفراط‬
Average                                                      ‫متوسط‬
Considerably                                          ‫على نحو هائل‬
Psyche                                                        ‫نفسية‬
Soul                                                          ‫نفس‬
Thought, feeling and volition                    ‫فكر وشعور وإرادة‬
Emotion                                                       ‫انفعال‬
Passion                                                      ‫عاطفة‬
Caprices                                                     ‫نزوات‬
Reasoning thinking                                   ‫التفكير المتعقل‬
Instinct of self conservation             ‫غريزة الحرص على الكيان‬
Property instinct                           ‫غريزة التملك أو االقتناء‬
Offence-defence instinct                       ‫غريزة القتال والدفاع‬
Sexual instinct                                     ‫الغريزة الجنسية‬
Vice-Versa                                          ‫والعكس بالعكس‬
Procreation                                                 ‫اإلنسال‬
Actuation                                                     ‫إعمال‬
Self-love                                                 ‫حب الذات‬
Refinement                                                   ‫تشذيب‬
Abolishment                                                    ‫إلغاء‬
Secondary instinct                                     ‫غريزة ثانوية‬
Fundamental instinct                                  ‫غريزة أساسية‬
Attenuating                                                  ‫تخفيف‬
Sharpness                                                       ‫حدة‬
Innate or acquired tendency                 ‫ميل بالميالد أو االكتساب‬


                                - 175 -
Material or moral existence                    ‫الكيان المادي أو المعنوي‬
Harming                                                         ‫إضرار‬
Fundamental instinctive activity                 ‫نشاط الغريزة األساسية‬
Striking                                                        ‫ضرب‬
Insulting                                                         ‫إهانة‬
Rape                                                          ‫اغتصاب‬
Preponderance                                                   ‫طغيان‬
Promotive power                                               ‫قوة دافعة‬
Refraining power                                    ‫قوة مانعة أو ملجمة‬
Abnormal instinctive quantity or             ‫شذوذ غريزي كمي أو كيفي‬
quality
Pride                                                  ‫خيالء أو غرور‬
Hated of life                                                ‫كره الحياة‬
Homicide-suicide crime                          ‫جريمة القتل االنتحاري‬
Avidity                                                           ‫جشع‬
Prodigality                                                       ‫تبذير‬
Inclination to accumulate property              ‫الميل إلى تكديس الملكية‬
Expenditure                                                     ‫اإلنفاق‬
Spender                                                           ‫منفق‬
To compensate                                                   ‫يعوّض‬
Loss                                                            ‫خسارة‬
Assaulting other’s property                    ‫العدوان على ملكية الغير‬
Precipitateness                                                 ‫التهور‬
Cowardliness                                                     ‫الجبن‬
The precipitate                                                ‫المتهور‬
The coward                                                      ‫الجبان‬
Hypocrisy                                                         ‫نفاق‬
Pretending                                                      ‫تظاهر‬
Passive                                                           ‫سلبي‬


                                   - 176 -
Active                                                     ‫إيجابي‬
To dislike                                                   ‫يكره‬
To detest                                                    ّ‫يمج‬
Torture                                                       ّ
                                                    ‫يعذب – تعذيب‬
Sympathy                                                   ‫تعاطف‬
Impotency                                                   ‫العنّة‬
Rape                                                     ‫اغتصاب‬
Kidnapping                                                  ‫خطف‬
Promotive power                                          ‫قوة دافعة‬
Refraining power                                ‫قوة مانعة أو ملجمة‬
Abnormal instinctive quantity or         ‫شذوذ غريزي كمي أو كيفي‬
quality
Pride                                              ‫خيالء أو غرور‬
Hated of life                                           ‫كره الحياة‬
Homicide-suicide crime                      ‫جريمة القتل االنتحاري‬
Avidity                                                      ‫جشع‬
Prodigality                                                  ‫تبذير‬
Inclination to accumulate property         ‫الميل إلى تكديس الملكية‬
Expenditure                                                ‫اإلنفاق‬
Spender                                                      ‫منفق‬
To compensate                                              ‫يعوّض‬
Loss                                                        ‫خسارة‬
Assaulting other’s property                ‫العدوان على ملكية الغير‬
To elude justice                                 ‫يتملص من العدالة‬
Occasional delinquent                             ‫المجرم العرضي‬
Constitutional delinquent                          ‫المجرم بالسليقة‬
Abnormal                                                      ‫شاذ‬
To waken                                                     ‫يوقظ‬
Animating factors                                     ‫عوامل منبهة‬


                               - 177 -
Consuming drugs                      ‫تعاطي المخدرات‬
To awaken                                       ‫يوقظ‬
Inherent in                                 ‫كامن في‬
Heredity                                      ‫الوراثة‬
Hippocrates                                 ‫إيبوقراط‬
Socrates                                      ‫سقراط‬
Plato                                       ‫أفالطون‬
Aristotle                                    ‫أرسطو‬
Corrupted soul                             ‫نفس فاسدة‬
Deriving from                              ‫ناجمة عن‬
Physical deformities                   ‫تشويهات خلقية‬
Trend                                           ‫اتجاه‬
Persisted                                        ‫بقي‬
Till the Middle Ages              ‫حتى العصور الوسطى‬
Belief                                         ‫معتقد‬
Features                                      ‫تقاطيع‬
Umbilicus                                  ‫سرة البطن‬
Planets                                       ‫كواكب‬
Destiny                                       ‫مصير‬
Wicked                                         ‫شرير‬
To reveal                              ‫يظهر – يكشف‬
Physical defects                        ‫عيوب خلقية‬
To sustain                                      ‫يؤيد‬
Natural philosophers                  ‫فالسفة طبيعيون‬
Weakness of character                    ‫ضعف خلقي‬
Related to a trouble                     ‫مرتبطة بخلل‬
Development                                      ‫نمو‬
Brain                                           ‫دماغ‬
Cerebrum                                          ‫مخ‬


                        - 178 -
Physician                                                      ‫طبيب‬
To profess                                                     ‫ينادي‬
Fall in a sin                                         ‫وقوع في خطيئة‬
Offender                                                       ‫مجرم‬
Uncompleted and deformed figure                   ‫صورة ناقصة مشوهة‬
Specialized in mental diseases             ‫متخصص في األمراض العقلية‬
Madness                                                        ‫جنون‬
To arise                                                ‫ينبع أو ينبعث‬
Origin                                                        ‫مصدر‬
Defective formation                                      ‫تكوين معيب‬
To reverse                                                     ‫يعكس‬
Idea                                                            ‫فكرة‬
Resurrection                                                    ‫بعث‬
To belong to                                                ‫ينتمي إلى‬
The remote past                                         ‫الماضي البعيد‬
Pathological nature                                    ‫طبيعة مرضية‬
Similitude                                                       ‫شبه‬
To clarify                                            ‫يظهر أو يوضح‬
To support                                                      ‫يساند‬
To start                                                         ‫يبدأ‬
Attempt                                                       ‫محاولة‬
To undertake                                          ‫يأخذ على عاتقه‬
Scientist                                                       ‫عالم‬
Forensic and nervous medicine                     ‫طب شرعي وعصبي‬
Physical characteristics                             ‫مميزات جسمانية‬
Evil soldiers                                            ‫جنود أشرار‬
Tattoos                                                       ‫وشمات‬
Ugly drawings                                            ‫رسوم قبيحة‬
Printed                                                       ‫مطبوع‬


                                 - 179 -
Autopsy                                                       ‫تشريح‬
Cadavers                                                        ‫جثث‬
Defects                                                        ‫عيوب‬
Bodily formation                                       ‫تكوين جسماني‬
Skulls                                                        ‫جماجم‬
Anomalies                                                 ‫وجوه شذوذ‬
Capacity of endurance                                   ‫طاقة احتمالية‬
Specialized in mental diseases             ‫متخصص في األمراض العقلية‬
Madness                                                        ‫جنون‬
To arise                                                ‫ينبع أو ينبعث‬
Origin                                                        ‫مصدر‬
Defective formation                                      ‫تكوين معيب‬
To reverse                                                     ‫يعكس‬
Idea                                                            ‫فكرة‬
Resurrection                                                    ‫بعث‬
To belong to                                                ‫ينتمي إلى‬
The remote past                                         ‫الماضي البعيد‬
Pathological nature                                    ‫طبيعة مرضية‬
Similitude                                                       ‫شبه‬
To clarify                                            ‫يظهر أو يوضح‬
To support                                                      ‫يساند‬
To start                                                         ‫يبدأ‬
L’uomo delinquent                                     ‫اإلنسان المجرم‬
To appear                                                      ‫يظهر‬
Latter researches                                       ‫بحوث الصقة‬
To surpass                                                    ‫يتجاوز‬
Apparent                                                       ‫ظاهر‬
Functions                                                     ‫وظائف‬
Internal organs                                      ‫األعضاء الداخلية‬


                                 - 180 -
Psychological conditions                        ‫األحوال النفسية‬
To state                                                  ‫يقرر‬
Strict relation                                      ‫صلة وثيقة‬
Organic trouble                                    ‫خلل عضوي‬
Psychological defect                                ‫عيب نفسي‬
To include                                              ‫يضمّن‬
Observations                                         ‫مالحظات‬
Edition                                                  ‫طبعة‬
Psychological lunatic                            ‫مجنون نفساني‬
Violent and blood crimes                        ‫جرائم عنف ودم‬
To deduce                                               ‫يستنتج‬
Nervous acts of epilepsy                    ‫أفعال عصبية تشنجية‬
To evolve                                               ‫يتطور‬
Primitive monster                                  ‫وحش بدائي‬
Epileptic                                        ‫متشنج عصبي‬
To translate                                             ‫يترجم‬
To criticize                                              ‫ينتقد‬
Born criminal                                     ً‫مولود مجرما‬
Hereditary factors                                ‫عوامل وراثية‬
Abnormal creature                                   ‫مخلوق شاذ‬
Assertion                                                ‫تقرير‬
Was bitterly criticized                            ‫انتقد بمرارة‬
Contemporaries                                      ‫معاصرون‬
To impute                                                ‫ينسب‬
Grave lack of statistics                 ‫قصور شديد في اإلحصاء‬
Psychological anomaly                             ‫شذوذ نفساني‬
Definite fall in delinquency             ‫سقوط حتمي في اإلجرام‬
Hereditary inclination                             ‫ميل موروث‬
Associated with                                       ‫مقترن بـ‬


                               - 181 -
To occur                                                ‫يوجد أو يحدث‬
Latent                                                  ‫خفي أو مستتر‬
Without conducing to any crime               ‫دون إفضاء إلى أية جريمة‬
Could be acquired after birth               ‫يمكن أن تكتسب بعد الميالد‬
Naples                                                           ‫نابلي‬
Disciple                                                         ‫تلميذ‬
Psyche                                                           ‫نفسية‬
Lacking mercy and honesty                  ‫ينقصه الورع وتنقصه األمانة‬
To generate                                                       ‫يولد‬
To assert                                                ‫يقرر أو يعلن‬
Special prevention                                       ‫المنع الخاص‬
Frightening of the public                     ‫إخافة أو إرعاب الجمهور‬
General prevention                                          ‫المنع العام‬
Last steps                                              ‫خطوات أخيرة‬
To pave the way                                           ‫يمهد الطريق‬
Apparition                                                      ‫ظهور‬
The positive school                        ‫المدرسة الوضعية أو الواقعية‬
To head                                                         ‫يرأس‬
Principles                                                      ‫مبادئ‬
Exerted their influence                                 ‫باشرت تأثيرها‬
Penal legislations                                  ‫التشريعات الجنائية‬
He achieved the task of his master                   ‫أكمل عمل أستاذه‬
To show                                                  ‫يبين – يظهر‬
Criminal sociology                               ‫على االجتماع الجنائي‬
Author                                                          ‫مؤلف‬
Cosmic                                                           ‫كوني‬
Organic                                                       ‫عضوي‬
To define                                                       ‫يعرّ ف‬
Interaction                                                     ‫تفاعل‬


                                 - 182 -
Inner and personal factors             ‫العوامل الداخلية الشخصية‬
Natural geographic environment         ‫الوسط الطبيعي الجغرافي‬
Social spiritual factors                 ‫عوامل اجتماعية روحية‬
Social relations                                ‫روابط اجتماعية‬
Proportion                                                 ‫نسبة‬
View                                         ‫رأي أو وجهة نظر‬
To give birth to                                            ‫يولد‬
The so-called                                          ‫ما يسمى‬
Criminal density                                 ‫الكثافة الجنائية‬
Field of chemistry                                ‫مجال الكيمياء‬
Law of density                                    ‫قانون الكشافة‬
Amount                                                     ‫كمية‬
Liquid                                                     ‫سائل‬
Temperature                                        ‫درجة حرارة‬
To dissolve                                                ‫يذيب‬
To represent                                                ‫يمثل‬
Limit of saturation                                   ‫حد التشبع‬
More or less                                        ‫أكثر أو أقل‬
Hence                                                        ‫إذن‬
Degree                                                    ‫درجة‬
Consequently                                           ‫تبعاً لذلك‬
Premise                                                   ‫مقدمة‬
Compelled                                                 ‫مسيّر‬
Power of free choice                    ‫قدرة على حرية االختيار‬
To deserve                                               ‫يستحق‬
Measure                                          ‫إجراء أو تدبير‬
Nevertheless                                           ‫رغم ذلك‬
To defend itself                                 ‫تدافع عن نفسها‬
To eliminate                                     ‫يستبعد أو يزيل‬


                             - 183 -
To originate                                                    ‫ينشئ أو يولد‬
To substitute to the moral                        ‫يحل محل المسؤولية األدبية‬
responsibility
A legal one                                                    ‫واحدة قانونية‬
Defense                                                                 ‫دفاع‬
Preventive measures                                             ‫تدابير وقائية‬
Instead of                                                               ً
                                                                     ‫بدال من‬
Repressive measures                                             ‫تدابير عقابية‬
To expect                                                              ‫ينتظر‬
To address to                                                      ‫يوجه إلى‬
To threaten                                                             ‫يهدد‬
To apply                                                               ‫يطبق‬
It is assumed that                                         ‫من المفروض أن‬
Effective taste of the punishment                   ‫المذاق الفعلي أللم العقاب‬
pain
To operate                                                    ‫يفعل أو يحدث‬
Inner character                                                ‫الطبع الداخلي‬
Modification                                                           ‫تعديل‬
The simple threat of punishment                       ‫محض اإلنذار بالعقاب‬
To be unable to realize                                     ‫يعجز عن تحقيق‬
To ascrible to                                                     ‫يرجع إلى‬
The function of social defence                      ‫وظيفة الدفاع االجتماعي‬
Retribution of a sin                                          ‫مقابل خطيئة‬
It drew the attention of legislators               ‫جذب انتباه المشرعين إلى‬
to
Necessity of providing a security            ‫ضرورة النص على تدبير وقائي‬
measure
Releasing                                                              ‫إفراج‬
Leaving him to the discretion of             ‫تركه تحت رحمة السلطة اإلدارية‬
the administrative authority
Prevention                                                             ‫وقاية‬

                                   - 184 -
To avoid the factors leading to             ‫يتالشى العوامل المفضية إلى اإلجرام‬
delinquency
Individualization of penal                                ‫تفريد المعاملة الجنائية‬
treatment
Penal execution                                                   ‫التنفيذ العقابي‬
To adapt to                                                             ‫يوائم مع‬
Resocialization                                                            ‫تأهيل‬
Briefly                                                                   ‫بإيجاز‬
To promote                                                       ‫يحرك أو يشحذ‬
Penal sanction                                                   ‫الجزاء الجنائي‬
In the fields of legislation,                 ‫في مجال التشريع والقضاء والتنفيذ‬
judgment and execution
To acquire approval                                               ‫يحظى بالقبول‬
Free will                                                             ‫إرادة حرة‬
Towards the non mad criminals                      ‫إزاء المجرمين غير المجانين‬
Sociologist                                                         ‫عالم اجتماع‬
To surround                                                              ‫يحيط بـ‬
Is susceptible to                                                         ‫قابل بـ‬
Correctness                                                   ‫إصالح – استقامة‬
Elimination                                                     ‫استبعاد أو إزالة‬
To environ                                                    ‫يحيط بـ أو يكتنف‬
Is not keen to recognize                                               ً ‫ليس‬
                                                        ‫مياال إلى اإلقرار بـ‬
Criminologist                                                        ‫عالم إجرام‬
Raw material                                                          ‫مادة أولية‬
To shape                                                                  ‫يشكل‬
The corrupted environment in                     ‫الوسط الفاسد الذي ولد ونما فيه‬
which he took birth and grew
To look for                                                           ‫يبحث عن‬
To give rise                                                                ‫يثير‬
To knock at their doors                                      ‫يطرق على أبوابهم‬
The knocking at his own door                                ‫الطرق على بابه هو‬

                                  - 185 -
To combat                                                             ‫يكافح‬
Negligence                                                            ‫إهمال‬
Citizens                                                          ‫مواطنون‬
Poverty                                                                  ‫فقر‬
Issue                                                          ‫نتيجة منبثقة‬
Harmful                                                                ‫ضار‬
Co-existence                                              ‫التعايش المشترك‬
Doctrinal conflict                                             ‫خالف ثقافي‬
Is impregnated by                                                   ‫مشبع بـ‬
Culture                                                                ‫ثقافة‬
Is in contrast with                                         ‫في تعارض مع‬
Regions                                                              ‫مناطق‬
Miserable parts                                                ‫أجزاء بائسة‬
Delinquency area                                               ‫بقعة اإلجرام‬
Social group                                                   ‫فئة اجتماعية‬
The upsaid point of view                    ‫وجهة النظر السابق أن أشير إليها‬
The same effect                                                  ‫ذات األثر‬
To depend upon                                                  ‫يتوقف على‬
Susceptibility of undergoing it                              ‫قابلية التأثر به‬
Unavoidable                                               ‫غير قابل للتحاشي‬
Psychiatrist                                  ‫عالم المرض العقلي والعصبي‬
To originate from                                             ‫ينبثق من‬
Object entity                                                  ‫كيان خسيس‬
To predominate upon                                             ‫يطغى على‬
Sublime entity                                               ‫كيان سام رفيع‬
Is distinguished by                                               ‫متميزة بـ‬
Fundament                                                            ‫أساسي‬
Supplementary                                                        ‫تكميلي‬
Profound and original                                         ‫عميق وأصيل‬


                                  - 186 -
Less profound                                                            ‫أقل عمق‬
To reflect                                                                  ‫يعكس‬
Race                                                                         ‫جنس‬
To encounter                                                        ‫يواجه – يقابل‬
Even partially                                                          ً‫ولو جزئيا‬
To mention                                                                   ‫يذكر‬
Guilty complex                                                      ‫مركب خطيئة‬
To push the individual                                                  ‫يدفع الفرد‬
The deserved punishment                                          ‫العقاب المستحق‬
To attribute to                                               ‫ينسب أو يرجع إلى‬
Attempt of freeing himself from                           ‫محاولة تحرير نفسه من‬
Inner struggle                                                      ‫صراع داخلي‬
Inferiority complex                                                   ‫مركب تدني‬
Evidently                                                                   ‫بالطبع‬
Do not offer a general criterion of                   ‫ال تقدم معياراً عاماً لإلجرام‬
delinquency
To flourish                                                                 ‫يزدهر‬
Really                                                                       ‫حقيقة‬
First half                                                             ‫نصف أول‬
Actual century                                                       ‫القرن الحالي‬
Due to                                                                       ‫بسبب‬
Efforts                                                                      ‫جهود‬
To adopt                                                             ‫يتبنى أو يتبع‬
Scientific methods                                                   ‫وسائل علمية‬
Experiments                                                                ‫تجارب‬
Establishment of prevention and                         ‫مؤسسات الوقاية والعقاب‬
repression
Universal physician specialized in          ‫طبيب عالمي متخصص في أمراض الغدد‬
glands diseases
Human typology science                                        ‫علم فصائل اإلنسان‬


                                  - 187 -
Categories                                                                     ‫فئات‬
Common symptoms                                                    ‫أعراض مشتركة‬
Criminal anthropology                                             ‫علم طبائع المجرم‬
Crowned his efforts by                                                ‫كلل جهوده بـ‬
Criminal constitution or                       ‫التكوين اإلجرامي أو االستعداد السابق‬
predisposition                                                              ‫لإلجرام‬
Experience indicates                                                   ‫تظهر الخبرة‬
To possess                                                                    ‫يحوز‬
Tendency or inclination to                                     ‫ميل أو نزعة لإلجرام‬
delinquency
Doesn’t exist in the others                                    ‫ال توجد في اآلخرين‬
Which provoke their criminal                 ‫التي تثير نزعتهم اإلجرامية وتقودهم إلى‬
tendency and lead them to                                                  ‫اإلجرام‬
delinquency
On the part of ordinary persons                        ‫من جانب األشخاص العاديين‬
To animate                                                                     ‫يثير‬
To exteriorize                                                                ‫يظهر‬
Is connected with                                                          ‫مرتبط بـ‬
Is simultaneously physical and                             ‫جسمي نفسي في آن واحد‬
psychological
To differ according to their kinds                          ‫يختلف باختالف أنواعهم‬
To distinguish from                                                        ‫يميز عن‬
Does not attain a pathological                          ‫ال تبلغ حد الطبيعة المرضية‬
nature
Doesn’t deserve the quality of a                          ‫ال تستحق وصف المرض‬
disease
The mad who is delinquent                                          ‫المجنون المجرم‬
The delinquent who is mad                                          ‫المجرم المجنون‬
His recovery from madness                                         ‫إبالله من الجنون‬
Previous to                                                              ‫سابق على‬
To aggravate                                                      ‫يضاعف الجسامة‬
It would not be enough                                                ً‫ال يكون كافيا‬

                                   - 188 -
To treat                                                               ‫يعالج – يعامل‬
At an early age                                                          ‫في سن مبكر‬
To imply                                                                      ‫يتضمن‬
Grave                                                                           ‫جسيم‬
To find delight and pleasure in                          ‫يجد لذة وسروراً في ارتكابها‬
committing them
We approve                                                                 ‫نوافق على‬
Causal factor of delinquency                                ‫العامل السببي في اإلجرام‬
Less detailed                                                            ً
                                                                         ‫تفصيال‬ ‫أقل‬
Central nucleus of criminal                       ‫النواة المركزية للشخصية اإلجرامية‬
personality
Egocentrism                                                      ‫االنطواء على النفس‬
Quick driftage                                                        ‫سرعة االنسياق‬
Aggressiveness                                                           ‫نزعة التعدي‬
Affective indifference                                         ‫عدم االكتراث العاطفي‬
Four abstacles that stand in the              ‫أربع عقبات تقف في الطريق إلى الجريمة‬
way of crime
The social opprobrium                                                ‫العار االجتماعي‬
The legal threat of punishment                                   ‫إنذار القانون بالعقاب‬
The consist of                                                              ‫يتمثل في‬
Difficulties                                                                ‫صعوبات‬
Probably                                                                     ً
                                                                             ‫احتماال‬
The horror of the figure which is                ‫بشاعة الصورة التي يعطيها هذا التنفيذ‬
given by this execution
To overcome                                                                  ‫يتخطى‬
Surpassingness                                                       ‫تخطي أو تجاوز‬
Indesicive acquiescence to the                   ‫اإلقرار غير الحاسم للفكرة اإلجرامية‬
criminal idea
Decisive acquiescence to the                          ‫اإلقرار الحاسم للفكرة اإلجرامية‬
criminal idea
The dangerous crisis state or the                ‫حالة األزمة الخطرة أو األزمة النفسية‬
psychological dangerous crisis                                               ‫الخطرة‬

                                    - 189 -
Withdraw                                                   ‫يسحب أو يرجع عن‬
The passage to the act                                        ‫العبور إلى الفعل‬
Organic physical factor                                  ‫عامل عضوي جسمي‬
Social economic                                             ‫اجتماعي اقتصادي‬
To deflect to                                                        ‫يحوّل إلى‬
Mental psychological factor                                  ‫عامل ذهني نفسي‬
The animating internal factors of delinquency
Addiction to alcohol drugs                    ‫اإلدمان على الخمر أو المخدرات‬
Disorder of glandular secretion                        ‫الخلل في اإلفراز الغددي‬
Self suggestion                                                  ‫اإليحاء الذاتي‬
The animating external factors of delinquency
Natural surroundings                                           ‫المحيط الطبيعي‬
Social surroundings                                         ‫المحيط االجتماعي‬
Internal animating factors
(1) The sex                                                             ‫الجنس‬
(2) The age                                                               ‫السن‬
Puberty                                                               ‫المراهقة‬
Pubescent                                                             ‫المراهق‬
Obscene acts                                                  ‫األفعال الفاضحة‬
Compensation                                                           ‫تعويض‬
Sexual potency decline                                     ‫أفول القدرة الجنسية‬
(3) Alcohol and drugs                                       ‫الخمر والمخدرات‬
Moderate use                                                ‫االستعمال المعتدل‬
Consciousness                                                           ‫الوعي‬
To sensitize                                                              ‫يثير‬
Embezzlers                                                        ‫خائنو األمانة‬
Predisposition                                                ‫االستعداد المسبق‬
Audacious                                                    ‫مجترئ أو جسور‬
Arson                                                                   ‫حريق‬



                                  - 190 -
Sexual assaults                                ‫االعتداءات الجنسية‬
Chronic                                                      ‫مزمن‬
Tuberculosis                                          ‫السل الرئوي‬
Latent                                                         ‫خفي‬
Infuriating                                                    ‫إثارة‬
Idleness                                                     ‫خمول‬
Indifference                                           ‫عدم اكتراث‬
Fall of mental faculties                      ‫انهيار الملكات العقلية‬
Has fallen a slave of the drug                     ‫وقع عبداً للمخدر‬
Poisonous substances                                     ‫مواد سامة‬
Saturation point                                       ‫نقطة التشبع‬
(4) Certain diseases
Syphilis                                                   ‫الزهري‬
Typhoid                                                      ‫التيفود‬
Malaria                                                     ‫المالريا‬
Influenza                                                 ‫اإلنفلونزا‬
Encephalitis                                           ‫التهاب المخ‬
Larceny                                                       ‫سرقة‬
(5) Disorder of glandular secretion
The thyroid gland                                      ‫الغدة الدرقية‬
The pituitary gland                                   ‫الغدة النخامية‬
The thymus                                          ‫الغدة التيموسية‬
The sexual gland                                      ‫الغدة الجنسية‬
The liver                                                      ‫الكبد‬
The kidneys                                                   ‫الكلى‬
The pancreas                                             ‫البنكرياس‬
Amputation                                        ‫قطع أو استئصال‬
(6) Emotion and passion
Interruption of feeling equilibrium        ‫انقطاع االتزان الشعوري‬



                                 - 191 -
(7) Autosuggestion                                          ‫اإليحاء الذاتي‬
Passive attitude                                             ‫موقف سلبي‬
Accordance                                                          ‫توافق‬
External animating factors
Natural surroundings                                      ‫المحيط الطبيعي‬
1) The weather                                                       ‫الجو‬
Meteorologic statistics                        ‫إحصاءات األرصاد الجوية‬
Calendar                                                             ‫تقويم‬
To prevail                                                 ‫يطغى أو يسود‬
2) The food                                                         ‫الغذاء‬
3) The dwelling                                                   ‫المسكن‬
Social surroundings                                    ‫المحيط االجتماعي‬
1) Disorganized family                                     ‫األسرة المفككة‬
2) School, friendships and job                 ‫المدرسة واألصدقاء والمهنة‬
3) Economic state                                       ‫الحالة االقتصادية‬
4) Widespread believes                                  ‫المعتقدات الشائعة‬
To swear                                                             ‫يقسم‬
Masculinity                                                       ‫الذكورة‬
Excitement                                                           ‫إثارة‬
5) Mass-media                                              ‫وسائل اإلعالم‬
Autosuggestion of delinquency                      ‫اإليحاء الذاتي باإلجرام‬
6) Illiteracy and instruction                              ‫األمية والتعليم‬
Patent                                                             ‫ظاهر‬
The dynamics of crimes according           ‫ديناميكية الجرائم حسب نوعيتها‬
to their kind
1) Dynamics of crimes against                  ‫ديناميكية الجرائم ضد المال‬
property
2) Dynamics of crimes against              ‫ديناميكية الجرائم ضد األشخاص‬
persons
To eviscerate                                                  ‫يبقر البطن‬
Savage                                                             ‫وحشي‬

                                 - 192 -
To mutilate the cadaver                                         ‫يقطع أوصال الجثة‬
3) Vengeance                                                                   ‫الثأر‬
Residue                                                                      ‫راسب‬
Vindictive retaliation                                          ‫رد الفعل االنتقامي‬
To stab                                                                       ‫يطعن‬
4) Doing evil for love of evil                             ‫فعل األذى حباً في األذى‬
5) Sexual jealousy                                                  ‫الغيرة الجنسية‬
Martial influence                                                 ‫السطوة الزوجية‬
Sensuality                                                         ‫الشهوة الجسدية‬
Exchange of ideas and sentiments                            ‫تبادل األفكار والمشاعر‬
Truthfulness                                                                ‫الصدق‬
Reciprocated care                                                   ‫العناية المتبادلة‬
Spiritual affection                                               ‫اإلعزاز الروحي‬
6) Feeling of a physical or                   ‫الشعور بمركب نقص جثماني أو نفساني‬
psychological inferiority complex
7) Pride and delight of                                            ‫الغرور والمتعة‬
Seeing fire spectacles                                                ‫بمشاهد النار‬
Dynamics of masses delinquency                        ‫ديناميكية إحرام الكتل الشعبية‬
1) The inclination to aggression                                  ‫الميل إلى التعدي‬
2) The tendency to imitate                                         ‫الميل إلى التقليد‬
3) The prevailing of evil spirit                            ‫طغيان النزعة إلى الشر‬
4) The paralysis of intelligence                                   ‫شلل ملكة الذكاء‬
5) The bad conditions of people’s                      ‫الظروف السيئة لحياة الشعب‬
life
6) The feeling of omnipotence                                   ‫الشعور بالجبروت‬
7) Presence of elements that                           ‫وجود عناصر تيسر اإلجرام‬
facilitate delinquency
Devastation                                                                ‫التخريب‬
Pillage                                                                         ‫نهب‬
Burning                                                                       ‫حريق‬


                                    - 193 -
Facades of shapes                                               ‫واجهات المحال‬
Incubus                                                            ‫الطرف القائد‬
Succubus                                                         ‫الطرف المقود‬
Previous acquaintance                                              ‫تعارف سابق‬
By accident                                                            ‫بالصدفة‬
Gang                                                                    ‫عصابة‬
Chief gangster                                                   ‫رئيس العصابة‬
The source of casual factor                                ‫مصدر العامل السببي‬
Arguments in support of heredity                          ‫الحجج المؤيدة للوراثة‬
Subdivision of criminology
Criminal anthropology                                         ‫علم طبائع المجرم‬
Morphology                                                ‫علم األعضاء الظاهرة‬
Endocrinology                           ‫علم األعضاء الباطنة أو الكيمياء الداخلية‬
Criminal psychology                                           ‫علم النفس الجنائي‬
Abdomen                                                                   ‫البطن‬
Extremities                                                           ‫األطراف‬
Deformities                                                           ‫التشوهات‬
Digestive apparatus                                             ‫الجهاز الهضمي‬
Respiratory apparatus                                            ‫الجهاز التنفسي‬
Cardiac vasomotor apparatus                        ‫جهاز القلب واألوعية الدموية‬
Urinary sexual apparatus                                 ‫الجهاز البولي التناسلي‬
Nervous apparatus                                              ‫الجهاز العصبي‬
More frequent                                                      ً‫أكثر شيوعا‬

More marked                                                           ‫أكثر حدة‬
To worsen                                                                 ‫يسوّئ‬
Impressions                                                           ‫انطباعات‬
Gaps                                                                     ‫ثغرات‬
Introvert perception                                ‫إدراك انطوائي على الداخل‬
Illusion                                                                    ‫وهم‬


                              - 194 -
Hallucination                                                         ‫هلوسة‬
Attentiveness                                                     ‫قوة االنتباه‬
Capacity of judgement                                             ‫ملكة الحكم‬
Capacity of logic                                              ‫ملكة االستنتاج‬
Capacity of criticism                                              ‫ملكة النقد‬
Capacity of imagination                                          ‫ملكة الخيال‬
Incapacity of identifying the scope                ‫عدم القدرة على تبين الغاية‬
Precipitateness                                                      ‫االندفاع‬
Without previous ponderation                                 ‫دون وزن سابق‬
Automaticity                                                     ‫بصورة آلية‬
Criminal sociology                                     ‫على االجتماع الجنائي‬
Criminal psychopathology                       ‫علم األمراض العقلية اإلجرامية‬
Methods of research in criminology              ‫أساليب البحث في علم اإلجرام‬
Precedents                                                            ‫سوابق‬
File of inquiry                                                 ‫ملف التحقيق‬
Interrogations                                                    ‫استفهامات‬
Doer’s dangerousness                                          ‫خطورة الفاعل‬
To tempt                                                               ‫يغري‬
Abundance                                                               ‫وفرة‬
Aliments                                                               ‫أغذية‬
Monetary stability                                              ‫الثبات النقدي‬
Deserted                                                             ‫مهجور‬
Badly illuminated                                              ‫سيء اإلضاءة‬
Easily accessible                                           ‫سهل الدخول فيه‬
Cash money                                                         ‫نقود سائلة‬
Poniard                                                                ‫خنجر‬
Revolver                                                              ‫مسدس‬
Instrument for fracture                                          ‫أدارة للكسر‬
Efficiency                                                             ‫فاعلية‬


                                     - 195 -
By mistake                                            ‫بطريق الخطأ‬
Undue banknote                               ‫ورقة نقدية غير مستحقة‬
Reimbursing a check                                    ‫صرف شيك‬
Testament                                                    ‫وصيّة‬
Testator                                                   ‫الموصي‬
In favour of his female lover                        ‫لصالح عشيقته‬
Donation                                                        ‫هبة‬
Destruction                                                   ‫إتالف‬
Bachelorhood                              ‫)العزوبة (حالة عدم الزواج‬
Guessing                                                     ‫تخمين‬
Criminal sociology                             ‫علم االجتماع الجنائي‬
Economic state                                     ‫الحالة االقتصادية‬
General welfare                                         ‫الرخاء العام‬
General depression                                      ‫الركود العام‬
Monotonous                                                     ‫ممل‬
Enterprises                                              ‫مشروعات‬
Accumulated                                                  ‫مك ّدس‬
Prosperous                                                    ‫رغيد‬
Fiscal situation                                   ‫الموقف الضريبي‬
Exonerated                                                    ‫معفي‬
Seemingly                                                ‫في الظاهر‬
Concentration                                               ‫تركيز‬
Erroneous                                                   ‫مخطئ‬
To increase                                               ‫يتضاعف‬
To decrease                                                 ‫يتناقص‬
To assimilate                                                  ‫يشبّه‬
Temptation                                                    ‫إغراء‬
Magnet                                                    ‫مغناطيس‬
Scraping                                             ‫برادة أو نشارة‬


                                - 196 -
Refractory                                        ‫غير قابل للتأثر‬
To succumb                                                ‫يخضع‬
Instantaneously                                       ‫على الفور‬
Social class                                   ‫الطبقة االجتماعية‬
Synthesis                                        ‫خالصة التفاعل‬
Interaction                                               ‫التفاعل‬
Isolately                                             ‫على انفراد‬
Requisites                                              ‫متطلبات‬
To demonstrate                                               ‫يبيّن‬
Capacities                                      ‫ملكات أو أهليات‬
Defective                                                  ‫معيب‬
Height of stature                                   ‫ارتفاع القامة‬
Dimensions                                                  ‫أبعاد‬
Intelligence tests                               ‫اختبارات الذكاء‬
Simple workers                                    ‫العمال البسطاء‬
Specialized workers                          ‫العمال المتخصصون‬
Numerous                                                   ‫متعدد‬
From generation to generation                   ‫من جيل إلى جيل‬
Big burden of misery                      ‫حمولة ضخمة من البؤس‬
Unsanitary dwelling                            ‫مسكن غير صحي‬
Bad nutrition                                         ‫تغذية سيئة‬
Lack of readiness                                   ‫عدم استعداد‬
Stimulants                                       ‫دوافع أو بواعث‬
Obscuration of morality sense                ‫تعتيم الحاسة الخلقية‬
Disability of work                          ‫عدم القدرة على العمل‬
Innate                                                  ‫مولود به‬
Acquired                                                 ‫مكتسب‬
Life requirements                                  ‫مطالب العيش‬
Sublime                                              ‫سام أو نبيل‬


                                - 197 -
To generate                                            ‫يولّد‬
Envy                                                 ‫الحسد‬
Incontestable                              ‫غير قابل للجدل‬
Gifts                                               ‫مواهب‬
To ascend                                            ‫يصعد‬
Ascendance and descendance                   ‫صعود وهبوط‬
Secrecy                                               ‫سرّ ية‬
Graduation                                            ‫تدرّ ج‬
Patent                                                ‫ظاهر‬
Sudden                                               ‫فجائي‬
Survival of the most idoneous                  ‫بقاء األصلح‬
Endowed                                   ‫مزوّد أو موهوب‬
Progress requirements                       ‫متطلبات التقدم‬
To claim                                             ‫يطالب‬
Goal                                                  ‫هدف‬
Brilliance                                            ‫بريق‬
Deceit of desires                           ‫خداع الرغبات‬
Incessancy                                        ‫الالنهائية‬
Insatiableness                            ‫عدم القابلية للشبع‬
To prevail                                           ‫يطغى‬
Sufferance                                           ‫معاناة‬
Sanguineous battles                           ‫معارك دامية‬
Slogans                                           ‫شعارات‬
Blameful                                       ‫محل للعتاب‬
Autocracy                                       ‫حكم األقلية‬
Democracy                                     ‫حكم األغلبية‬
Dictatorship                                   ‫الديكتاتورية‬
Vicious circle                                 ‫حلقة مفرغة‬
Incessantly                                   ‫بدون انقطاع‬


                                - 198 -
Managers                                  ‫رؤساء أو مديرون‬
Subordinates                                    ‫مرؤوسون‬
Fiscal duties                                      ‫ضرائب‬
To flourish                                         ‫يزدهر‬
Avoiding conviction                           ‫تفادي اإلدانة‬
Wicked                                       ‫خبيث أو شرير‬
The degree of civilization                  ‫درجة الحضارة‬
Progressive                                         ‫متزايد‬
Graphic                                         ‫رسم بياني‬
Ascendant line                                  ‫خط صاعد‬
Statistics                                       ‫إحصاءات‬
Spouses                                             ‫أزواج‬
Horizontal line                                   ‫خط أفقي‬
Illusive                                              ‫واهم‬
To accelerate                                        ‫يعجّ ل‬
Ingress                                              ‫دخول‬
Campaign                                            ‫معركة‬
Concordance                                           ‫وفاق‬
Contentment                                         ‫رضاء‬
Discontent                                           ‫سخط‬
Lamb                                               ‫خروف‬
Male sheep                                          ‫كبش‬
The kind of life                              ‫نوع المعيشة‬
Urban                                             ‫حضري‬
Rural                                                ‫ريفي‬
Administration centres                     ‫المراكز اإلدارية‬
Beneath this limit                           ‫تحت هذا الحد‬
Heterogenous group                     ‫مجموعة غير متجانسة‬
To plough                                           ‫يحرث‬


                             - 199 -
Wage worker                                      ‫أجير الزراعة‬
Gathering of harvest                              ‫جمع الحصاد‬
Hirer                                                 ‫مستأجر‬
Exploiter                                              ‫مستغل‬
Crospsharing                                         ‫المزارعة‬
Shepherd                                         ‫راعي األغنام‬
Woodcutter                                      ‫قاطع األخشاب‬
Liberal professions                                ‫المهن الحرة‬
Employees                                             ‫موظفون‬
Arid lands                                    ‫األراضي القاحلة‬
Economic cycle                                ‫الدور االقتصادية‬
Phase of imitation and repetition           ‫مرحلة تقليد وتكرار‬
Phase of insurgence and uprising           ‫مرحلة تمرد وخروج‬
Phase of conformity and                   ‫مرحلة تطابق ومماشاة‬
uniformity
Momentary economic distress               ‫ضيق اقتصادي مؤقت‬
Good moral health                             ‫صحة خلقية جيدة‬
Consumption                                           ‫استهالك‬
To obstruct the revelation                        ‫يعوق ظهور‬
Alert                                                    ‫حذر‬
Homogeneous                                           ‫متجانس‬
Immigrants                                           ‫مهاجرون‬
Underworld                                           ‫دنيا سفلى‬
Countrymen                                       ‫رجال الريف‬
Townsmen                                         ‫رجال المدينة‬
Patience                                                 ‫صبر‬
Forbearance                                          ‫طول أناة‬
Conservation                                          ‫محافظة‬
Avariciousness                                            ‫بخل‬


                                - 200 -
Opposition to change                                ‫االعتراض على التغيير‬
Isolation and lack of contact                        ‫العزلة وعدم االحتكاك‬
Denunciation                                                         ‫بالغ‬
Committed thefts                                         ‫السرقات المرتكبة‬
Meditations                                                        ‫تأمالت‬
Fermentation                                                        ‫تخمر‬
Increment                                                   ‫زيادة أو تزايد‬
To allude in the connection                             ‫يومئ في هذا الشأن‬
Exodus                                                              ‫هجرة‬
Ability                                                             ‫مقدرة‬
Pander                                         ‫)قوادة (تعويل على العاهرات‬
Bribery                                                             ‫رشوة‬
Forgery                                                             ‫تزوير‬
Fraud                                                       ‫غش أو احتيال‬
Practical usefulness of criminology
Individualization of punishment                               ‫تفريد العقاب‬
Juvenile deviation                                        ‫انحراف الطفولة‬
Flagrant adultery                                           ‫زنى متلبس به‬
Accompaniment of imprisonment               ‫مصاحبة الحبس بالعمل اإلجباري‬
with compulsory labour
To replace                                                           ‫يبدل‬
Replacement                                                        ‫اإلبدال‬
Trial                                                            ‫المحاكمة‬
Conditional release                                       ‫اإلفراج الشرطي‬
Relapse into delinquency                        ‫الوقوع من جديد في اإلجرام‬
Diagnosis                                                        ‫تشخيص‬
Emendation                                                         ‫إصالح‬
Undeniable                                                ‫غير قابل لإلنكار‬
Collaboration                                                       ‫تعاون‬


                                  - 201 -
Combat                                                        ‫مكافحة‬
Pioneer                                         ‫رائد أو فاتح الطريق‬
Subdivision of penal expertise                 ‫تقسيم الخبرة الجنائية‬
Analogously to                                            ‫قياساً على‬
Penal matters                                          ‫المواد الجنائية‬
Civil affairs                                         ‫المسائل المدنية‬
Symposium                                                        ‫ندوة‬
Psychiatric expertise                                  ‫الخبرة العقلية‬
Medico-legal expertise                        ‫الخبرة الطبية الشرعية‬
Criminalistics expertise                         ‫خبرة األدلة الجنائية‬
Crime scene                                          ‫مسرح الجريمة‬
Finger prints                                      ‫بصمات األصابع‬
Blood stains                                                  ‫بقع الدم‬
Forged documents                                 ‫المستندات المزورة‬
Criminology expertise                      ‫خبرة فحص شخص المجرم‬
Available                                     ‫موجود تحت التصرف‬
Definition of penology                          ‫التعريف بعلم العقاب‬
Discrimination                                                  ‫تفرقة‬
Social position                                   ‫الوضع االجتماعي‬
Interdiction                                                    ‫حظر‬
Flagellation                                        ‫الضرب بالسياط‬
Medical experiments                                 ‫التجارب الطبية‬
Exchanging correspondence                          ‫تبادل المراسالت‬
Anachronistic                                    ‫غير مواكبة للعصر‬
Prevention science                                        ‫علم الوقاية‬
Treatment science                                         ‫علم التقويم‬
Occurrence                                                      ‫وقوع‬
To emend                                                       ‫يصلح‬
The ideal criminal policy                    ‫السياسة الجنائية المثالية‬


                                 - 202 -
To avoid recidivism                                  ‫يحاشي العود‬
To trace                                                     ‫يرسم‬
Nowadays                                        ‫في الوقت الحاضر‬
Substitute                                                    ‫بديل‬
Legisiative                                               ‫تشريعي‬
Judicial                                                   ‫قضائي‬
Executive                                                   ‫تنفيذي‬
                            PREVENTION
A- Prevention of casual factor            ‫الوقاية من العامل السببي‬
Hereditary                                                  ‫وراثي‬
Avoidance of bad heredity                    ‫تحاشي الوراثة السيئة‬
For this purpose                                      ‫لهذا الغرض‬
Posterity                                        ‫الخلف أو الساللة‬
Engaged persons                             ‫األشخاص المخطوبون‬
Defects                                                     ‫عيوب‬
Sterilization                                               ‫التعقيم‬
Castration                                               ‫اإلخصاء‬
Fallopian tubes                              ‫قناتا فالوب لالستقبال‬
Ejaculation tube                                       ‫قناة اإلنزال‬
Testicles                                                ‫المبايض‬
Uterus                                                   ‫الرحم‬
Limitatively                                   ‫على سبيل الحصر‬
Mental disability                                  ‫الضعف العقلي‬
Idiocy                                                     ‫البالهة‬
Schizophrenia                                    ‫انفصام الشخصية‬
Depressive mania                          ‫مرض االنقباض النفسي‬
Epilepcy                                                   ‫الصرع‬
Nervous diseases                               ‫األمراض العصبية‬
Serious addiction to alcohol             ‫اإلدمان الشديد على الخمر‬


                               - 203 -
Grave physical defects                            ‫العيوب الجثمانية الجسيمة‬
Blindness and deafness                                      ‫العمى والصمم‬
Simultaneous to birth                                     ‫المقارنين للوالدة‬
Technical courts of specialized             ‫محاكم فنية من أطباء متخصصين‬
physicians
Heirs                                                                 ‫ورثة‬
Compensative role                                            ‫دور تعويضي‬
Descendant                                                            ‫خلف‬
Pregnancy                                                            ‫الحمل‬
Embryo                                                              ‫الجنين‬
B-Prevention of animating factors                ‫الوقاية من العوامل المهيئة‬
Standard of life                                           ‫مستوى المعيشة‬
Misery                                                              ‫البؤس‬
Unemployment                                                        ‫البطالة‬
Tiny wage                                                    ‫األجر الضئيل‬
Charity                                                                ‫البر‬
Subsidy                                                              ‫معونة‬
Gratuitous                                                          ‫مجاني‬
Medicament                                                          ‫مداواة‬
Enlightenment                                               ‫تنوير أو توعية‬
Consciousness                                                         ‫وعي‬
Entertainment                                                         ‫تلهية‬
Leisure time                                                   ‫وقت الفراغ‬
Furnishing                                                           ‫تأثيث‬
Impediments                                                          ‫موانع‬
Dissipation                                                           ‫تبديد‬
Jobs polluted atmospheres                           ‫األجواء المهنية الملوثة‬
Press                                                              ‫صحافة‬
Expansion of preaching                                           ‫نشر الوعظ‬



                                  - 204 -
Agglomerations                                       ‫تكتالت أو تجمعات‬
Adversity                                            ‫مخاصمة أو معاداة‬
Vagrants                                                    ‫المتشردون‬
Suspected persons                                ‫األشخاص المشتبه فيهم‬
Perpetration                                          ‫اقتراف – ارتكاب‬
C- Prevention of juveniles’ deviation         ‫الوقاية من انحراف الصغار‬
Puzzled                                                          ‫حائر‬
Obstinate                                                         ‫عنيد‬
Arrogant                                                        ‫متبجح‬
To precipitate                                           ‫يتزلق – يندفع‬
Lukewarmness                                                     ‫فتور‬
Proceeds                                                       ‫عائدات‬
To underestimate                                         ‫يغض من شأن‬
Negligible                                               ‫جدير باإلهمال‬
Accidental childish frivolousness               ‫رعونة صبيانية عارضة‬
Fourfold                                                        ‫رباعي‬
Adaptable to                                                 ‫متالئم مع‬
Aptitude                                                        ‫مقدرة‬
Theoretical                                                     ‫نظري‬
Till                                                              ‫حتى‬
Undergo                                                         ‫يتحمل‬
Feminine police                                           ‫بوليس نسائي‬
To consign                                                       ‫يسلّم‬
Immoral                                                      ‫ال أخالقي‬
Impressive                                                      ‫موحى‬
To warrant                                               ‫يكفل أو يضمن‬
D-The police role                                          ‫دور البوليس‬
Apprehending criminals                            ‫القبض على المجرمين‬
Peaceful settlement of any dispute               ‫الفض السلمي ألي نزاع‬


                                    - 205 -
Trap                                                 ‫كمين‬
Fugitives                                          ‫هاربون‬
Usurers                                   ‫المقرضون بالربا‬
To exploit                                          ‫يستغل‬
Police supervision                          ‫مراقبة البوليس‬
Lie                                                 ‫الكذب‬
Reticence                                          ‫الكتمان‬
Fermented idea                               ‫فكرة مختمرة‬
Removal                                    ‫استبعاد أو إزالة‬
To scatter                                           ‫يبعثر‬
E-The role of work principals             ‫دور أرباب العمل‬
Apprentice                                           ‫صبي‬




                                - 206 -
Contents




  - 207 -
- 208 -
                                 Contents

PREFACE                                                      5

Part I: Criminology                                          7

Chapter One: Importance of Criminology as a Human Science    9

Chapter Two: Crime as a Human Phenomenon                    17

Chapter Three: Schools of Criminology                       26

The Appearance of Schools of Criminology
                                                            32
The Positive Schools

The Modern Positive School                                  39

The Social Schools                                          42

The Renaissance of Criminology in the Modern Ages           45

Chapter Four: The Animating Factors of Delinquency          49

Chapter Five: The Dynamics of Crime                         65

Chapter Six: The Source of The Causal Factor (Heredity)     76

Chapter Seven: Methods Of Research In Criminology           83

Chapter Eight: Criminology as an Applied Science            107

Chapter Nine: The Subdivision of Penal Expertise            113

Part II: Penology                                           115

Chapter One: The Significance of Penology                   117

Chapter Two: Some Aspects of The Criminal Policy            147

Chapter Three: Penal Treatment                              163

Treminilogy                                                 171

Contents                                                    207



                                  - 209 -
- 210 -
