MODULE 2- PUNISHMENT
  AND ITS THEORIES

            By Asst. Prof. Vaishnavi Desai
                   CONCEPT OF PUNISHMENT
• Punishment, according to the dictionary, involves the infliction of pain
  or forfeiture, it is the infliction of a penalty, the purpose of punishment
  is to cause physical pain to the wrong-doer, it serves little purpose.
• In other words punishment is sanction imposed on an accused for the
  infringement of the established rules.
• The Object of Punishment is to protect society from mischievous and
  undesirable elements by deterring potential offenders, by preventing
  the actual offenders from committing further offences and by reforming
  and turning them into law abiding citizens.
                      DETERRENT THEORY
• Punishment is primarily deterrent when its object is to show the
  ineffectiveness of crime, and thereby teach a lesson to others.
  Deterrence acts on the motives of the offenders, whether actual or
  possible. Offences are committed, in most cases, as a result of a
  conflict between the so called interests of the wrong-doer and those of
  society at large. The object of punishment, according to this theory, is
  to show that, in the final analysis, crime is never profitable to the
  offender, and as the case maybe.
• The deterrent theory can be related to the sociological school of
  Jurisprudence. One of the main aim of the deterrence is to establish an
  example for the individuals in the society by creating a fear of
  punishment.
                       PREVENTIVE THEORY
• If the deterrent theory tries to put an end to the crime by causing fear of the
  punishment in the mind of the possible crime-doer, the preventive theory
  aims at preventing crime by disabling the criminal, for example, by inflicting
  the death penalty on the criminal, or by confining him in prison, or by
  suspending his driving license, as the case may be.
• The aim of punishment is to prevent the crimes. The crimes can be
  prevented when the criminal and his notorious activities are checked. The
  check is possible by disablement.
• In the ultimate analysis, the preventive mode of punishment works in three
  ways, viza) a) by inspiring all prospective wrong-doers with the fear of
  punishment; b) by disabling the wrong-doer from immediately committing
  any crime; and c) by transforming the offender, by a process of reformation
  and reskilling, so that he would not commit crime again.
                   REFORMATIVE THEORY
• According to the reformative theory, a crime is committed as a result of
  the conflict between the character and the motive of the criminal. One
  may commit a crime either because the inducement of the motive is
  stronger or because the restraint imposed by character is weaker. This
  theory would consider punishment to be curative or to perform the
  function of a medicine. According to this theory, crime is like a disease.
  This theory maintains that "you cannot cure by killing". The exponents of
  the reformative theory believe that a wrong-doers stay in prison should
  serve to re-educate him and to re-shape his personality in a new mould.
• The idea of the Reformative Theory is hypothesis. It depends on the
  humanistic rule that regardless of whether a wrongdoer perpetrates a
  wrongdoing, he doesn’t stop to be a person. In this way, an exertion
  ought to be made to change him/her during the time of his/her
  detainment.
                     RETRIBUTIVE THEORY
• It is based on a very small doctrine, namely the doctrine of Lex
  talionis, which if translated, means ‘an eye for an eye’. It depends on
  following principles:
• that those who commit certain kinds of wrongful acts, paradigmatically
  serious crimes, morally deserve to suffer a proportionate punishment;
• that it is intrinsically morally good—good without reference to any other
  goods that might arise—if some legitimate punisher gives them the
  punishment they deserve; and
• that it is morally impermissible intentionally to punish the innocent or to
  inflict disproportionately large punishments on wrongdoers.’
                         FORMS OF PUNISHMENT
1. The five different kinds of punishments awarded by the Indian Penal Code, 1860 have been
enumerated under Section 53, and those are:
• Death
• Life imprisonment
• Simple or rigorous imprisonment
• Fine
• Forfeiture of property
• 2. Deportation -
      Another way of punishment is the deportation of corrigible or dangerous
  offenders. Deportation of criminals is also called banishment. Corrigible and hardened
  criminals where generally clamored to far off places with a view to eliminating them from the
  community. In England, war criminals there usually transported to distant Astro-African British
  colonies.
     In India, this method also known as transportation, popularly known as Kalapani. The
  practice was abolished in 1995. It still persists in Mini-form popularly called as externment.
  The object of externment offender is to dissociate him from his surroundings so as to reduce
  his capacity to commit crime. This form of punishment has been incorporated in the penal law
  of India.
3. Corporal punishment -
     Corporal punishment was very common until late 18th century. Corporal punishment includes modulation, flogging (or whipping) and
torture etc.

(a) Flogging -Dictionary meaning of word flogging means, "to whip or to beat with strap/stick as punishment. In middle ages, Whipping was
the commonest form of punishment. The instruments and methods of flogging differ from country to country. In Russia instrument used for
blogging was constructed of a number of dried and hardened thongs was construed of rawhide, interspersed with wires having hooks in their
ends, which could enter and tear the flesh of the Criminal. It has now been discontinued being barbarous and cruel in form. The main object
of this kind of punishment is the deterrence.In India, whipping was recognized as a mode of punishment under the Whipping Act, 1864 which
was repeated and replaced by a similar act in1909 and the same was abolished in the year 1955.

(b) Mutilation -Mutilation is another kind of corporal punishment. It is prevalent during eminent Hindu Period. In case of theft, one or both
the hands the offender were chopped off and in case of sex offenses, his private part was cut off. The justification advanced in support of
mutilation was that it served as an effective measure of deterrence and prevention. This mode of punishment as well has been completely
discarded being barbaric in nature This system was in practice in England, Denmark and many other European countries as well.

(c) Branding - In this type of punishment, criminals were branded with the appropriate mark on the forehead so that they would be
identified and subjected to public Ridicule. For example, if a person found guilty of theft, the word 'theft' or 'T' it is branded on his forehead
and the public would call him theft. In England, branding was practiced till 1829. finally, it was abolished by an Act of Parliament. In India
branding was prevalent during the Mughal rule in its crudest form and was abolished later.

(d) Chaining- Chaining the offenders together was also commonly used as a mode of punishment. Their liberty and mobility was thus
completely restricted. The hands and legs of criminals were tied with iron rods and Chained together. This method is now being sparingly
used in the present prison system.

(e) Pillory - Pillory was yet another form of cruel and barbaric corporal punishment. It was in practice till 19th century. Hardened criminals
and dangerous offenders were nailed in walls and shot or stoned to death. There is no doubt that this type of punishment was more cruel and
brutal in form and therefore it has no place in the modern penal system. The system of pillory existed slightly in the different form during the
Mughal rule in India. It is still used as a mode of punishment for sex offenders in Islamic countries which take offense against women very
seriously
                                   PENAL POLICY IN INDIA
• The Indian law givers of the olden times were well versed in the science of penology and attached great importance to
  penal sanctions. Brahaspati Shastra contains directions that an ideal penal policy always seeks the support of public
  opinion or Lokniti. Again, Kautilya in his Arthashastra modelled his penal policy on utilitarian principles taking into
  consideration various social factors, traditions and customs of the people. Expressing his views on punishment Kautilya
  commented that punishment if too severe alarms a man, if too mild frustrates him, but if properly determined, makes
  man conform to Dharma or rightous conduct. The function of law (Vyavhar) according to him was to bring the wrong-
  doer on the right track by a change in his attitude.
• One peculiar feature of the ancient penal system of India was that it acknowledged the supermacy of Brahmins in
  matters of punishment.

• As to the modes of punishment in ancient India, four main forms were known to have existed. They were:
    (i) Admonition or warning (Vakdanda),
    (ii) Remonstrance (Prayaschitta),
    (iii) Fine (Arthadanda), and
    (iv) Imprisonment, death or mutilation (Vadhadanda, Mritudanda or Aung Vichheda).
• During the medieval period the Muslim rulers introduced their own penal laws in
  India. The system being retributive in nature and irrational and discriminatory in its
  application, failed to meet the ends of justice.
• he irrationalities of Muslim criminal law provided an opportunity for British law
  administrators to substitute their own system of laws with necessary modifications
  so as to suit the needs of India.
• The advance of penology in Anglo-American world during 18th and 19th centuries
  had its own impact on Indian penal system. he sentence of transportation,
  mutilation, solitary confinement, whipping or punishing the offenders in public place
  are completely abolished and new reformative methods such as parole, probation,
  open air prisons, borstals, reformatories, etc. have been adopted for the
  rehabilitation of offenders.
• Modern penologists generally agree that reformation of offenders should be the
  basic purpose of every penal system but at the same time the importance of
  deterrence should not be undermined.
                                 CONCLUSION
• Dr. Jacob George v state of Kerala: In this case, the Supreme Court held that the
  aim of punishment should be deterrent, reformative, preventive, retributive &
  compensatory. One theory preferred over the other is not a sound policy of
  punishment. Each theory of punishment should be used independently or
  incorporated on the basis of merit of the case. It is also stated that “every saint has
  a past & every sinner has a fortune”. Criminals are very much a part of the society
  so it is a responsibility of the society also to reform & correct them and make them
  sober citizens of the society. Because the prevention of crime is the major goal of
  the society and law, both of which cannot be ignored.
• The most heinous crimes in India are of sexual offences. The laws that govern
  these cases are strict in its own sense, but on interpretation shows many
  loopholes. Although there are offences for which death penalty and imprisonment
  for life are the punishments, there are other offences for which a term of
  imprisonment or fine or both, are the punishments. In case of the latter, there are
  chances of offenders repeating the offence. Therefore, the law has to be stringent.
                    LOK SATTA MOVEMENTS’




LOK SATTA MOVEMENT
   People Power
 www.loksatta.org
                 THIS PRESENTATION PROCEEDS
                       ON THE PREMISE …
• That the necessity of “Police Force” is an admission by the civil Society that
  “crime” cannot be eliminated and therefore must be minimized
• That there would always exist persons who will disregard the “Rule of Law”
  and take “Law” into their own hands
• That this is true of perpetrators of crime and also the victims if justice is
  delayed or denied
• Therefore it is vital that criminals are identified, found guilty and punished
  swiftly according to the law of the land
• That fulfillment of this objective depends entirely on the degree of efficiency
  with which Crime Investigation Machinery and judicial system functions
• That the Police Force ought to be feared and respected if India wants to
  provide a dignified life to its citizens and fulfill its dream about becoming
  superpower in the world
                         SOME FACTS…

Indian economy growing @ 9% p.a., limited by three factors:
  – Lack of infrastructure
  – Low labour productivity
  – Failure of rule of law
     • Civil disputes no longer go to courts
     • Extra-legal means being adopted for justice
     • Criminalization of politics
     • Rough and ready justice along with poverty and poor services have
       undermined the legitimacy of the state
                                SOME MORE FACTS…

• Investment on judiciary
   – India: 0.2 % of GDP (Source: First National Judicial Pay Commission)
   – Singapore: 1.2% of GDP
   – USA: 1.4% of GDP
   – UK: 4.3% of GDP
• Number of judges
   – India: 12 per million
   – OECD countries: 120 per million
• Petty corruption in Police (crime and Traffic)- Rs. 3899 crores
• Common citizens pay Rs. 21068 crores to get public services
  (that too in only 11 public departments) (Source: India Corruption Study 2005 by Transparency International
    India   )
       FAILURE OF JUSTICE DELIVERY SYSTEM IN INDIA
• Over 3,00,00,000 (30 million) cases pending in Indian courts
• 60-70% witnesses retract their statements during trial
       (Source: National Police Academy Study)
• Long wait for justice – justice delayed is justice denied
• Recent events have cast a shadow on ability of the
  judiciary to deliver justice effectively
   – Alistair Pereira drunken driving case- Mumbai
   – Best Bakery case- Gujarat
   – Jessica Lal murder case- New Delhi
       • Shooting took place in a prime neighborhood in Delhi
       • Large number of witnesses
       • Forensic evidence was potentially strong
       • Circumstantial evidence was strong
       -> Still the accused were acquitted initially
            HOW RULE OF LAW PREVAILS ELSEWHERE

•    Tony Blair- the former British PM had to sit through a mandatory counseling
    session in 2000 when his 16-year old son was taken in by the police for getting
    drunk and becoming incapacitated. The local police officer counseled the Blair
    couple who had to sit through the entire session as ordinary parents!

•    Bill Clinton was impeached and was almost removed as the President of USA
    ‘merely’ for lying under oath and on a highly personal issue

•   Jenna Bush was arrested, fined and sentenced to community service in Texas
    after she was caught drinking below the legally permissible age limit. She is the
    daughter of George W. Bush Jr., the President of United States

• Paris Hilton has been sentenced to 45 days in prison for driving without a permit in
  Los Angeles. She is the multi millionaire heiress to the Hilton Hotel empire.
       STATE OF POLICE AND POLICING TODAY…
                  Life of a policeman

• His salary - impractically low
• His working hours - inhuman
• His housing and family welfare like health care etc - subhuman
• Education facilities for his off springs - highly inadequate
• Stress busting and morale building training to improve his mental
  and intellectual health - hardly any
• END RESULT
    – Unbearable High Stress leading to increasing incidents of suicides
    – Low Efficiency leading to substandard policing
           STATE OF POLICE AND POLICING TODAY…

• Dwindling faith of the general public in the police force
• Lack of professional approach to investigations which results in low rate
  of convictions
• Political interference hampers neutrality of crime investigations
• Increasing corruption in police force
• Lack of a citizen friendly image
• Lack of morale among policemen
• Vested interest driven appointments
• Unwarranted outside interference in functioning of police force
   STATE OF POLICE AND POLICING TODAY…(cont’d)
          - Distrust between citizens and Police
• Most citizens avoid police due to fear of harassment
• Only those are detained who have no money or political power


   Types of difficulties faced by citizens    Perception of corruption
   Sr.                            Total in   Sr. Perception Total in
        Difficulties faced                   No. of corruption %
   No.                            %
                                                1 Agree              87
      1 Indifferent attitude            64        Neither agree
      2 Corruption                      61      2 nor disagree        7
        Procedural (e.g.: Use of                3 Disagree            5
      3                                 43
        English language)
        Non-availability of forms
      4                                 29   Source: Corruption India study 2005
        and guidelines
      5 Interference of middlemen       11
   STATE OF POLICE AND POLICING TODAY…(cont’d)
          - Distrust between citizens and Police
• Those who need help turn to illegal approaches such as bribing,
  using influence or approaching middlemen
          Alternate avenues used                Services for which bribes are paid
   Sr. Alternate procedures Total in        Sr.                                    Total
                                                  Services
   No. used                       %         No.                                    in %
        Paying additional                       1 Registering FIR                       47
      1                             80
        amount                                    For avoiding being challaned for
                                                2                                       16
      2 Putting extra efforts       27            traffic offences
      3 Using influence             16            For avoiding arrest/serving of
                                                3                                       11
      4 Using political influence   11            notices
        Bureaucrats/officials’                    Other activities (bail, other
      5                              9          4                                        8
        influence                                 challan, etc)
      6 Approaching middlemen        5          5 Avoiding arrest                        6
                                                6 Verification of passport               5
                                                  Ensuring the case is followed
                                                7                                        5
      Source: Corruption India study 2005         up actively
                                                8 Verification for job                   4
                                                9 Filling of charge sheet in court       3
A. Internal systemic problems
B. External influences
                           THE AILMENTS
• Outdated laws
   – Indian Police Act - 1861
   – Evidence Act - 1872
   – Criminal Procedure Code - 1973
   – Indian Penal Code - 1860
• Inappropriate
   – Selection processes
   – Training methods
   – No scope for specialization
   – Empowerment
• Interference by external forces
   – Demoralization
   – Promotion of incompetent personnel
   – Punishment posting
                           PROBLEMS IN
           THE CURRENT INDIAN POLICE SYSTEM
                     -Reasons behind the problems
   • Police inefficiency
        – Hiring of police personnel

                               Citizens per sworn           Sanctioned And Actual Strength Of Civil Police
Country (year)
                               police officer                      Including District Armed Police
Australia (2004)               1:235                                             Maharashtra         ALL INDIA
                                                        Police Ranks / Region
Canada (2007)                  1:492                                           Sanctioned Actual Sanctioned Actual
UK (England & Wales-                                 DG/ Addl.DG /IG / DIG             70     66       1140    1080
                               1:268                 SSP/SP/Addl.SP/ASP/ Dy.SP        810    589       9632    8514
March 2004)
                                                     Inspector, SI & A.S.I.        23250 21046      170338 151799
UK (Metropolitan Force                               Officers Below A.S.I.        111940 100835     967363 885182
                               1:420
London- March 2004)                                  TOTAL                        136070 122536    1148473 1046575
USA (2003)                     1:392                 Shortage                              13534             101898
South Africa (May 2007)        1:365                 % Officers below ASI             82%    82%        84%     85%
India                          1:750
     Source: South Africa Police Service home page
                                                                     Source: National Crime Records Bureau- MHA
India                       1:750
                  PROBLEMS IN
      THE CURRENT INDIAN POLICE SYSTEM
            -Reasons behind the problems
• Police inefficiency
  – Training of police personnel
     • Only three Central Detective Training schools in India
     • Shortage of trained officers and equipment results in poor quality
       investigations
  – Technical equipment
     • 23 Central Forensic Science laboratories in India
     • 203 in USA
     • Level of equipment not good enough- Malimath Committee Report
     STATE OF POLICE AND POLICING TODAY…(cont’d)
        - Burden of disparate duties on police personnel
•    Patrolling neighborhoods (‘on beat’) for security
•    Petty crimes
•    Investigating grave criminal offences and assisting in Prosecution
•    Presenting the accused; serving court summons and bringing
     witnesses to the court
•    Crowd management and riot control
•    Protecting important material assets (like state monuments and
     vital installations)
•    Ensuring physical safety of important public persons
•    Traffic control and management
•    In some cases, tackling organized violence, extremism and
    insurgency
                       PROBLEMS IN
        THE CURRENT INDIAN POLICE SYSTEM
         -Structural design defects in the police force

• Unwarranted external interference and politically driven
  appointments, transfers and promotions
• Disparate functions performed by an overburdened police force
• Lack of genuine empowerment
• Inadequate collaboration between the police and the prosecutor
STATE OF THE POLICE FORCE
  IN THE COUNTRY TODAY
EVOLUTION OF POLICE- SHIFTING ROLES AND PERSPECTIVES
  Police before independence        Police Today               Police of Future
                                                Operates                 Autonomous
      An           Agent of      Agency                    Citizen
                                                 Within                    Within
   Oppressive      colonial       of the                   Centric
                                               Framework                    Legal
     force          rulers     government                  service
                                                 of law                  framework


        Suppression
                                       Law                     Efficient,
            Of
                                   Enforcement              professional and
          people’s
                                    Authority               People friendly,
            will
                                                             upholding rule
                                                                 of law

           Not                         More
      Representative               Representative
           Of                                                 Representative
                                        Of                         of all
         society                      society                   sections of
                                                                  society
A REFORM PROPOSAL
             FIVE-FOLD PATH TO TRANSFORM
             OUR JUSTICE DELIVERY SYSTEM
• Police Reforms
   – Police functioning needs to be completely modernized, adequate
     resources, mobility and technology should be guaranteed
   – Crime investigation must be separated from other police functions, and
     made independent and accountable
• A system of low-cost, citizen-friendly local courts needs to be
  created to try small cases- civil and criminal
• Procedural laws need to be revised to suit modern conditions
• A career in judiciary must be made viable for bright young
  lawyers
• A National Judicial Commission must be created to oversee
  appointments and removals in higher judiciary
         REFORMS PROPOSED – A SUMMARY

• Separation of
   – Crime Investigation
   – Law and Order
   – Local police
• Crime Investigations of serious offences being quasi judicial
   – Placed under “Supervisory Body” appointed by “Collegium”
   – Independent Prosecution Wing
   – All promotions, transfers etc- decided by Supervisory Body
• Counter checks- by Independent Oversight Body
   – To restrain misuse or abuse of authority or power
PROPOSED STRUCTURE OF THE NEW POLICE FORCE
                                                                                                               STATE
                                                    COLLEGIUM                                                GOVERNMENT
                                      Appoints                                                 Appoints
                       SUPERVISORY                    Appoints
                          BODY                                                                              DGP




                                                                        Line of separation
                                                                                                                   District
Independent Crime                                                                                      SP
                                                                                                                  Magistrate
Investigation Unit                               Independent
Grave offences:                  Independent     Oversight
- Homicide                       Prosecution     Body
- Sexual Offences                   Wing         – obstruction of
- Narcotics                                        justice and                                         Riot            Other
- Economic Crimes                                - abuse of authority                                 Control        serious
- Dacoity
- Cyber Crime                                                                                                        law and
- Other grave Crimes                                                                                                   order
                                                                                                                      issues

         Cooperation
                                                       Local,
                                                    Independent                              Line of separation
                                                      oversight
      Local Police
  •   Small Crime
                                                                                              LOCAL GOVERNMENT
  •   Traffic
      maintenance
  •   Local Law & Order
                            COLLEGIUM

• Collegium consists of
   – State Chief Minister
   – Home Minister
   – Leader of Opposition in State Legislature
   – Chief Justice of High Court
   – About 6 eminent personalities from diverse fields of society
• Created to ensure independence of police force from the
  Executive
• State DGP to be appointed for guaranteed tenure without
  unwarranted external interference
• Appointments to key positions in Supervisory Body and
  Independent Oversight Body will be made by Collegium
                   SUPERVISORY BODY

• Independent of the Executive
• Head of this body will be appointed by the Collegium
• Will comprise of jurists, professional investigators and legal
  experts who are reputed, experience and credible within their
  domains of expertise
• Will decide all the appointments, transfers, terminations and
  promotions
• Will prevent arbitrary transfers and ensure sustainability within
  the department.
• Will ensure professionalism and careers on merit and
  performance
    INDEPENDENT CRIME INVESTIGATION WING
• Crime investigation duties are quasi judicial in nature and need
  to be insulated from external influences
• This unit will
   – Be professionally driven in all aspects of investigation
   – Work in close collaboration with an independent prosecution
     unit and the local police
   – Decrease workload on police investigators and ensure that
     expert knowledge gained in the field remains in the unit
   – Will handle only grave offences and not other tasks such as
     petty crimes, traffic control, VIP protection, etc
          INDEPENDENT CRIME INVESTIGATION WING
                    -Proposed Structure

                                     Supervisory Body


                         Independent crime investigation unit


         Homicide                         Sexual offences        Narcotics

  Team 1          Team 2              Team 1     Team 2         Team 1       Team 2

 PI1 PI2        PI3     PI4        PI1 PI2      PI3 PI4     PI1 PI2          PI1 PI2
PI= Police Investigating Officer
          INDEPENDENT PROSECUTION WING
• Appointments, transfers and promotions will be handled by the
  Supervisory Body
• Independent from the District Magistrates
• This unit will ensure
   – Good legal guidance to build a sustainable case in the court
   – Professional and efficient crime investigations
   – Every aspect of investigation will be covered from a legal point of
     view
                          LAW AND ORDER
• Riot control and other serious law-and-order
  issues like terrorism and insurgency etc will
  continue to be addressed by the State Police
  forces as is done today
• Dual control of District superintendent and
  District Magistrate will be maintained as exists
  currently
                   LOCAL POLICE FORCE


• Will help handle small and local issues at the local level
• Will have functional jurisdiction over petty crimes, local policing
  and traffic maintenance
• Will have a local independent oversight body
• Will allow for an increase in police–population ratio and address
  current manpower shortage
• Will decrease burden of disparate duties and promote efficiency
                       LOCAL POLICE FORCE
                         -Proposed Structure

                         Local Police Force


      Petty Crime         Traffic maintenance    Local law and order

 Team 1        Team 2       Team 1      Team 2   Team 1      Team 2

PO1    PO2    PO1 PO2     PO1 PO2 PO1 PO2 PO1 PO2 PO1 PO2

  PO= Police Officer
            INDEPENDENT OVERSIGHT BODY
                  -Policing the police!
• Will consist of experts, reputed jurists, eminent individuals with
  an established track record
• Will not consist of active police officers or government servants
• Will ensure and enhance public accountability
• Will investigate all allegations of
   – Abuse of authority
   – Obstruction of justice by the police
• Will speedily and effectively investigate complaints received
• Will ultimately enhance public trust in police force
      EMPOWERMENT AND TWO LEVEL ENTRY
• Currently entry level determines progress in career
• Individuals stagnate at the level they enter, more so at lower
  levels of the police force
• Current system has contributed to low morale of police
• Proposed system has two level entry
   – Every police officer will be empowered with decision making powers
     and be fully accountable and responsible for his / her work
   – Provides incentives for personnel to carry out their duties effectively
   – Creates better chances of promotions
   – Entry barrier into the system shall be low
   – Growth shall be based on competence and performance
PROPOSED STRUCTURE OF THE NEW POLICE FORCE
                                                                                                                       STATE
                                                       COLLEGIUM                                                     GOVERNMENT
                                         Appoints                                                 Appoints
                          SUPERVISORY                     Appoints
                             BODY                                                                               DGP




                                                                           Line of separation
                                                                                                                         District
Independent Crime                                                                                          SP
                                                                                                                        Magistrate
Investigation Unit                                  Independent
Grave offences:                     Independent     Oversight
- Homicide                          Prosecution     Body
- Sexual Offences                      Wing         – obstruction of
- Narcotics                                           justice and                                           Riot             Other
- Economic Crimes                                   - abuse of authority                                   Control         serious
- Dacoity
- Cyber Crime                                                                                                              law and
- Other grave Crimes                                                                                                         order
                                                                                                                            issues

          Cooperation
                                                           Local,
                                                        Independent                             Line of separation
                                                          oversight
      Local Police
  •   Small Crime                                                                               LOCAL GOVERNMENT
  •   Traffic
      maintenance
  •   Local Law & Order
                               THE ROAD AHEAD…
• Advocacy
   •   Political parties
   •   State and local governments
   •   Civil Society institutions
   •   Community organizations
   •   Citizens
   •   Media
• Preparation for launch of the Police Reforms campaign
   •   Clearly defined roles and responsibilities for campaign activities
   •   Detailed agreements on media support
   •   Preparation of supporting collateral – documentaries, pamphlets etc
   •   Public consultations/ Orientation programmes for volunteers and supporters
   •   Response-capture mechanism
   •   Clear definition of milestones
• Launch of the Police Reforms campaign
   •   Series of well-structured events to obtain critical mass of visibility
• Youth awareness program
   •   Intercollegiate Debate on Police Reforms
• Workshops / seminars
• Public support
   •   Citizen awareness program
• Media debates and activities
THE CAMPAIGN ORGANIZATION CHART
                    CORE GROUP
   STRATEGY &       DIRECTIONS
                                       PLANNING &
  GOAL SETTINGS                          REVIEW
                  CAMPAIGN COORD




                     BYCULLA OFF. SG
                                         Short Term/ Medium
                                          Term/ Long Term
                                           Goal realisation
                                           Through Plans
                      ADVOCACY SG
  TASKS

   FOR                  MEDIA SG
                                                PLAN
                                         (Translate strategy
                                            into actions)

                                                 DO
   EACH               STRATEGY SG         (Achieve process
                                             goals set)

                                               CHECK
 SUBGROUP            RESPONSE CAPT.     (Review performance/
                          SG               achievements/
                                              shortfalls)

                     VOLUNTEER N/W
                          SG                     ACT
                                        (Apply corrections and
                                        complete improvement
                     FINANCE & FUND             cycle)
                           SG

                  VOLUNTEERS
                WHAT YOU CAN DO…


• Participate in the campaign as a volunteer
• Take up a role as a trainer, presenter, manager of activities
• Partner your organization in the campaign
• Write / Carry articles in local newsletters, newspapers
• Participate in meetings etc
• Contribute financially
• Get involved in the Intercollegiate debate on Police Reforms
     LOK SATTA MOVEMENT
           People Power
           www.loksatta.org
loksatta.maharashtrachapter@gmail.com




                                        Courtesy: R.K. Laxman
 police reforms programmed aims to
 realize increased demand for and
 achievement of police
 accountability and reform
 throughout the Commonwealth.
 In order to achieve this objective, the police are
  empowered to use limited coercive power
  thereby creating conditions for realization of
  human rights. The constitution itself and the
  international treaties and covenants ratified by
  India cast a duty on the state to protect and
  promote human rights. Article 2(3)(a) of the
  International Covenant on Civil and Political
  Rights mandates every state party to ensure that
  any person whose rights or freedoms as herein
  recognized are violated shall have an effective
  remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has
  been committed by persons acting in an official
  capacity.
 Insulating police from political pressures
 Internal autonomy to police in personnel
  matters
 Ensuring accountability
 Objective selection of DGP
 Security of tenure to field officers
 Separating investigative from law and order
  functions
 Any model recommended by the following
 could be chosen:



 National Human Rights Commission
 Ribeiro Committee
 Sorabjee Committee
   Issues Related to Functioning of Police
   Political Criminalisation Nexus: Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2007)
    has noted that the excessive power in the hands of police has been abused in the past by
    the political executive to unduly influence police personnel, and have them serve
    personal or political interests.
       Further, there has been an increasing phenomenon of criminalization of politics.
       This nexus interferes with professional decision-making by the police (e.g., regarding
        how to respond to law and order situations or how to conduct investigations),
        resulting in a biased performance of duties.
   An Overburdened Police Force: State police forces had 24% vacancies (about 5.5 lakh
    vacancies) in January 2016. Hence, while the sanctioned police strength was 181 police
    per lakh persons in 2016, the actual strength was 137 police.
       This is way too low when compared with the United Nations’ recommended
        standard of 222 police per lakh persons.
       Further, an average policeman ends up having an enormous workload and long
        working hours, which negatively affects his efficiency and performance.
   Need to set Police accountability: In India, various kinds of complaints are
    made against the police including complaints of unwarranted arrests,
    unlawful searches, torture and custodial rapes.
       To check against such abuse of power, various safeguards should be adopted, such as
        accountability of the police to the political executive, internal accountability to senior
        police officers, and independent police oversight authorities.
   Lack of Resources: CAG audits have found shortages in weaponry with
    state police forces. For example, Rajasthan and West Bengal had shortages
    of 75% and 71% respectively in required weaponry with the state police.
     Also, the Bureau of Police Research and Development has also noted a
       30.5% deficiency in stock of required vehicles with the state forces.
     Further, funds dedicated to the modernisation of infrastructure are
       typically not utilised fully. For example, in 2015-16, only 14% of such
       funds were used by the states.
   Recent custodial death of a father and son by police in Tamil Nadu and the
    death of a gangster (with alleged political connections) in an encounter by
    Uttar Pradesh police has put a question mark on objectivity and credentials
    of the police in delivering justice.
   Factors responsible for atrocities done by police and criminals evading the
    criminal justice system range from their political nexus to inefficiency of
    police.
   This can be also reflected in the Vohra Committee report, that highlighted
    the nexus between the criminals, politicians and government functionaries.
    It stated that the network of the mafia is virtually running a parallel
    government, pushing the state apparatus to irrelevance, and suggested that
    an institution be set up to effectively deal with the menace.
   Thus, there is a need to decriminalise politics and bring about a number of
    reformations in the criminal justice system including the police reforms.
   Curbing Criminalisation of Politics: The criminal nexus with politics will
    have to be broken and reforms must start with the political system. Thus,
    there is a need for laws which debars persons with serious criminal cases
    from entering the assemblies and the Parliament.
   Revamping Criminal Justice System: There is a need to incorporate
    the Menon Committee and Malimath Committee recommendations for
    devising a national policy paper on the criminal justice system. Some of the
    key recommendations are as follows:
       Creation of a fund to compensate victims who turn hostile from the pressure of
        culprits.
       Setting up of separate authority at the national level to deal with crimes threatening
        the country security.
       A complete revamp of the entire criminal procedure system.
   Independent Complaints Authority: The Supreme Court has observed that
    there is a need to have an independent complaints authority to inquire into
    complaints of police misconduct.
   Implementing the Supreme Court’s Directive: The Supreme Court’s
    directions in Prakash Singh case 2006 on police reforms must be
    implemented. The court laid out seven directives where considerable work
    in police reforms is still needed.
 Registration   of offences and information about progress in
  investigation:
 Transparency in the investigation process must be maintained. The
  Commission has stressed that complainants must have access to
  information about their cases. They have said that:
 A First Information Report [FIR] should be registered promptly on
  receiving a complaint about a cognizable offence.
 A copy of the FIR should be given to the complainant and an entry
  about this should be made in the First Case Diary.
 If the complaint does not make out a cognizable offence, the police
  should explain to the complainant, the reasons why the complaint
  cannot be registered.
 If investigation is not completed within three months of the FIR
  being registered, the complainant should be informed in writing
  giving specific reasons for the delay.
 Proof of having informed the complainant [postal acknowledgement
  or written acknowledgement] about reasons for the delay in
  investigation should be kept on the Case Diary file.
 If investigation is not completed within six months of registering the
  FIR, the complainant should be informed again in writing about the
  reasons for noncompletion of investigation, and the acknowledgement
  should be kept on the Case Diary file.
 If the investigation is not completed within one year, a more detailed
  intimation [memo] should be prepared by the investigating officer
  giving reasons for the delay to the complainant. The intimation should
  be endorsed by a gazetted officer who directly supervises the work of
  the investigating officer. The gazetted officer should personally verify
  the reasons for delay given by the investigating officer. A record of the
  intimation and its acknowledgement by the complainant should be
  kept on the Case Diary file.
 The complainant should be informed once the investigation is
  completed and a charge-sheet is filed before the court. A copy of the
  charge-sheet should be given to the complainant by the police. In case
  the complainant is not available for some reason, her/his family
  should be informed.
 1. As soon as information about death being caused in a police
  encounter is received, the officer in-charge of a police station
  must record it in the appropriate register.
 2. It is desirable that the investigation should be handed over to
  an independent investigation agency such as the Criminal
  Investigation Department [CID], if members of the encounter
  party belong to the same police station.
 3. Whenever a specific complaint is made against the police for
  committing a criminal act that amounts to culpable homicide,
  an FIR should be registered under appropriate sections of the
  Indian Penal Code and investigation should invariably be
  handed over to the CID.
 4. A magisterial inquiry must invariably be held in all cases
  where death has occurred in the course of police action. The
  next of kin of the dead person must invariably be associated
  with the inquiry.
 5. Prompt prosecution and disciplinary action must be initiated
  against the officers found guilty in the magisterial inquiry/
  police investigation.
   6. The question of compensation being given to the dependents of the dead
    person will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
   7. No out of turn promotion or instant gallantry rewards will be given to the
    concerned officers soon after the occurrence. It must be ensured .[at all costs].
    that they are given only after the gallantry of the officer concerned is proven
    beyond doubt.
   8. A six monthly statement of all cases of deaths in police action in the state
    shall be sent by the Director General of Police to the NHRC by January 15
    and July 15 every year. The statement may be sent in the following format
    along-with postmortem reports and inquest reports : (i) Date and place of
    occurrence
   (ii) Police station and district
   (iii) Circumstances leading to death:
   (iv) Brief facts of the incident
   (v) Criminal case number
   (vi) Investigating agency
   (vii) Finding of the magisterial inquiry/ inquiry by senior officers:
   (a) disclosing in particular names and designations of police officials,       if
    found responsible for the deaths; and
   (b) whether use of force was justified and action taken was lawful.
HISTORY OF PRISONS &
   PRISON REFORM
CRIMINAL PUNISHMENT : 17th Century
     Public Punishment: Sentence for many
      offences was public hanging, or else
      whipping, branding, scaffold, bilboes, etc.
      designed to shame the person and deter
      others.
     Prison System was not very evolved:
   - Not seen as punishment: Prison was very
  rarely used as a punishment in its own right. It
  tended to be a place where people were held
  before their trial or while awaiting punishment.
   - Houses of correction managed by
  Justices of Peace: Set up under the Poor Law
  to instil habits of industry through prison labour.
  They were later integrated into prison system.
   - Transportation: A much-used method for
  disposing of convicted people was to ship them
  to the British colonies
PRISON SHIPS
 Who was in the prisons: Petty
  offenders, vagrants and the
  disorderly local poor.
 No segregation: Men and women,
  boys and girls, debtors and
  murderers were all held together
 No concept of care: Badly
  maintained and often controlled by
  negligent prison warders. Many
  people died of diseases like gaol
  fever, which was a form of typhus.
    Seeds of Reform: 18th century


   Transportation curtailed (late 18th century):
    Other sanctions had to be found.
   Prison Hulks (1776-1857): For those who
    could do hard labour. Prison hulks were ships
    which were anchored in the Thames, and at
    Portsmouth and Plymouth. Those sent to
    them were employed in hard labour during
    the day and then loaded, in chains, onto the
    ship at night.
   Prisons: The house of correction for those
    unfit for hard labour.
Prison Reform: The appalling conditions
on the prison hulks, especially the lack of
control and poor physical conditions,
eventually led to the end of this practice.
The conditions on hulks did much to
persuade public opinion that
incarceration, with hard labour, was a
viable penalty for crime.
Late 18th century

   18th century Rise of Debtors
    Prisons: Debtors were put in irons
    and vault rooms by jailers even
    before judges could give their
    sentence; jailers could frighten
    away lawyers who came to defend
    their clients


   Mid 18th century: Imprisonment,
    with hard labour, was beginning to
    be seen as a suitable sanction for
    petty offenders
Late 18th century: Regimes of Prison Reforms
   Howard League’s Call for Wide Ranging
    Reforms (1777): (John Howard-namesake of the
    Howard League) condemned the prison system as
    disorganised, barbaric and filthy.
- the installation of paid staff
- outside inspection
- a proper diet and other necessities for prisoners
   Jeremy Bentham’s Prison Design (1791):
    Bentham designed the 'panopticon'. It became the
    model for prison building for the next half century.
    Each individual is seen but cannot communicate with
    the warders or other prisoners. The prisoner can
    always see the tower but never knows from where he
    is being observed.
- Surveillance/Hard Labour/Health-Sanitation/Segregation
   Penitentiary Act (1799): This was a British Act of
    Parliament which introduced state prisons for the first
    time. Drafted by the prison reformer John Howard and
    the jurist William Blackstone, it recommended
    imprisonment as an alternative sentence to death or
    transportation. The Act specified that jails should be
    built for one inmate per cell and operate on a silent
    system with continuous labour.
19th Century: Watershed Reforms in State Punishment
     Early 19th century: Prisons came to
      be seen as a place of reform for
      sinners. Public shaming was losing its
      popularity. Imprisonment replaced
      capital punishment except for
      offences of murder. Quakers and
      Evangelicals were becoming
      influential in prison reform and push
      for better prison conditions
     Elizabeth Fry: English prison and
      social reformer in the early 19th
      century who was a major driving
      force behind new legislation to make
      the treatment of prisoners more
      humane, and she was supported in
      her efforts by the reigning monarch.
     Dorothea Dix: Investigated prisons in
      the 1840s and reported to
      government on ill-treatment of poor
      and prisoners
   The Birth of the State Prison: The
    19th century saw the birth of the state
    prison. The first national penitentiary was
    completed at Millbank in London, in 1816. It
    held 860 prisoners, kept in separate cells,
    although association with other prisoners
    was allowed during the day. Work in prison
    was mainly centred around simple tasks
    such as picking 'coir' (tarred rope) and
    weaving.
   Prison Commission: In 1877 prisons were
    brought under the control of the Prison
    Commission. For the first time even local
    prisons were controlled centrally. At this time
    prison was seen primarily as a means to
    deter offending and reoffending. This was a
    movement away form the reforming ideals of
    the past.
   Prison Act 1898: The Act reasserted
    reformation as the main role of prison
    regimes.
20th Century: Towards Reformation
   Introduction of Borstal System for youth: This was introduced in the Prevention of
    Crime Act 1908. Borstal training involved a regime based on hard physical work,
    technical and educational instruction and a strong moral atmosphere. A young person in
    borstal would work through a series of grades, based on privileges, until release.
   The First Open Prison: In 1933, the first open prison was built at New Hall Camp
    near Wakefield. The theory behind the open prison is summed up in the words of one
    penal reformer, Sir Alex Paterson: "You cannot train a man for freedom under conditions
    of captivity".
   Abolition of Penal Servitude: The Criminal Justice Act 1948 abolished penal
    servitude, hard labour and flogging. It also presented a comprehensive system for the
    punishment and treatment of offenders. Prison was still at the centre of the system, but
    the institutions took many different forms including remand centres, detention centres
    and borstal institutions.
   Prison Service as an Agency of government (1993): This new status allows for
    greater autonomy in operational matters, while the government retains overall policy
    direction.
   Introduction of Private Prisons: The 1990s have also seen the introduction of
    prisons which are designed, financed, built and run by private companies. Supporters of
    privatisation argue that it will lead to cheaper, more innovative prisons, while
    organisations like the Howard League argue that private prisons are flawed both in
    principle and in practice.
First Open Prison: New Hall Camp
    21st Century
   More Prisons: The supremacy of imprisonment as a way of dealing with offending behaviour shows no signs of abating. Privatisation
    increases
   UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (1977): Stressed on ‘minimum’ conditions acceptable and to be
    achieved despite all the diversities in the world.


           - Treatment as persons; Non discrimination; Prisons to maintain records and registers; maintain
           segregation btw men and women, between civil and criminal prisoners, men and women, undertrial
           and convicted, adult and young and prisoners
            - Laid down standards for accomodation, bedding, hygiene, food, exercise, medical services,
           discipline and punishment, restraints, information to and complaints by prisoners, contact with
           outside world, books, religion, property, death, removal of prisoners, criteria and training of prison
           personnel, and inspection of prisons

   The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR): Remains the core international treaty on the protection of
    the rights of prisoners. India ratified the Covenant in 1979 and is bound to incorporate its provisions into domestic law and state
    practice.
   The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESR) states that prisoners have a right to the
    highest attainable standard of physical and mental health.
“No prisoner shall be punished unless he or she has been
informed of the offences alleged against him/her and
given a proper opportunity of presenting his/her
defense”. Corporal punishment, by placing in a dark cell
and all cruel, inhuman or degrading punishments, shall be
completely prohibited as a mode of punishment and
disciplinary action in the jails.
PRISON REFORMS IN INDIA
   The modern prison in India originated with Lord Macaulay in 1835.
   Prison Discipline Committee (1835): Recommended in its 1838 report the
    increase in rigorousness of treatment while rejecting all humanitarian needs and
    reforms for the prisoners.
   Second Commission of Inquiry into Jail Management and Discipline (1864):
    Made similar recommendations as the Prison Discipline Committee
   Prison Law & Draft Bill: First mention 1877
   Fourth Jail Commission (1888): Recommended a consolidated prison bill.
    Provisions regarding the jail offences and punishment were specially examined by
    a conference of experts on Jail Management.
   Prisons Act 1894: In 1894, the draft bill became law with the assent of the
    Governor General of India. This Act has hardly undergone any substantial change
    and continues to govern prison administration in India.
   Cardew Committee (1894): The Committee asked for a body of free and unbiased
    observers, whose visits would serve as a guarantee to the Government and to the
    public, that the rules of the Prisons Act and Prison Manuals are duly observed
   Indian Jail Committee (1919-20) : For the first time in the history of prisons,
    'reformation and rehabilitation' of offenders were identified as the objectives
    of the prison administrator
   Government of India Act (1935): Jails became State Subject. Disparate
    implementation of a national level prison policy.
   Report of UN Expert (Dr W.C. Reckless ) on Correctional work (1951): His
    report titled 'Jail Administration in India' made a plea for transforming jails
    into reformation centers. He also recommended the revision of outdated jail
    manuals.
   All India Jail Manual Committee(1957-1960) for Model Prison Manual:
    Recommended amendments in the Prison Act 1894 and Prison Manuals through
    a Model to provide a legal base for correctional work. Eg., probation, after-
    care, juvenile and remand homes, certified and reformatory school, borstals
    and protective homes, suppression of immoral traffic etc.
   Working Group on Prisons (1972): It brought out in
    its report the need for a national policy on prisons
    and made an important recommendation with regard
    to the classification and treatment of offenders and
    laid down principles.
   The Mulla Committee on Jail Reform (1980-1983):
    Made a comprehensive review of the laws, rules and
    regulations keeping in view the overall objective of
    protecting society and rehabilitating offenders.
   It emphasized non-custodial measures for prisoners,
    and periodic review of undertrial cases.
   The Krishna Iyer Committee (1987): Undertook a study on the situation of
    women prisoners in India. It has recommended induction of more women in
    the police force in view of their special role in tackling women and child
    offenders.
   BPR&D Committee (1996): Basing on Ramamurthy vs State of Karnataka
    judgment to make prison administration uniform, the jail manual was re-
    drafted by the committee and accepted by the Central government and
    circulated to State governments in late December 2003. But States are
    lagging behind on this.
   Draft Model Prisons Management Bill (The Prison Administration and
    Treatment of Prisoners Bill- 1998): This was circulated in 1999 to replace
    the Prison Act 1894 by the Government of India to the respective states but
    this bill is yet to be finalized.
   Committee for the Formulation of a Model Prison Manual (2000): The
    Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, appointed a Committee for a
    pragmatic prison manual in order to improve the Indian prison management
    and administration.
Problems of Prison
   1. OVERCROWDED JAILS/PRISONS
   2. UNSATISFACTORY LIVING CONDITIONS
   3. STAFF SHORTAGE AND POOR TRAINING OF STAFF
   4. POOR SPENDING ON HEALTH CARE AND WELFARE
   5. LACK OF LEGAL AID
   6. ABUSE OF WOMEN PRISONERS
   7. PROBLEMS OF UNDER-TRIALS
In December 2015, United Nations adopted the Standard Minimum Rules for
treatment of Prisoners (Nelson Mandela Rules) which enlisted the rights of the
prisoners such as Right to life including the right to contact the outside world,
right to proper sleep and clothing, right to security, right to proper healthcare
etc.



The concept of Open Prisons
The paradigm of Reformative Punishment does not support the traditional
inhuman jails with bars but is more liberal and supports the concept of open
prisons, which is a trust-based prison with minimum security.


The concept of Open prisons was first developed in U.K in the 1930s and was
based on the idea of ‘carrots’ rather than ‘sticks’.


This open prison helps the prisoner to gradually connect with the world before
the release.


In India currently, there are 69 Open Jails:


       •   Rajasthan (29), and
       •   Maharashtra (13) having the highest number.

As per the data of 2015:


       •   Open prisons have 3786 prisoners out of which 2227 prisoners are in
           the Maharashtra and Rajasthan prisons.
       •   Almost 60% of the total prisoners in the open prisons are concentrated
           in two states.
       •   Many states have an open prison but do not accommodate any
           prisoners.
     •     The reasons for this overcrowding and at the same time under-
           utilization could be because the Jails are a part of the state list and
           hence a collaborative approach cannot be adopted by the states.
     •     Open Jails are prisons without boundaries and cells



In open jails the prisoners are given the liberty:
     •     To live with their families
     •     Allowed to find employment
     •     Prisoners can move out of the prison for their work and are supposed
           to come back to the prison campus after their working hours.



The open jails in India involve the prisoners in
activities like:
     •     Farming,
     •     Animal husbandry etc.
     •     Convicts can be sent to Open jails for two purposes
     •     For the purpose to slowly cut down his/her level of socialization,
           instead of directly confining the convict in a closed prison, as this can
           negatively affect the mental health of the prisoner.

Secondly, in order to help the prisoner to slowly re-socialize with the world.
While serving in the closed prison, the prisoner is bound to lose touch with the
outside world and hence wouldn’t be able to rehabilitate himself after the
release.


However, in India, only the second scenario is accepted. Rajasthan,
Maharashtra and Himachal Pradesh have the maximum number of active open
prisons in India. Some of the most popular Open Prisons are located in:


     •     Yerwada
     •     Akola
     •     Kolhapur
     •     Paithan
     •     Sangamner
     •     Bikaner etc

Prisoners are transferred from closed to traditional prison. Only selected
prisoners are transferred from closed or traditional prison to an open prison.
These prisoners in Maharashtra generally do agricultural work to earn their
living and prisoners in Rajasthan also work at factories and industries.


The money earned by these prisoners is spent by them for their families and no
amount except a small administration charge is to be paid to the Jail.


Every morning at 6 a.m. a roll call takes place after which the prisoners are
allowed to move out and another roll call is scheduled at 7 p.m., till then the
prisoners are expected to return to the prison.


These prisons exist for almost 8 decades now, however, no complaints of any
prisoner escaping have come forward.



The condition open prisons in India
The conditions of prisons in India has been severely criticised. There have many
cases of


     •     Custodial violence
     •     Custodial deaths
     •     Suicides, and


Overcrowding etc. in Indian jails.

As per the NCRB’s 2015 data:
      1. 77 deaths were caused due to custodial suicide, and
      2. 11 deaths due to custodial murders which shows the poor
          administration and structure of Indian Prison system.
      3. The Supreme Court has time and again given directions on Prison
          Reforms, In many cases, the Supreme Court has actively endorsed the
          Open Jail system.
      4. The basis on which the selection of these prisoners is done


Open Prison rules in Maharashtra

The selection is governed by Maharashtra Open Prison Rules, 1971. As per the
act a Selection Committee consisting of:


      •   Inspector General
      •   Deputy Inspector general
      •   Superintendent of the Prison, and
      •   Superintendent of the Open Prison is formed
      •   Selection is done on the basis of:
      •   Good behavior
      •   Mental and physical fitness
      •   The period of imprisonment etc.

However, there is a long list of the ineligibility criteria, of which some are
completely arbitrary for e.g.


      •   Women prisoners
      •   Convicts of narcotics
      •   Prisoners with any history of mental illness
      •   Professional murderers
      •   Convicts of crimes like:
      •   Collection of arms
      •   Sedition
      •   Crimes against the army etc.
This provision eliminates the possibility of rehabilitation of a large number of
convicts, who are actually in need of it and offers rehabilitation to those are who
are not in dire need of it.


However, the committee can consider certain special cases even if they’re
ineligible.


Open Prison Rules in Rajasthan

As per the Rajasthan Prisoners open-air camp rules, 1972 the Open Jails aim at
encouraging and rewarding good behavior and give prisoners an opportunity to
social adjustment and economic independence.


In Rajasthan the Jail Superintendent sends the list of potential prisoners to the
Open Air Camp Advisory Committee and the decision is taken by the committee.


The eligibility criteria are similar to that of Maharashtra however, the convict is
expected to spend 1/3rd of the sentence in a closed prison.


Even in Rajasthan, arbitrary provisions for ineligibility exist such as:


      •   Convicts not having an abode in Rajasthan or
      •   Have a place of Residence outside Rajasthan
      •   Prisoners below the age of 25 or above the age of 60
      •   Civil prisoners
      •   Unmarried prisoners
      •   Prisoners with any history of mental illness
      •   Professional murderers
      •   Convicts of crimes like a collection of arms, sedition, crimes against the
          army etc.
Although women are given access to open jails the provisions of Rajasthan are
stricter than those of Maharashtra. Such provisions don’t provide equality to the
convicts and thus are violative of the rights of the prisoners.


The committee does not have the power to consider special cases, like
Maharashtra.


Rajasthan also provides for a unique rehabilitation system, where every open
prison has a panchayat consisting of 5 to 7 members, who are selected by the
prisoners, amongst the prisoners.


This Panchayat looks after the daily management of the prison. This helps in
improving communication and leadership in the prisoners.


Open Prison Rules in Himachal Pradesh

Himachal has 7 open prisons. The working is governed in a similar way as
Rajasthan, however, the rape convicts, and convicts of other heinous crimes are
also ineligible.



Criticisms of the Open Jails in India
Unnecessary and arbitrary provisions for ineligibility, which filter out many
deserving convicts.


      •   Under-utilisation of the Open Prisons. These prisons have a capacity to
          accommodate 25776 prisoners however, only 3786 prisoners are
          currently in these prisons (as of 2015). This shows that despite the
          heavy overcrowding in the closed prisons, open prisons are vacant.
      •   The prisoners in most states are selected by a committee, who have no
          accountability over them, as they are not expected to provide reasons
          for their selections. This leads to partiality and corruption.
    •   No measures are taken for the convicts beginning their sentence. At
        least, semi-open prisons should be made open for the fresh convicts.
    •   No provision of Open Jails to under trial prisoners.
    •   Inadequate Open Prisons in every state. Some states are concentrated
        with Open Prisons while some have just one and no Union Territory in
        India has an Open Prison. Due to the state list subject, this inequality
        exists among different states.
    •   Open Prisons are the only rehabilitative prisons in India. Which also
        favor only a small number of convicts. There is a need for more
        rehabilitative provisions for other convicts, in order to reduce the
        amounts of custodial deaths.
    •   The rules and laws governing the selection and administration are
        extremely old and thus unfit for the present situations.


Reforms needed in the status quo

    •   The number of Open Prisons and better utilization of the currently
        existing ones through amendments to the rules and relaxation of the
        strict eligibility criteria.
    •   Efforts should be taken to move the subject of prisons to the union list.
        As this will bring in uniform reforms and every prisoner will get similar
        rights.
    •   In order to bring accountability in the selection procedure, the state
        committee should be compelled to provide reasons to the Chief
        Minister of the concerned state for the selection made. These
        documents should also be made available within the ambit of RTI so
        that common people can also get access to it.
    •   Semi-open Jail in order to provide rehabilitation to mentally disturbed
        prisoners, semi-open jails should be promoted. They do not provide
        complete liberty, but there are no prison cells and prisoners are
        provided with employment opportunities within the Jail campus. One of
        the finest semi-open jail in India is the Tihar Semi-Open Jail in Delhi.
      •   Supreme Court or the concerned High courts should also be given the
          jurisdiction to allow certain prisoners to directly go to the Open Prison.
      •   Every prisoner whether in open or closed prison should be made aware
          of his/her rights and should be informed about the process of selection
          to open prisons. This will not only give the required information to the
          prisoners but will also reinforce good behavior among these prisoners.



Conclusion
The concept of open prison has existed in India since almost 7/8 decades,
however, many states still do not have enough open prisons. With the current
scenario of overcrowding of Jails, it is extremely important to build and utilize
the open prisons. Open prisons are excellent in providing rehabilitative justice,
as it helps the convicts to re-socialize with the world before they’ve completed
their sentence. Although the existing open prisons are well- managed and have
a good record in the past there is still room for improvement in terms of laws
and rules. Active measures should be taken to amend these rules, to provide
access to justice to all the prisoners. This system if properly utilized will also
help in reducing the custodial deaths.
          NHRCGUIDELINES
                      REGARDING
                              ARREST

                   {NationalHumanRightscommission}




     Arresr ihvolves
                   restricriohof liberryof o per3onqrresredondrh.r.lore,
inffihgesthe bosichundnrights of liberry.Neverrhetess
                                                   lh€ Consri.rirrion
                                                                   of
Indio as well ds Inlernationdlhuhonrighis low r€.ogniseihe powerof.rhe
si.fe to of.e3r dnypersono3a pdrrof iis prihoryroteof lnqinroiniig
                                                                 tawond
order. The Constitutiohfequire! o j!st, foir ond reosonabtepfo.edure
estoblished
          by la\runderwhicholon€suchdeprivoriorof tibertyis pe nissibte.
AlthoughArti.le 2?0) of ihe consiiiuiionpfovid* thdt evefypersohptdced
undefarfest shollbe inforhed ds soohos ndy be rhe groundof orr€s.rdnd
shollnot be deniedth€ right .to consulrdndbe defehdedby o towye.of his
choiceonds.50 of lhe code of cfiminq procedure,
                                              1973(cr pc) requifesa
paliceofticer drreslingdhy personto " forthwirh .orrnunicoreto hirn futl
porliculqfsof the offencefor whichhe is arresredor oiher grolndsfof such
drfeslir.in dctuol praciice these r€quinehentsor€ observedmore jn rhe
breoch.Likewise,
               rhe requir€h€ntof p.odudionof.rheorrestedpersonbefore
th€ colrt pronpily which is rnondatedboih under ihe Cohsii.roiion
             ondrhe h. Pc(s€.tion571is otsonorodheredfo strictty.
IArricle22(?)1


    A lorgenurnberof conlploinls
                              p€r'idining
                                        to Hu|nqhRighlsvioldtions
                                                                are in
the or€oof obuseof policepo|^,ers,
                                porriclJdrly
                                           thoseof drrestonddei€ntion.
Ii has,therefofe,beconenecessory,
                               with oviewto norrowihg
                                                    ihe gopbetw€€n
lqwond p.arnce,io presc.ibeguidelines
                                    regordi^gorces-den whte or the
sometihrehoi und!lycurtoilingthe powerof iha polic€to effec.rivety
                                                                 naih.roih
ond€nforcelowondord€rohdpfoperinvesligoiion.
PRE.ARREST

    Z Thepowerto.fresi withouto urorrdntshouldbe €x€rcisedonlyafter o\
redsonoblesolisfdction is rached, ofrer some investigotion,
                                                          os to the
genuiheness
         ond bonofidesof o.onploini dndo reosondble
                                                  belief os to both
the persohs.ohplicityaswellosthe needio eJfeci drresi. lJoginderKuhdls
.ase- (1994)4 sCC260).
    O Arr*t   connot be jusrified herely on th. exisre ce of power, ds o
hqtterof low,to orresl withoutawarrontino.ognizablecqs€.
    g AlJer JoginderKurnor'spronounceneni
                                       of the SupreheCourr'rhe
question
       54 wheiherlhe pou/€rof orrest hdsbeenexer.isedfasonablyor no+
is clearlyo jus'ricioble
                      one.
    .O Arresr in .ogniza5lecasesmoybe considered
                                               jusiified ia o^eor orhe.
of thef ollowing
               circunston.es:
    (i) Thecoseinvolves
                      o groveoffencelike hurdef, docoity,robbery,rope
€tc.ohdit is hecessory
                    to ofrestlhe suspeclto prevehthih froh €rcoping
                                                                  or
evoding
      lhe procass
                o{ ldw.
    (ii) The suspectis givehro violentbehoviour
                                             ond is likelyfo cotnrnit


    (iii) Thesuspectr€quir6 to be prevenied
                                          froh destroying
                                                        evidence
                                                               or
int€rferingwilh witnesses
                        of worhing            whohovenot yel been
                                 olher suspecis


    (iv)Thasospectis a hobiiualoffehderwho,lnlessorresied,is likelyio
conhii sihiloror furlher offenc4.[3rdR€portof National
                                                    Police
                                                         Commission]
    A Excepiin heinous
                     offences,          above,an orrest musibe
                             os meniioned
      if a policeofficer issueshoti.eio ihe personio oiiend the police
avoided
                                               (seeJoginderKutnofs
siotionondnot l€oveihe stoiionwitholt p€rmission-
cose(1994)SCC?60).
             'the
         O          powerto arrcst must be ovoidedwhere the off.n * o.. bailobL
     unless
          ther€ is a slrongopprehension
                                     of the3uspectobsconding.
         O Palic.oftic.rs carryingoutqnorrelt or interrogqlion
                                                             shouldbeqrcleor
     identificoiionond nqmelogs wilh designaiions.
                                                The pdriiculdrsof police

,/
     personnelcqrrying oui the orrest of ihterrogotionshould be recorded
     conrempordneously,
                   in a registerkepiot rhe poli.estdtion.

     ARREST

         g As a r!]e rse of fofce shouldbe ovoidedwhil€ eff€ctihg qrrest.

           in cdseot forciblefesistonceio orrest,mini|nuln
     Howev€r,                                            force to ovefcohe
     suchresistqhcen\oybe used.However,core musi be tqkq 10 ensurethct
     injuiiesto ihe personb€ingarresled,v'sibleor otherwise,
                                                           isovoided.
         g'the dignii|'ot the personbeirg dffesredshouldbe protecied.Public

     disPlay
           or poroding
                     of the personarrestedshouldnoi be penniiiedot dnycost.
                  of the persohorresJednust be donewith duefespeciio the
         O Searches
     dignityof rhe person,without force of aggression
                                                    ond with cor€ for ihe
     personsright io privocy.seorchesof womenshouldonly be modeby other
                                     (s.5t(2)cr.?c.)55
     wohenw'iihstricl regordto decency.
         O The us€ of hondclffsor leg choinsshouTd
                                                 be dvoidedand it ol dll, it
     shouldbe resortedto sificrly ih dccordohce
                                             wilh ihe low.ep4fedly expldined
     ondhqhdor€din judgehehiof the SupreheCouriin Pren ShonkerShuklqv.
     DelhiAdhihsirdtioni(1980)3 SCC5261dndCilizenfor Deho.rocyv. Sioie of
     Assorn
          I(1995)3 Scc 7431.
         O As lar as is prqcticqblewotnehpoliceoffic€rs shouldbe ossocidted
     wheretha personor persohsbeingorresledqfe wohen.The omeslof wornen
     beiweensunseiondsunriseshouldbeqvoided.
         O Where childrehor juvehilesdra soughito be o.rested,no lorce ar
     betings shouldbe qdnini3ieredunderonycifcurcioncd. Poli.eOffi.ers, hoy
                                                         lhot the childreno;\
fo|this     purpose.osso.idterespecrdbleciirzensso
juvenil€s  6re noi rerrorisedandll\ininolcoercion is used
                                                 the personarresl€dhosto be
       U Wherethe arresi i3 withouto worrdnt'
                                                                whichhe or she
 immedidiely  infortnedof the groundsof orrest in o longudge
                          this pufpose,the polica'if necessdryn\ayidke'rhehelp
 und€rsionds.  Agoin, for
                                                hqvedlrady beenrecordedin
 of resp€ctoblecitizehs Thesegroundsmust
                                                   shouldbe shownihe wriiten
  wriiing in policerecords The P"rsohofresied
                                                 (s 50(1)cr'Pc)
  resonsa5wellanddlsogiveno coPvondehond
                                                                             'rhat
                        person     os
                                can,  d request made  bv him or her' demqnd
        O rhe orr.sred
                                                  be infornedof the foct of his
  d friend,feloliveor other personknownto him
                                                                     in d regillef
  qrresl ond ihe pldceof his deienliohThe policeshouldfecord
   'ihalomeof ihe personsoihfofhed tJoginderKutndlsccae(suprc)l-
                                                             policeoffi'er should
        O$ o Pe.]son  B off.,fed lor d bqilobleoffence'rhe
                                                  bqilso ihqt he movorrongefor
    infonnhin of his eniilenentio be relased on
        (s 50(2)cr.Pc)
 sureiies.
                                                    righfs'the
                                 afrestzdof the above
                        lhe Person
    O AParl+rcn informing
                                                                           q
              olso inforh hitn of his righi io cossulidnd be defendedby
  police.should
                                                  ihol he is eniitledio free
  lowyerof his choice He shouldalsobe informed
  legalaidat sioteexPense  [D ( Bosuscase(1997)1scc]'
         When   the pefsonorrested is broughtio the policestoiion'heshould'if
       @
                                            promPtn\edicdlassisionce  Hemust
  hemdkesa requestin ihis regord'bagiven
                                         policeoffic"r finds fhat lhe arresied
   be inforrnedof ihis right Where ihe
                                                     suchrequestbut i5 in need
   personis in a condiiionwherehe i5 lnobleto nake
                                                   ihe sqhe This nusl olsooe
   of medicalh€lP,he shouldpronptlyorrdngefor
                                                                       medicol
   fecordedcontehporqneouslv   in d regisier'Thefemalereque$ingJor
                                               registerednedi'dl prociilioner'
   help shouldbe exomih€donlYbv a femole
   (s.53
       cr.Pc.)
                                                                         be
       O rnforhotionregardingthe drresrondthe Ploceof deienlionshould
                                                                 onydelayro
               bv the Policeotlicer efleclir'llhe offest wiihoui
    comnunicot€d
                                          1
 'thepoliceConfrot
                 RoohdndDisirict / sto.ie Heddquor.rers.
                                                     Therehusr be o
 honitorihgrnechohisrn
                    workihgroundthe cto.k.
    u As soonas rhe personis offested,poti.. offi.er etfeding
                                                                  the orr,si
 shollhqkad nehrionof ihe exis.i€nce    or non,€xisi€nceof dnyinjury(s)or the
 persorof the arresi€eih +heregbterol arr3t.If
                                                     anyi4juriesora foundon
 the personof fhe arrestee,fu des.riptionondo.ih€r
                                                         pdrtjculorsos .rorhe
 n'oin€rIn whi.h the i(uries w€recousedsholldbe merlioned
                                                              in.iheregister,
 whichentfy shollalsobe signedby the poticeofficer and the
                                                             orrcst.e.Al the
 tit'e of reledseof rh€ drreste€,o cerrifi.ote ro rhe obove
                                                            effe.t underthe
 srgnaiure of the policeofficer sholtb€ issuedio.rheorresree.
     O E the aff.s+eeh6be.      remonded
                                       io poti.ecusiodyunderthe orders
of ihe court, ihe dfresteeshoutdbe subjectedio medicat
                                                      &yonirdrionby q
rroiied Medi.olofficer a.ry 48 hoursduringhis derention
                                                       in cusrodyby o
doctor on ihe ponelof opproveddocto8 oppoinredby
                                                     Direclor, Heotth
Senvices of the concernedSiqie or UhionTerritory . Ar rhe rinle of
                                                                   his
releoseffom rhe police.usrody,the orresieeshqllbe
                                                     9or hedico{ty
                                                                 a(onined
ondo certificoteshqllbe issu€dro hi|nsratihgthereinthe
                                                       foctudtposirionof
ihe elisrenceor nonexist€n.eof onyinluriesonhis person.

POSTARREST

    O lhe persanunder orresr nust be produ.ed befof€ rhe oppropdqte
co'rrtwiihin24 hoursof thedrresr(ss 56and57 Cr.pc).
    @Thepersohqfrested
                    shoutd
                         b€pe.mitedio heerhjs
dufihgrhe interrogorion.
    Z Th€ interrogotioh
                      shouldbe conduded
                                      in o cl€lrly
whichhasbe€nnorifiedfof ihjspurpose
                                  bytheGovernnenr.
accessible
        ondlhe i€lo.iiv€s
                        orfriendof the p€rsoh
                                            arresJ€d
of ihe pld.eof int€rrogorion
                          tokingpto.e.
    O Thenrelhods
                of inierrogotion
                               mus.r
                                  b€ consisreni
                                             wiih ihe recognised
righis ro ife, dignityqnd lib€rtyondrighi qgoinsrtorture onddegrading



ENFORC€]I,IENT
             OF 6UIDEITNE5

    1. Theguidelines
                   inustbe irdnslatedih os hany tdhguoges
                                                       os possibte
                                                                 did
dillriblted to everypolicestotion.Ir hust dlsobe incofpo.ofed
                                                            in d hdndbook
whichshouldbe givenro everypolicernah.
    2. Goidelihesmust receivemoxirilm publicity in ihe print or other
eledrohichredio.rt shouldalsobe prominenrly
                                         displqyedon noli.e boord,in
hore thononejonguoge,
                   in eve.ypolicestq.rion.
   '3. The poli.e rllusl set !p o.ohploinr redrdsal mechdnish,
                                                            whichwitl
pro;nptlyinvesiigotecompldihrs
                            of violotionof glidelinesondioke corfective


    4 Th€ noticeboordyrhichdisploysguidelines
                                            musralso indicqreih€
iocqtionof the cornploints
                        redressql
                                mechanism
                                        ond howthat bodycqnbe


    5. N6Os ondplbiic inslitutionsincludirgcou.is,hospitals,
                                                          univ€rsiiies
etc.,nusr be involved
                    in the dissehinotion
                                      of ihes€guidelines
                                                      ro enslre.rhe
widestpossible
            redch.
    6.'fhe   functioningof'rhe cohplaint redressol,n€chonism
                                                           lnusr be
lrqnspof€ntondits reportsoccessible.
    7. Promptdciionlnusibe ldkenagoinst€ffant policeofficer3for violaiion
of the guidelines.
                Thisshouldnoi be liniied io deportmentol      bui qlso
                                                      enquiries
set il monorihe ffimiiolJUsncenechonisr'.
    E. Sensitizotion
                   ohd i.oiningof policeofficers is €$entiol for effe.rive
inpl€menldtion
             of lhe guidelines.



                                    9
