           SCHOOL OF LAW
     DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES


PENOLOGY & VICTIMOLOGY-SAL1053
                     SCHOOL OF LAW
               DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES



     UNIT 1 – PENOLOGY& THEORIES OF PUNISHMENT


Dimensions of Crime in India -Definition of penology-Theories of
punishment-classical Hindu and Islamic approaches to punishment-
Capital Punishment-Law reforms proposals- Criminal Justice System.


Introduction
Penology is a multi-disciplinary subject that aims for the study and
evaluation of the application of penal laws onto the wrongdoers. It broadly
explains the justification, characteristics, and effectiveness of punishment
in its various forms. In other words, it is a systematic study of different
facets of punishment and its impact on crimes, criminals, and society. As
a matter of fact, penology owes its origin to Cesare Beccaria, the classical
school of criminology. This Italian criminologist argued that justification
of punishment must be to deter potential criminals, and not merely to
punish the offender. Later, it was during the end of the 19th century that
different theories of punishment were propounded focusing on the aims
and objectives of the punishment.

Scope
The scope of penology is vast and hence it becomes difficult to define the
same. Penology is almost seen in every aspect and type of punishment for
the crimes and offences. To limit the scope we have to study basically all
the aspects of penology, where all the things are explained in their wider
senses.
Modern penologists lay greater emphasis on the rationalism of
punishment. The penal policy should be more reformation oriented rather
than coercive penal sanctions. As Lewis Gillin (1871-1958) rightly
observed:
“The criminal is the product of his biological inheritance conditioned in
his development by the experiences of life to which he has been exposed
from early infancy up to the commission of a crime. By studying the
offender in every possible way, the modern penology promises to throw
light on his conditioning and arrive at a diagnosis of the factors entering
into each individual case. From the standpoint of penology, it attempts to
adapt the treatment of each offender in accordance with the diagnosis
obtained by the scientific study of the criminal.”
Adopting a similar approach to penology, the Supreme Court in Santa
Singh v. State of Punjab , observed that “penology regards crime and
criminal as equally material when the sentence has to be awarded. It turns
the focus not only on the gravity or nature of the crime but also on the
criminal and seeks to personalize the punishment so that the reformist
component is also many operatives as the deterrent element. A proper
sentence is an amalgam of many factors such as nature of the offence,
circumstances, previous record of the offender, his age, education,
employment and family background, the possibility of social adjustment
and reformation, etc.”
Relationship between penology and victimology
It must retreat that criminology is one of the branches of criminal science
which is concerned with the social study of crimes and criminal
behaviour. It aims at discovering the causes of crimes and effective
measures to combat it. Penology deals with care, custody, treatment,
prevention, and control of crimes as also the various modes of sentencing
and rehabilitation of criminals. The primary concern of victimology is to
seek justice for victims of crime who are faced with multiple problems. It
deals with the rights and claims of victims of crime and their dependents.
The focus is on mitigating the sufferings of crime victims and providing
them with compensatory and other reliefs.
The policies which are postulated by these three branches i.e.,
criminology, penology, and victimology are implemented through the
agency of criminal law. Broadly, all these taken together constitute the
subject-matter of criminal science.
Approach of penology
Like in criminology, penology may also be approached from various
points of views. These may be denoted as Administrative Penology,
Scientific Penology, Academic Penology, and Analytical Penology.
Administrative Penology
The administrative personnel employed for custodial functions in prisons
ought to be capable persons conscientious of their responsibility to the
society. They must be well-educated and imparted entry-level training
before taking the job. Services old psychologists, social workers, and
media persons should be availed for assisting the prison authorities in
carrying out their correctional programmers. Prison guards and jail
supervisors owe a special duty to keep the inmates under control and
special vigil on prisoners who have no loyalty to the prison.
Scientific Penology
Individualization of prisoners should be the object of privatization and the
effectiveness of rehabilitative techniques is essentially dependent on
relaxing the custodial and disciplinary conditions keeping in view the
personality needs of each inmate. The services of therapeutic specialists
may be used for scientific corrective treatment of inmates in prison. The
prison environment should be corrective rather than punitive.
Academic Penology
Academic penology is basically descriptive in character, and its main
purpose is being the dissemination of penological knowledge. It limits
itself with the theoretical knowledge of penology.
Analytical Penology
It aims at ascertaining as objectively as possible, the adequacy of existing
penal policies and methods and suggests measures for improving the
system. Thus, it makes a critical analysis of penal measures and offers
solutions for the efficient administration of penal justice.
The basic principle underlying the modern penology is that the sentences
awarded ought to be proportionate to the gravity of the offence. In
operating the sentencing system, the law should adopt the corrective
machinery or deterrence based on the factual matrix of the case. The
nature of the crime, the manner in which it was planned and committed,
the motive of the commission of a crime, the conduct of the accused, the
nature of the weapons used, and all other attending circumstances are
relevant facts which should be taken into consideration before sentencing
the accused. The court must not keep in view the rights of the victim to
the crime but also the society at large while considering this imposition of
an appropriate sentence. Awarding inadequate sentences out of uncalled
for sympathy for the accused would do more harm to the justice system
and undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of the penal system.

Caution against excessive reformation
Despite the fact that traditional methods of deterrent and retributive
justice have fallen into disuse and they are now substituted by modern
reformatory measures, it must be stated that excessive reformation is
likely to defeat the very object of penology. If the difference between life
inside and outside prison is narrowed down beyond a certain limit, it is
bound to culminate into catastrophic results. The element of deterrence is
as necessary for any penal program as reformation; otherwise, the very
purpose of punishment will be defeated. It must be realized that the
ultimate control and prevention of crime depends on the proper utilization
of criminological knowledge to the needs of society.

This accounts for the emerging importance of applied criminology in
recent years. The focus of attention should therefore not only be the
offender or his criminal act but the interest of society in general and the
rights of the victim, in particular, which must be protected at all costs. It
is only then that the real objective of penology would be accomplished. A
balanced penal program justifying deterrence when it is absolutely
necessary and reformation as a general model of treatment of offenders
would perhaps be the best policy to achieve the desired ends of criminal
justice administration.
Justice must be prompt, stern, and summary inspiring a wholesome fear
in the criminal. It must not be forgotten that the protection of society
against crime and criminals is far more important than the personal gain
of the individual offender in committing a particular crime. Therefore, it
is the offender who must suffer in the larger interests of the community.
Then only the real ends of penal justice can be accomplished. It must be
remembered that punishment presupposes an offence and the measure of
punishment must not be lesser than the offender deserves. It must be
recognized that there is a strong and wide-spread demand for retribution
in the sense of reprobation.
It may have retreated that the faith and philosophy behind the
administration of criminal justice is the attainment of social justice and
not individual justice. Therefore, a blatant shift to reformation cannot be
accepted as our constitutional creed. Commenting on this aspect of penal
justice, Justice Gulab Gupta, a former judge of the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh pointed out “if reformation, in fact, benefits the society, the
conscience of social justice would be satisfied but if the reformation
accrues to the benefits of the individual alone, social justice would remain
suffocated. Let this not happen even unwillingly or unknowingly.”
The active participation of the people in the implementation of the
correctional penal program may be helpful in exercising effective control
and supervision over the offenders. Since the criminal is the product of
the community is for the community to devise ways and means to solve
this problem. The Nyaya Panchayat system representing community
justice may perhaps play a significant role in this sphere. The Lok Adalats
which are meant for quick and cheap justice may also go a long way in
accomplishing the objective of social justice. The statutory recognition
given to Lok Adalats by the Legal Services Authorities (Amendment)
Act, 2002 is indeed a progressive step in this direction.
Above all the impact of information technology and its widening
dimensions have to be recognized by the legal fraternity, particularly
those who are concerned with the administration of criminal justice. The
courts, advocates, academicians, law teachers, and even the litigants have
to acquaint themselves with the use of the developed and developing tools
and technologies to meet the demands thrown up by numerous statutes
and litigation explosions.
The computerization of courts, offices, law-chambers, and libraries, a
listing of cases, judgments, etc. has rendered it possible to make the
necessary information instantaneously available. Thus, it will greatly help
in plugging the loop-holes of the existing criminal justice system and
expose and destroy inefficiency, unfairness, and injustice which have
crept into the administration of criminal justice. The efforts that are being
made in recent years to switch over to e-courts with e-governance for e-
justice would certainly go a long way in restoring the confidence of the
people in the criminal justice system which lost its credibility being too
expensive and dilatory. The development of ADR mechanism Lok
Adalat’s plea-bargaining and setting up of the Fast- Track Courts are some
of the measures which certainly help to strengthen the cause of the
criminal justice system in India.
Recent development
According to the modern view, lawbreakers can be deterred by harsh
penalties as a cost of breaking the law. It has been generally observed that
developing countries like India focus more on penalties rather than their
effective implementation. The weak implementation of laws and harsh
punishments lead to a culture of public and private violence, lawlessness
and impunity, as can be observed in India today.
The laws relating to social policies such as Article 377 on homosexuality
or beef bans and prohibition laws, which are gaining popularity all over
the country are accompanied by over-strict penalties. Even in non-
prohibition states like Delhi, the possession of a few cases of beer, or a
collection of more than nine bottles of single-malt whiskey, could land
one to a jail term of three years. Added to the list in upholding criminal
defamation under section 400/500 IPC. Defamation is essentially a civil
wrong that was criminalized during the British period when duels aimed
at defending honour and reputation posed a threat to public order. The
need of the hour is that India should improve the delivery of speedy justice
in civil defamation cases, instead of retaining criminal defamation.
Conclusion
Some penologists have suggested that punitive reaction to crime varies
and fluctuates in accordance with the phase through which a particular
society or nation is passing. For instance, during the periods of revolution
or war, the use of death sentence, banishment, solitary confinement,
confiscation of property, etc. as punishment may be extensively used, but
the same may not be justified In periods of peace and tranquillity. In the
Indian context with the incidence of terrorist attacks rising unabated, the
death penalty for terrorists may be fully justified though it has to be used
in rarest of rare cases. Similarly, the widespread corruption at all levels,
particularly, among the high placed bureaucrats, politicians,
corporations’, etc. fine to the tune of lakhs of rupees accompanied but the
confiscation of ill-gotten wealth as a punishment would be more
appropriate rather than incarceration, and perhaps, ostracization of such
culprits would be more effective.
Commenting on the prevailing criminal justice system in the country, the
Chief Justice of India, Justice P. Sthasivam, while speaking on the
occasion of National Legal Services Day (on 6th November 2013)
observed that “justice is still in a cynical phase for the common man
despite efforts being made to make it accessible. Endorsing his views,
Justice G.S. Singhvi in his address to the legal fraternity said that,” it is
time to ponder whether in 65 years we have been able to achieve the goal
to provide justice for people and whether we have created an atmosphere
where everybody has equality of opportunity and status for people.
According to him, “Justice was still an illusion for millions of people in
the county and it is not accessible to a majority of the population.” The
plight of the victims of crime needs to be on the priority list of courts and
law adjudicators.
HINDU AND ISLAMIC APPROACHES OF PUNISHMENT
Introduction
Man has passed from the stages of being uncivilized to becoming a social
being. There are many factors responsible for promoting man for this
change, one of which is common fear and reciprocity. Over time, man has
become more and more social which resulted in the increase of moral
restraints on his interaction with the society. Whenever a man acted in an
unrestrained or unsocial manner, he came in conflict with others and in
order to do away with such conflicts many rules and regulations enforcing
various kinds of punishments came into being.
Earlier when there was no criminal law to govern the society, people were
under a constant threat of being attacked at any time by one another. The
weak, the young and the old were easily dominated and overpowered by
the strong and the powerful. However as time advanced, societies became
more integrated and various norms came into practice, whose violation
resulted in punishments and penalties such as: compensation, death
penalty, banishment, mutilation etc. With the rise of the humanitarian
aspect in penal philosophy fines, forfeiture, confiscation of property and
imprisonment to life became common forms of punishment meted out for
almost all offences in many parts of the world.
Historical Perspective Of The Punishment System

“Punishment governs all mankind; punishment alone preserves them;
punishment wakes while their guards are asleep; the wise considers
punishment as the perfection of justice”
Proverb by Manu
From the earliest times, punishment of offenders was a private matter.
Punishment was basically based upon the principle of Lex Talionis. It is
a principle that states that the victim or a member of the victim’s family
retaliates against the offending party as a remedy for personal wrongs,
i.e. an eye for an eye. In many instances, personal revenge was not only
a right but also a responsibility. Every tribe, family and kin in every kind
of society were obligated to avenge the harm caused to them and their
family.
The Sumerian code and the code of Hammurabi are the earliest written
criminal codes. These codes carry the harsh translation of ‘lex
talionis’ but further specify the concept of ‘equality on
revenge’, meaning that the severity of retaliation must be equal to the
severity of offence or amount of retaliation must fit the crime.
Mythological Perspective of Punishment
It is believed in many religions that an individual’s ultimate punishment
is being sent to hell by God who is the highest authority that upholds
justice. Hell is considered to be a place which exists after the life of a
person, corresponding to the sins committed during his/her life. In
Plato’s ‘Myth of Er’ and Dante’s ‘Divine Comedy’ it is said that in hell,
damned souls suffer for each of the sins that they committed. In many
religious cultures including Christianity and Islam, hell is traditionally
depicted as a fiery and painful place where souls are punished.
In Hinduism, Garuda Purana is considered to be a set of instructions given
by lord Vishnu to his carrier, Garuda (king of birds). This version of
Garuda Purana that survives into the modern era was written somewhere
between 800 to 1000 CE. It deals with law, astronomy, medicine,
grammar, gemstones, etc. It is also known as Vaishnava Purana. In this
Purana, different offences were defined and their respective punishments
prescribed. Indian Jurisprudence Under Hindu Kings
Under Ancient Hindu kings, there was an administration of civil and
criminal justice which was done according to the rules of the Dharma
Shastras. In ancient Hindu law, laws were discussed under 18 heads
covering both modern civil and criminal branches of law which fell under
heads such as gifts, sales, partition, bailment, non-payment of debt,
breaches of contract, disputes between partners, assault, defamation,
trespass of cattle, damage to goods and bodily injury in general.
A Hindu code was compiled by the Pandits of Banaras at the instance of
Warren Hastings when he was governor general of India. It was known as
the Gentoo code which was printed by the East India company in 1776 in
London. It provided that the penalty for theft be divided into open theft
and concealed theft and different punishments were prescribed for them
according to Roman Law. The former was punished by fine and the latter
by the cruellest form of punishment of cutting off the hand or foot, at the
discretion of the judge. Death punishment was also given for crimes like
housebreaking and highways robbery.
Unequal And Discriminatory Punishment System in Ancient India
During the ancient Indian period there was a clear distinction made
between the people of higher and lower castes while imposing
punishments. Kautilya’s Arthashastra prescribed lower punishment to
higher caste offenders and more severe punishment to lower caste
offenders. According to him, a brahmin is not to be tortured like other
people even though he may have committed an offence; they were also
exempted from death penalty.
 For example: A Kshatriya who commits adultery with a woman would
be punished with the highest punishment, while a Vaishya doing the same
thing would be deprived of his entire property and a Shudra would be
burnt alive.
During that time the powers of the judge were also very limited and kept
in check. According to Kautilya a judge or a magistrate, who imposes an
unjust fine shall be fined either double the amount or 8 times over the
prescribed fine. If he imposes corporal punishment wrongly, he shall
himself suffer the same.
Forms Of Punishments Under Hindu Code of Law
The history of the penal system states that in the past punishments were
torturous, cruel and barbaric in nature. The objectives of such
punishments were to create deterrence and retribution. Such punishments
were classified under the following heads:
1. Capital Punishment
2. Corporal Punishment
3. Social Punishment
4. Financial Punishment
Capital Punishment
Capital punishment is an authorized killing of someone in a legal manner
as a punishment for the crime committed, such as a death penalty. In other
words, it means a government has itself sanctioned a practice where a
person is put to death by the state as a punishment for a crime. In Ancient
India, capital punishment was a very common practice. It was the most
extreme form of punishment and the methods of meting out this
punishment varied from time to time. Some of those methods were:
Stoning: ‘Stoning’ is that method of capital punishment in which a group
of people throw stones at a person until he dies. In it, the guilty person is
made to stand in a small trench dug in the ground and the people surround
him from all sides and throw stones on him until his death. This mode of
punishment is still meted out in some of the Islamic countries, especially
in Afghanistan, Saudi-Arabia etc.
   • Pillory: In ‘Pillory’, the offender was compelled to stand in a
      public place with his head and hands locked in an iron frame so that
      he couldn’t move. Then he would be whipped, branded or stoned, or
      his ears would be nailed to the beams of the pillory. Sometimes,
      dangerous criminals were nailed to the walls and were then shot or
      stoned to death. It undoubtedly was a very cruel and brutal form of
      punishment which was in practice till the 19th century.
   • Immurement: In it the offender was constructed into a wall. It was
      the most cruel, barbaric and the most painful form of execution of a
      death penalty.
   • Execution by elephant: Under this punishment, the offender was
      thrown under the feet of an intoxicated elephant, to be painfully
      crushed to death.
Corporal Punishment
Corporal Punishment simply means a form of punishment which is
intended to cause physical pain on a person. It is also known as physical
punishment. This form of punishment is for the violation of a law which
involves infliction of pain on or harm to the body of the offender. The
objective behind corporal punishment is not only to punish the offender
but also to prevent the repetition of the offence by the offender or by any
other person. The following are the corporal punishment which were
meted out in ancient times:
   • Flogging: It simply means ‘beating or whipping’ someone with a
      stick or whip as a punishment. It was the most common method of
      meting out corporal punishment to offenders. In India, it was
      recognized under the Whipping Act, 1864 which was repealed in
      1909 but was finally abolished in 1955. The method of flogging
      differed from country to country. Some used straps and whips with
      a single lash while others used short pieces of rubber hose since they
      leave behind traces of flogging. It was one of the most barbaric and
      cruel forms of punishment. This method is being used in most of
      the Middle East countries even today.
   •  Mutilation : Generally it means ‘to cause severe damage to the
      body of a person’. In other words it means damaging a person
      severely, especially by removing a part of the body. This mode of
      punishment was in practice in ancient India. During that period one
      or both of the hands of the person were chopped off if the offender
      committed theft, if he indulged in sex offences, his private parts
      were cut off, if he told a lie or criticized God his tongue was cut off,
      and if he was deceitful or untrustworthy his ears were cut off. This
      system was also in practice in the European countries. But in modern
      times this method has been completely disregarded because of its
      barbaric nature.
   • Branding : It means ‘searing of flesh with a hot iron’. In this
      method of punishment, the culprit was branded by hot iron on the
      forehead with the words describing his offence. This method was
      commonly used in classical societies. In Roman Penal Law,
      criminals were branded with appropriate marks on their forehead so
      that they could’ve been identified and subjected to public ridicule.
      In India it was in practice during the Moghul rule, which has been
      completely abolished.
   • Pressured by iron rods : In this method of punishment the body of
      the offender was pressured by two iron rods in a very inhumane and
      cruel manner where he suffered a lot of pain.
   • Imprisonment : The Punishment of imprisonment which is seen
      today is totally different from the kind of imprisonment which was
      awarded in the past. Many kingdoms awarded the punishment of
      imprisonment by shackling the hands and legs of the culprit and
      throwing them down a dry well or in a small dark room.
Social Punishment
Social punishment is a punishment in which a person is restrained from
making any kind of contact with any other person, or is moved to a distant
place, breaking all of his social connections. No person can extend any
help of any sort and if anyone tries to do that, they are held liable for
punishment. Social punishment wasn’t aimed at inflicting any bodily pain,
but a psychological one. This form of punishment was divided into two
parts :
  •   Banishment : Banishment means ‘to expel a person’. It is also
      known as ‘transportation’. In this form of punishment, undesirable
      criminals were transported to far off places with an aim to isolate
      them from the society. This type of punishment was also in practice
      during the British rule in India. It was popularly known as
      ‘kalapani’. At that time, people deemed as ‘dangerous criminals’
      were transported to remote islands. This practice was abolished in
      1955 and was replaced with “Imprisonment for life”.
   • Social Boycott : Social Boycott means ‘an act of forcing a person
      to abstain from any kind of contact with other people of the society’.
      In ancient times, the nyaya panchayat in villages used to give the
      punishment of social boycott to offenders. Under this punishment,
      no person of the village was allowed to share any occasion of joy
      and happiness with the offender. In other words the offender was
      degraded from his caste and no caste member was allowed to come
      into contact with him. For example in those times smoking
      ‘Hukkah’ was considered as one of the means for social gatherings
      and acceptance by the society. But offenders were not allowed to
      participate in smoking ‘Hukkah’ with the rest of the people, thereby
      boycotting them. This was termed as stopping a person’s ‘Hukkah-
      Pani.’
Financial Punishment
It is also known as imposition of fine. It was the common mode of
punishment which was not serious in nature and it was awarded specially
for the breach of traffic rules, revenue laws and other minor offences. It
also included the payment of compensation to the victims of the crime and
also the payment of the costs of prosecution.
Ancient Mohammedan Jurisprudence
The criminal law practiced in northern and southern parts of India was the
Mohammedan law, which was introduced by the Moghul conquerors
whose power culminated under Akbar in the second half of the sixteenth
century. The most authoritative written exposition version of the
Mohammedan Jurisprudence in India was the Hidayah, which expresses
the views of Aboo Huneefah and his disciples Aboo Yousuf and Imam
Mohammed who were regarded by the Sunni sect of the Muslims as the
principal commentators on the Quran. The Mohammedan criminal law as
stated in the Hidayah presents a curious mixture of great vagueness and
extreme technicality. The Mohammedan criminal law was open to all
objections. It was occasionally cruel. Thus, for instance, immoral
intercourse between a woman and a married man was in all cases
punishable by death.
The primary base of the Mohammedan criminal law was the Quran which
was believed to be of Divine origin. But the laws of the Quran were found
to be inadequate. Only eighty or ninety verses of the Quran talked about
general rules which might come before a civil or criminal court of justice.
Also under this system, the Sultan himself as a ruler exercised criminal
jurisdiction over his subjects and accordingly sentenced the offenders to
temporal punishments.
Forms Of Punishments Under Mohammedan Jurisprudence
The Mohammedan Jurisprudence had four broad principles of
punishment. They were as follows:
   1. Qisas or retaliation
   2. Diyut or blood-money
   3. Hadd or fixed punishment
   4. Tazir and Siyasa or discretionary and exemplary punishment
Qisas or Retaliation
The principle of Qisas states, ‘an eye for an eye, life for a life, and a
limb for a limb‘. Under this principle, crimes called Jinayat were also
included. The qisas crimes were murder, manslaughter and any physical
injury to another individual, intentional or unintentional. However the
punishment of retaliation was classified under two heads:
   • Life Qisas- If the intentional injurious act of the criminal causes the
      death of the victim, the heirs of the victim may take revenge and ask
      the judge for Life Qisa (death penalty).
   • Limb Qisas- When the intentional injurious act does not cause the
      death of the victim, but rather the loss of a limb or its proper
      function, the victim, herself/himself, may take revenge or ask for
      Diya.
Diyut or Blood Money
The second form of punishment was called Diyut which meant the fine or
compensation for blood in cases of homicide. The amount of Diya
received for a murdered person and injury of different parts of the body is
determined in Fiqh books; the Islamic jurisprudence compiled in books
by different Islamic jurists. The punishment of Qisas in all cases of willful
homicide was exchangeable with that of Diyut, if the person having the
right of retaliation wished so. He was given an alternate remedy either to
take Diyut or Qisas as a form of compensation.
Hadd or Specific Penalty
The third principle of punishment under the Mohammedan law was called
Hadd which is defined in the Hidayah, which comprises the specific
penalties fixed to promote public justice. Under Hadd the quantity and
quality of punishment was fixed for certain offences and this could not be
altered or modified. If the offence was proved, the Qadi had no other
alternative but to sentence the convict to the prescribed punishment. But
Hadd could not be executed if there was any doubt, or legal defects and
then the Sultan was directed to administer the law with moderation. The
punishment of Hadd also extended to the crimes of adultery, of illicit
sexual intercourse between married or unmarried individuals, on false
accusations, drinking wine, theft and of highway robbery.
Types of Hadd Punishment Given for Different Crimes
   • Whipping is the Hadd punishment for adultery, sapphism,
      procuring, sexual defamation and drinking alcohol. Maximum
      amount of Hadd lashes is 100 lashes. Some offences receive 80
      lashes and the minimum amount is 75 lashes.
   • Amputation form of punishment is given for burglary, rebelling
      and doing corruption on earth. The perpetrator of rebellion was
      punished either by maiming of his/her hand and foot, crucifixion for
      three days, banishment or death.
   • Death Penalty is given for crimes such as sodomy, rape and incest.
      Death penalty is considered as the most cruel and sadistic form of
      punishment given in those times. There are still many Islamic
      countries which encourage the practice of death penalties.
  •   Lapidation or Stoning was the punishment for the offences of
      Zina, when legally established against a man of sound understanding
      and mature age, being a Musalman and free, and being married to a
      woman of the same description.
Tazir and Siyasa
Tazir and Siyasa were the discretionary and exemplary form of
punishments, which rested completely on the discretion of the judge.
Under Tazir, the punishment could be anything from imprisonment and
banishment to public exposure. The Qadi was authorized to exercise
discretion according to the nature of the offence, rank and situation of the
offender in adjudging him to receive his punishment for the crimes he
committed. At the discretion of Qadi, banishment was also allowed.
Public exposure with a blackened face was expressly declared to be the
punishment to be inflicted upon a false witness in addition to forty lashes.
This general doctrine of discretionary punishment was clearly set forth in
the preamble of Mohammedan law which states that “The Mohammedan
law vests in the sovereign and his delegates the power of sentencing
criminals to suffer discretionary punishment in the following three cases.
   1. In the cases of offences for which no specific penalty of Hadd or
      Quisas has been provided by the law.
   2. For crimes which are within the specific provisions of Hadd and
      Kisas and the proof of such crimes being committed may not be such
      as the law requires for a judgment of the specific penalties.
   3. For repeated heinous crimes in high degree which causes injury to
      society at large and particularly other offences of this description
      that require exemplary punishment beyond the prescribed penalties.
Siyasa was also the same as Tazir which was meant to create an example
by punishing dangerous criminals habitually committing atrocious
crimes, and of whom there could be no hope of reformation. Therefore
Tazir and Siyasa might in all cases be inflicted by the ruler upon strong
presumption, whether arising from the credible testimony of such
incompetent witnesses or from circumstances which raised a presumption
of guilt or from any other reasonable cause.
Conclusion
From the above brief survey, it can be said that the punishment system
during Ancient India was cruel and barbaric. The laws regarding
punishment which existed both in Hindu and Muslim laws promoted
harsh punishment following the principles of retaliation (Lex Talionis),
deterrence and incapacitation giving less importance to restoration and
rehabilitation theories. Also, punishment was discriminatory in the Hindu
societies, handing out stringent punishment to lower castes. Most of the
laws that existed in ancient times were a result of various religious
interpretations ie, for the Hindus it was Manusmriti and Arthashastras and
for Muslims it was Sharia and teachings of Mohammad. Due to following,
the principles of religious offences were interpreted as evil incarnation,
therefore harsh punishment were very common in those days.
There was no regard for human life and human rights, people believed
that bodily pain and harm is the only way for rehabilitation. However,
with the advent of British rule in India, new theories of law came into
existence which evolved the definition and forms of punishment. Fines,
compensation, confiscation of property became the most common form
of punishment. Later on, an official criminal code of India was introduced
which covered all substantive aspects of criminal law. The code was
drafted on the recommendations of the First Law Commission of India
established in 1834 under the Charter Act of 1833 under the Chairmanship
of Lord Macaulay. This code came into force in British India during the
early British Raj period in 1862, known as the India Penal Code. Since
then many amendments have been made to it, bringing many significant
changes into the theories and forms of punishment.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN
INDIA
Capital punishment or death penalty is the penalty of death for a person
convicted of a serious crime. It is derived from the Latin word ‘capitalis’
which means ‘of the head.’ The penalty is so-called since centuries ago
beheading was the most frequent form of punishment for serious crime.
Among the current methods of implementing capital punishment are
firing squad, electrocution, gas chamber and lethal injection, apart from
hanging by neck. From the study of history, we can see the prevalence of
capital punishment since time immemorial. Right from ancient Indian
period, thro’ medieval period of India and as well as in modern India,
capital punishment has been very much prevalent. The punishments are
provided in order to deter crimes. The punishments are imposed to make
the threat credible. Threats and imposition of punishments are obviously
necessary to deter crimes. This material focus is on the extent of
implementation of capital punishment in ancient India and medieval
period and also examines trends and developments in India particularly in
terms of the challenges in implementation of the Capital Punishment in
modern India.
Capital punishment, often referred to as the death penalty, has been used
as a method of crime deterrence since the earliest societies. Historical
records show that even the most ancient primitive tribes utilized various
methods of punishing wrongdoers, including taking their lives, to pay for
the crimes they committed. Murder most often warrants this ultimate form
of punishment. “A life for a life” has been one of the most basic concepts
for dealing with crime since the start of recorded history. Early forms of
capital punishment were designed to be slow, painful, and torturous. In
some ancient cultures, law breakers were put to death by stoning,
impaling, being burned at the stake, and even slowly being crushed by
elephants. The prescription of punishment is a clear recognition of the
principle that such offences are no longer a private affair between
individual, but a matter between individual and state, a matter with which
the whole society is concerned. Here we have the existence of the
common principle to all ancient society that evil should be returned for
evil. It is the dictum of an eye for an eye and a tooth for tooth.
ANCIENT PERIOD
In ancient India, punishments were generally sanctioned by the ruler.
There were two main purposes for punishment in Hindu society.
Incapacitation was the first purpose and was used to ensure that an
offender would not be able to commit the same crime again. For example,
the hands of a thief would be cut off. Deterrence was the second purpose
of punishment. Criminals were punished to set an example to the public,
in hopes of preventing future offenses. Although these were the two main
purposes of Hindu Law, other purposes such as rehabilitation were used
as means of punishment and correction. Retribution is another theory of
punishment; however, it does not have a prevalent role in Hindu
punishment.
Types of punishment
In his digest, Manu cites four types of punishment: Vakdanda,
admonition; Dhikdanda, censure; Dhanadanda, fine (penalty);
Badhadanda, physical punishments. Later authors added two more types
of punishment: confiscation of property and public humiliation.
Ancient India was not a safe place to live. Many groups of thieves existed
already at the time of the Buddha ( 6th century BC). They were bandits
from generation to generation, robbing and killing their victims like the
thugs did later. These are professional bandit caste, but not only them,
constituted an important problem: punishment of crimes and offences was
then harsh.1

Maurya Dynasty

The Mauryan administration is famous in history for its judicial system.
The Mauryan legal system was based on idealism and not reformism. The
king was the highest judicial officer. Penalties were imposed on those who
break the law. Monetary fines were imposed for ordinary crimes. Capital
punishment was practiced. During the rule of Chandragupta and his son
Bindusara: the laws were harsh and the death penalty was applied to a
myriad of offenses.

The Maurya Dynasty, which had extended to substantial parts of the
central and eastern regions during the 4th Century B.C., had a rigorous
penal system, which prescribed mutilation as well as death penalty for
even trivial offences. Written in the 4thcentury BC by Kautilya, minister
of the king CandraguptaMaurya, the “Arthashastra” is a treatise on the art
of ruling and one of the main Indian books ever written. It recommends :
cutting off the right hand for pick pocketing or theft; cutting off the nose
for theft; cutting off one hand for false dice player; cutting off the nose
and ears for abetting in theft and adultery; chopping off one hand and leg
for kicking preceptors and using royal coaches; blinding by poisonous
ointments for sudras pretending to be Brahmins or for slandering the king;
chopping off one hand or foot for freeing culprits, forgery or sale of
human flesh; cutting off the tongue for slandering preceptors, parents and
the king and for defiling a Brahmin’s kitchen. There were also different
forms of death: death with torture for murder in a quarrel; death by
impaling for theft of royal animals; death by burning hands and skin for
treason; death by drowning for breaching dams or reservoirs, for
poisoning or for women who administered poison; death by tearing off
the limbs of criminals, for women who administered poison or set fire to
houses; death by burning for incendiarism.2

Guptha Dynasty:

Fa-hein (337 – 422) was the first of three great Chinese pilgrims who
visited India from the fifth to the seventh centuries, in search of
knowledge, manuscripts and relics. Fa-hein arrived during the reign of
Chandragupta II and gave a general description of North India at that time.
Among the other things, he reported about the absence of capital
punishment, the lack of a poll-tax and land tax. The cruel punishments
during the Mauryan Dynasty had been abolished. The government
operated without the system of espionage often practiced by Mauryan
rulers. Law breaking was punished without death sentences – mainly by
fines. Punishments such as having one's hand cut off were applied only
against obstinate, professional criminals. Gupta law was exceptionally
generous.3

Vardhana dynasty:

The down fall of Gupta Empire formed into a number of small
independent kingdoms in North India. One kingdom was at Thaneswar
ruled by the Vardhana dynasty. PrabhakaraVardhana was the one who
founded the Vardhana dynasty. He was the first king of the dynasty with
his capital at Thanesar. After the death of the founder, his son
RajyaVardhana succeeded him. But, soon the enemies murdered him and
then Harsha became the ruler of Thaneswar in A.D. 606 and ruled up to
A D 647. King Harsha left for the holy abode in the year 647 AD, after
ruling over the Indian subcontinent for more than 41 years. The Vardhana
Dynasty came to an end by the death of Harshavardhana. As he did not
have any heirs, his empire rapidly collapsed into small states again.
During his period, punishments were not so harsh and there was no death
penalty.

MEDIEVAL PERIOD

The ancient law of crimes in India provided death sentence for quite a
good number of offences. The great Indian epics, viz., the Mahabharata
and the Ramayana also contain references about the offender being
punished with vadhadand (death penalty). During the medieval era,
capital punishment was sentenced even for extremely trivial and
inconsequential matter or in other words we can say that they were
executed for minor crimes such as stealing, cheating or even trespassing.
Also, the methods of administering death penalty were immensely harsh
and gruesome. The punishment which was given to the accused can’t be
compare to the act which has been done by accused. Can you imagine
someone getting executed for stealing a fruit from their landlord's tree?
Or someone gets decapitated for shoplifting? Bizarre, it might sound, but
such petty 'crimes' accounted for capital punishment during the medieval
period. There were several hundred offenses which 'qualified' for death
penalty. Once convicted of these ridiculous crimes, convicts were
executed in the most heinous way possible. Some of these ways include,
hanging, decapitation, burning at the stake, drowning, crucifixion,
quartering by horses, stoning, strangulation, impalement etc. There are
records of other violent and brutal execution methods being practiced in
that era.
Capital punishments during various dynasties of Medieval Period:

The Medieval Period of Indian History comprises a long period, spanning
from 6th century i.e. after the fall of the Gupta Empire to the 18th century
i.e. the beginning of colonial domination.

Pallava Dynasty

Pallavas were a powerful Dynasties of Andhra Pradesh in Indian medieval
history in the end of 500 AD.4 They ruled from its capital placed at
Pallavapuri. For better administration, they moved it to Kanchipuram and
established a more strong empire by the founder of pallavas Dynasty
Simha Vishnu Pallava. The highest judicial organization was called
Dharmasena. The king acted as its head. Punishments were not cruel and
harsh. Fines were also imposed along with punishment.

Chola Dynasty

The Cholas dynasty was one of the earliest dynasties that ruled in South
India. Vijayalaya (850-875) was the founder of the dynasty. The
punishments for minor crimes were in the form of fines or a direction for
the offender to donate to some charitable endowment. Even crimes such
as manslaughter or murder were punished by fines. Capital punishment
was uncommon even in the cases of first-degree murder. Only one solitary
instance of capital punishment is found in all the records available so far.
Crimes of the state such as treason were heard and decided by the king
himself and the typical punishment in such cases was either execution or
confiscation of property.5

The Chalukya Dynasty

The Chalukya Dynasties were in power of Indian medieval history from
the reign of 600 to 1200 AD in the state of Deccan. There were separate
military and civil courts during the reign of Chalukyas. King was the
highest judicial authority and gave his decision in accordance with
conventions and on the advice of his ministers. All sorts of punishments
such as imprisonment, exile, fines and sentence to death etc. were
prevalent in his period.6

Pandya dynasty

The Pandyan Empire started around the 6th century and ended around the
15th century . The modern districts of Madurai ,Thirunelveli and parts of
the Travancore State were parts of the Pandyan Kingdom . Punishments
were severe unlike during Chola rule. Justice was administered free of
charge, by special officers appointed as judges and magistrates, but the
king was supreme and the final arbiter in all civil and criminal cases. The
punishments were very severe and hence crimes were rare: one caught in
the act of burglary, adultery or spying was given the death penalty and
one giving false testimony would have his tongue cut off. If a debtor can’t
pay back his creditor and keeps making incomplete promises, and the
creditor can draw a circle around the debtor, then the debtor cannot leave
that circle until the debt is paid. If he does then he is punished with death.
Corporal punishment was common and by modern standards barbarous.
Instances of persons being tied to the leg of a buffalo bull and being
dragged by the brute are not wanting as models of punishment. There was
ony tyrant king, GunaSundaraPandyanwho signaled his change of creed
by outrages on the Jains. Tradition claims that eight thousand Jains were
impaled.7

Delhi Sultanate Dynasty

A number of Delhi Sultanates were in power from 1210 AD to 1526 AD.
During the Muslim period Islamic law or Shariat was followed by all
Sultans and Mughal Emperors. The Shariat is based on the principles
enunciated by Quran. Under the Muslim criminal law, which was mostly
based on their religion, any violation of public rights was an offence
against the State. There were three types of punishments recognised by
Muslim Law, Hadd, Tazir and Qisas. The penal code was severe in those
days. Capital punishment and physical torture were frequently awarded
as punishments like cutting of limbs driving nail into the body, pouring
molten lead into the throat, beating with stones and such other inhuman
punishments were common in those days. Death by elephant was most
prevalent in those days. In 1305, the sultan of Delhi (Sunni Muslims)
turned the deaths of Mongol prisoners into public entertainment by having
them crushed by elephants. In the sultanate of Delhi, elephants were
trained to slice prisoners to pieces “with pointed blades fitted to their
tusks”. Such executions were often held in public as a warning to any
who might transgress. The executions were intended to be gruesome and,
by all accounts, they often were. They were sometimes preceded by
torture publicly inflicted by the same elephant used for the execution.

Vijaynagara Dynasty

Vijaynagar Empire was established by two brothers Harihara and Bukka
in the middle of 13th century. It continued for three centuries.
Krishnadeva Raya was the best ruler of Vijaynagar Empire; He was
always unbeaten in the wars throughout his reign. He always treated with
the beaten enemy as a friend. During Krishnadevaraya period, crimes
were less. Mild to severe punishments were awarded according to the
crime. Death was the sentence for treason

Mughal Dynasty

Babur (1526 to1530 AD), was the founder of the Mughal Empire in India.
The judicial system of the Mughals was very similar to that of the
sultanate. It became more systematic, particularly under Aurangzeb.
Capital punishments and mutilations were frequent, and there are records
of impaling, dismemberment and other cruel punishments. They were,
however, limited in their incidence and were inflicted only under the royal
orders. Furthermore, they were confined to those cases where an example
was to be made of the individual concerned. One famous punishment of
the Mughal dynasty is crushing by elephants. Execution by elephant was
a common method of capital punishment in India during later medieval
period.8

MODERN INDIA

After the downfall of Mughal Empire, no empire was able to establish
their rule in India. In the meantime, East India Company started their rule
and started to occupy many regions forcibly. When once the British
colonial rule was started, the British had taken control over the judicial
system.

Making of Indian Penal Code- Historical Background:

The Charter Act of 1833, plausibly to achieve uniformity of laws and
judicial systems in all the parts of British India, introduced a single
legislature for the whole of British India. It made the Governor-General
of India, for the first time, solely responsible for promulgating laws for all
persons and the Presidency towns as well as for the mofussil. The Charter
Act of 1833 also provided for the appointment of a 'Law Commission' for
inquiring fully into, and reporting on, the state of laws in force in British
India and the administration of justice. During 1834-36, the Law
Commission, under TB Macaulay's supervision, prepared the Draft Penal
Code. Thus, it is evident that the Indian Penal Code 1860, which is an
outcome of vision, and laborious efforts of about three decades (1834 -
1860) of the law commissioners, particularly of Lord TB Macaulay, the
main architect of the Code, emerged as a codified the then prevailing
English criminal law.9
Provisions awarding Capital Punishment under Indian Penal Code:

The offences for which capital punishment is granted under IPC includes,
waging War Against The Government Of India, (Sec. 121), aggravated
Forms of The Offence Of Giving Or Fabricating False Evidence (Sec.
194), punishment for murder (Sec. 302), abetment of suicide of child or
insane person (Sec. 305), aggravated form of Decoity (Sec. 396),
kidnapping for ransom etc. (Sec. 364A). by the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2013, capital punishment has been included for the
offence of sexual assault also (Sec. 376).

Prior to 1955, under the old Code of Criminal Procedure 1898, Section
367(5) of the Code stipulated that the court had to give reason, if the
sentence of death was not imposed in a case of murder. In 1955, sub-s 5
of Section 367 was deleted. The result of the deletion was that the
discretion available to the court in the matter of the sentence to be imposed
in a given case widened. The Code of the Criminal Procedure was further
amended in 1973, making life imprisonment the normal rule. Section 354
of the new code, has now made imprisonment for life a rule and death
sentence an exception, in the matter of awarding punishment for murder.

The constitutional validity of death penalty was considered by a
Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in Bachan Singh Versus State
of Punjab.10 Rarest of the rare doctrine was introduced in this case. The
Supreme Court's ruling that death sentence ought to be imposed only in
the 'rarest of rare cases' was expanded in Machhi Singh Versus State of
Punjab11 wherein it was held that life imprisonment is the rule and death
sentence is an exception. In other words, death sentence must be imposed
only when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inadequate
punishment having regard to the relevant circumstances of the crime.
The recent executions broke with a trend of gradual abandonment of the
death penalty. According to statistics, India had approximately 140
executions per year between 1954 and 1963. Between 1996 and 2000, this
rate was roughly 1 execution per year. It is, however, interesting to note
that despite the punishment being handed down by the courts, both the
lower and appellate ones, not many have been carried out. According to
official statistics, only one sentence, that of Dhananjoy Chatterji in 2004
was carried out since the execution of ‘Auto’ Shankar in 1995. After 8
years without executions, India carried out two executions in close
succession in November 2012 (AjmalKasab) and February 2013 (Afzal
Guru). Both prisoners had been convicted of taking part in terrorist
attacks. In July 2015, Mumbai serial bomb blast convict YakoobMemon
was hanged for his offence against the State. All other death sentences
pronounced earlier have, in some cases, been reduced to life
imprisonment and the in the other cases, are in Court for revision or before
the President or Governor on the plea of mercy.
There are some main differences between the ancient and the modern
Hindu law with respect to the death penalty. The first difference is that in
classical India the death penalty was permissible in a very large number
of cases. Second, the death penalty was not prescribed solely in cases in
which death resulted or was likely to result. Instead, it was also used in
cases such as adultery and theft. Third, there were numerous ways to
inflict the death penalty, unlike modern India which uses hanging as their
only means of imposing death. Fourth, in modern India the death penalty
is an exception whereas in ancient India it was a rule. Fifth, today the
underlying principle seems to be retributive while in classical India it was
a means of deterrence. Lastly, today the law in relation to the death
penalty is the same regardless of caste or colour. However, in ancient
India Brahmins were never subject to the death penalty.

As of now, death penalty is good and serves a definite purpose of reducing
crime as well as bringing justice to the criminals and innocent. In order to
serve its purpose, it must be adjusted and made more effective and
efficient.
THEORIES OF PUNISHMENT
The Critical Evaluation of the Different Theories of Punishment
Introduction
  Punishment is a form of social control which helps the society to sustain
its rules and regulations, not to mention the peacefulness of the lives of
its inhabitants. Because of that reason if the wrongdoing is not controlled
then it will create problem within the society and in the lives of people. In
order to deal with the wrongdoing; and in this particular case, crimes,
which can be said as the violations of law, we have the theories of
punishment. The theories of punishments try to explain and justify
punishment by their own viewpoints. There are mainly three theories of
punishment which are the deterrent theory which tries to deter crimes by
punishing the criminal, retributive theory which aims to attain retribution
by punishing the criminal for his or her wrongdoing and finally
reformative theory which hopes to reform the character of the criminal by
inflicting punishment. Nevertheless, every one of these theories has their
own merits and demerits.       Deterrent Theory of Punishment Deterrent
theory of punishment is one of the theories of punishment. This aims at,
according to Mackenzie “to deter others from committing similar
offense” whereas Lillie describes it “when the judge makes example of
some offender.” (Lillie, 1948, p. 253) Thus it is also preventive theory of
punishment or exemplary theory of punishment. Similarly, it is thought
that “Punishment is said to have a deterrent effect when the fear or actual
imposition of punishment leads to conformity. Specifically, punishments
have the greatest potential for deterring misconduct when they are severe,
certain, and swift in their application.” So in general, the aim of
punishment is to deter crimes.        So, punishment is inflicted upon the
criminal in order to deter or prevent similar offenses. It is done as a
preventive measure towards crimes. It is exemplary so that the others do
not commit similar crimes. It is forward-looking. It is focused on society.
It is done as a preventive measure towards crimes. It is generally held that
when a person commits a crime, he or she gets mental satisfaction by
doing so. Pain and pleasure being natural feelings of human beings, the
satisfaction of a crime leads to more crime. In order to prevent that pain
is given to the offender so that he or she may have the dissatisfaction of
the act and thus deter from doing so. For example, if a person steals
something and as a result of that, he is given a punishment in which his or
her hand is cut off then the negative effect that is to say the pain will
abstain him or her from stealing. It is done as a preventive measure
towards crimes. It is exemplary so that the others do not commit either
the identical or the similar crimes. For example, if a person takes drugs,
this crime can influence other latent criminals to indulge in the same
activity. And punishing the drug user can deter others from doing the
same kind of heinous act. Crimes can influence more crime of the like,
for example, taking drugs can influence others in selling drugs. So
deterrent theory comes here to deter the similar offense by infliction of
punishment upon the criminal, for example, if the criminal, in this case,
the drug user is punished, then this act will be exemplary towards the
latent criminals, reframing them from committing the similar crime; that
is to sell drugs. And this is why it is exemplary so that the others do not
commit either the identical or the similar crimes. It is forward-looking.
This is because it tries to deter crimes in the future. For example, if a
person is found guilty of fraud and is punished for it then this act of
punishment will deter future offense like that. So it is “forward-looking.”
It is focused on society. The aim of this theory is not towards the
individual but towards the society. This is because by exercising
punishment
it wants to deter or prevent crimes, not to mention set an example of what
would happen if the crime is committed. Thus, it is focused on society.
There are mainly four types of deterrent theory. They are specific
deterrence, general deterrence marginal deterrence, and partial deterrence.
“Specific deterrence involves the effectiveness of punishment on that
particular individual’s future behavior.” For example, if a thief is
punished, he will be deterred from future crimes as such. “General
deterrence asks whether the punishment of particular offenders deters
other people from committing deviance.” For example, if a thief is
punished then this will deter other latent criminals from committing the
same crime in the future. Marginal deterrence “focuses on the relative
effectiveness of different types of punishments”. For example, if the
punishment for a certain crime, being jail time has more effectiveness than
giving fine, then the former has higher marginal deterrent value. Partial
deterrence involves the partial abstaining from a crime, or part of a crime.
For example, a hijacker may threaten his or her victims by words or by
weapons, and this threatening by weapon deserves severe punishment
than threatening by words. Critical Evaluation of Deterrent Theory of
Punishment The deterrent theory has the purpose to demonstrate a certain
act as wrong, thus inflicting punishment on the criminals, and also to deter
the criminal and the others from doing the same kind of act. Utilitarian’s
or consequentialists are the main advocate of this theory. “Utilitarian’s
want a system of punishments designed so that everyone can feel a
maximum of security. This means that the system of criminal justice
should prevent people from committing crimes by threatening them with
those kinds of punishment that are best suited to the aim of preventing
further crime. At the same time, those who do not commit crimes should
feel reasonably certain that they will not be punished. The system is
consistently looking forwards.” This is because it wants to deter crimes in
the future by inflicting punishment upon the criminal at the present. J.
Bentham advocates this by saying that “people would be deterred from
crime if the punishment was applied.” The two versions of utilitarianism
that is act utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism think deterrence as
adequate. As act utilitarianism is a version of utilitarianism that holds that
an act is good if it results in greatest utility. “It seems right, in general, to
suppose that punishing people for breaking the law is useful.” and as rule
utilitarianism is a version of utilitarianism where the action is good if the
resulted greatest utility is gained by following the rule.
A major limitation of the theory is that it promotes the treatment of a
person as a means in order to benefit others. It is also criticized that as the
aim is only to prevent crimes, it does not matter if the punished is actually
guilty or not. Furthermore, at times, the punishment may exceed the level
of the crime. The criminal is also treated as an outsider. It can also be
criticized by saying that it fails to deter crime. Finally, it does not focus
on reforming the criminal or retribution but only on the prevention of
crimes. At first, the opponents of the theory argue that a person will be
treated as a means. This is because the person having the punishment is
being punished for the sake of deterring these types of crimes, not for his
own sake. For example, if a person is guilty of theft, he or she is punished
so that others may not do it. Thus, Kant thinks that “it ignores the
criminal’s dignity by sacrificing his interest for the public good.”
Mackenzie also says “it would involve treating a man as a thing.”
Similarly, Kant again says that it treats a person as a means in order to
“achieve social ends.” Thus the theory is accused of treating a person as a
means. Others think that the aim of this theory is only to prevent crimes,
so it does not matter if the punished is actually guilty or not. This is
because the focus is not on justice but on the prevention of crime. For
example, a car is stolen and in order to prevent this from happening again,
an innocent people are charged with the crime and thus punished. So as
W. Lillie criticizes “it does not really matter whether the punished is
innocent or guilty.” Some think that at times the punishment may exceed
the level of the crime. This is because the punishment needs to be an
exemplary one and thus crossing the line is not unnatural. But it would be
punishing the person more than he deserves. For example, if a person is
caught as a pickpocket and he is hanged for it then that will exceed the
limit of his or her crime. Thus, William Lillie says that “punishment
beyond a certain limit for a particular crime is unjust.” Another objection
has emerged as the criminal is also treated as an outsider. This happens
while a criminal is treated as a means for social progress he or she is also
being treated as an outsider as an insider would not be treated as a mere
means to an end. This is an objection recently raised by R. A. Duff where
“we the” supposed “law-abiding people would punish the outsiders for
their own safety.” Thus, it is contended that this theory treats criminals as
an outsider. It can also be criticized by saying that it fails to deter crime.
As moreover as “many criminologists say it does not stop crime” as white-
collar criminals or the criminals that like punishment may be unshaken by
this whether it is specific deterrence, or general deterrence, or
The Critical Evaluation of the Different Theories of Punishment marginal
deterrence, or even partial deterrence. Thus, Nagin also states this
objection that “it fails to deter crime.” It is also criticized for not aiming
to reform the criminal or retribution. As the aim of the deterrent theory of
punishment is to deter so it does not focus on reforming the criminal. And
likewise, it does not focus on retribution of the crime. It only focuses on
the prevention of the crime.            Retributive Theory of Punishment
Retributive theory of punishment is one of the theories of punishment.
And the aim of this punishment is “allowing a man’s deed to return to
himself” as Mackenzie says, and “make the offender suffer like his
victim” as Lillie describes. And it is also said that “offenders under a
retributive philosophy simply get what they deserve.” So, the aim of the
punishment is to achieve retribution. It holds that when a criminal has
done a crime then he or she has forfeited his or her rights of equal value.
It also says that the punishment should fit the crime. As a result, the
criminal should suffer just as the victim did. So, it has a backward-looking
approach. By this theory, the criminal has forfeited his or her rights by
committing the crime. As Boonin would say by this “a particular offender
has forfeited a particular right.” This is because when a criminal commits
a crime, he or she has done an act that dismisses their rights. For example,
if a person kills a person, then he or she has forfeited his or her rights to
live. And thus, the criminal has forfeited his or her rights by committing
the crime. It also holds that “let the punishment should fit the crime.”
The reason is that this theory tries to achieve retribution, not vengeance.
Thus, for example, if a person steals then he or she must be punished
according to the crime, he will not be punished at the degree of any severe
or mild offense. That is why the punishment should fit the crime. The
criminal should suffer just as the victim did. It is like “an eye for an eye a
tooth for a tooth approach.” As punishment is given for retribution so the
suffering of the criminal should be the same as the victim. For example,
if a person bit another by his or her sick enjoyment then he or she should
also be punished in the same way. So, the criminal should suffer just as
the victim did. This theory is “backward looking.” Boonin explains that
“committing an offense in the past is sufficient to justify punishment
now”. For example, if someone harasses a person a month ago, he will
be punished for his previous crimes, if found guilty, now. So, it is a
backward-looking approach.
In the classical times, retributive punishment would follow only an eye
for an eye rule. But at the present time, there are versions of retributive
theories which punishes by the means which is mainly proportionate to
the crime rather than an eye for an eye approach. Thus comes the desert-
based retributivism, forfeiture-based retributivism, and fairness-based
retributivism. Desert based retributivism which holds “that punishing
people for breaking the law is morally permissible because such people
deserve to be punished.” So, it is our duty to punish them. Forfeiture-
based retributivism states that the offender has forfeited his or her rights
while hampering the rights of others. Fairness-based retributivism saying
retribution is necessary because of fairness as it is unfair for a criminal
not being punished, as the criminal is a “free rider”. Critical Evaluation of
Retributive Theory of Punishment Retributive theory of punishment has
the purpose of reattribute the unjust act, holding that the punishment
should be proportionate to the crime. Deontologists are mainly the
advocates of this theory. “The goal of the system of punishment is very
different, according to deontological ethics. When a person commits a
crime, this means, according to deontologists, that he or she becomes
afflicted with guilt. And a guilty person deserves to be punished. So, this
system is backward looking.” This is because here it tries to do retribution
to the already committed crime. This punishment is given for the person
as retribution towards his crime. This is how Kant writes that “Judicial
punishment can never be used merely as a means to promote some other
good for the criminal himself or for civil society, but instead it must in all
cases be imposed on him only on the ground that he has committed a
crime.” So, he supports this by arguing that “retribution is not just a
necessary condition for punishment but also a sufficient one.” And it is
also said that “the pointer of the scale of justice is made to incline no more
to the one side than the other”. So, this is done the wrongdoing comes
around towards the criminal himself. Thus, Hegel supports it by saying
that “it is the reward of the crime.” This is said to be a theory of
punishment which is according to Mackenzie “the most satisfactory of all
the theories of punishment.” This is because neither deterrent nor
reformative theories of punishment will do any good if the criminal does
not understand that the punishment is the consequence of his wrongdoing.
And both of them serve the retributive attitude. But like the other theories
of punishment, this theory is not beyond criticism. Critics criticize this
theory by saying that this uplifts revenge.
The Critical Evaluation of the Different Theories of Punishment others
say that there is always a possibility of crossing the line while punishing
the criminal. Opponents of this theory think that breaking the law must
not always result in retribution by punishment. It is criticized against
forfeiting the rights of the offender. The fairness-based retribution is
criticized on the account of the “free rider”. This also disregards, as others
claim, other moral considerations such as deterrence and reformation.
Others criticized it by saying that it is not possible to have, and also, we
should not have the same retributive punishment in all criminal cases.
The theory is firstly criticized by the notion of uplifting revenge. It is
assumed that this theory satisfies the need for vengeance. For example, if
a criminal is beaten up as he has beaten an innocent person, it will uplift
the notion of vengeance. So, the theory is firstly criticized by the notion
of uplifting revenge. The critics also say that there is a chance to cross
the limit of punishment in these cases. This is because as it is based on
retribution the offender may be punished more several than the crime he
has committed. For example, in the retribution of beaten up an innocent
person the criminal might be beaten even more or he or she may be beaten
to death. So, there is a chance to cross the limit of punishment in these
cases. Opponents of this theory think that breaking the law must not
always result in retribution by punishment. For example, if a person
breaks a law, for say, giving someone water without buying it, so that the
person receiving the water can recover himself from having a heat stroke,
then though it is illegal as the person did not buy the water before giving
it to the other person, but still it is not something that should be punished.
And this goes against the desert-based retribution, so opponents of this
theory contend that breaking the law must not always result in
punishment. It is criticized against forfeiting the rights of the offender.
This goes against the forfeiture-based retribution. This is because human
rights are supreme and held as universal for all humans. Because of that
the abolishing of rights due to the offender’s criminal activity is not
accepted by some. Furthermore, even if rights are forfeited, the question
arises about its length and duration. So, it is criticized against forfeiting
the rights of the offender. The fairness-based retribution is criticized on
the account of the “free rider”. It is held that though there can be criminals
who are free riders it is not necessarily true for every criminal, as for
murder, rape, child abuse and so on the free riding concept does not work.
And so, the fairness-based retribution is criticized on the account of the
“free rider”.       It is also criticized by disregarding other moral
considerations such as deterrence and reformation. As the focus of this
theory of punishment is to attain retribution, so it does not try to deter
crimes in the future or it does not try to reform the character of the
criminal. And as Lille says this theory in the simplest form makes the
criminal suffer. So, it disregards other moral considerations as it
does not aim to reform the criminal and demonstrate the act as wrong
to others. Finally, it is criticized that it is not possible to have, and also,
we should not have the same retributive punishment in all criminal cases.
This is because there are some cases where the criminal has done so much
wrong that no punishment can make retribution of the act as classical
retribution theory would hold as “an eye for an eye”. For example, if a
person kills two people and he is also killed then it will be makeshift
retribution but not the actual one as he or she cannot be killed twice. So,
it is not possible to have retribution in all the criminal cases. Besides, we
simply should not have the same act done to the criminal all the time as
well. For example, a rapist should not be raped by the name of retribution,
so lesser punishment can also serve as well but again it cannot be the same
retribution, and then again if higher punishment is given then it simply
wrong, so either way the punishment does not fit the crime. Thus, it is
criticized that it is not possible to have, and also, we should not have the
same retributive punishment in all criminal cases.        Reformative Theory
of Punishment Reformative theory of punishment is one of the theories of
punishment. As Lillie says “the aim of punishment is to reform the
character of the offender himself.” Likewise, Mackenzie thinks that “the
aim of this punishment is to educate or reform the offender himself”.
Thom Brooks thinks “punishment should teach the offenders a lesson.”
The goal is also referred to as “to restore a convicted offender to a
constructive place in society through some combination of treatment,
education, and training.” Thus, it is also called the educational or
rehabilitation theory of punishment. Where it aims to reform or educate
or rehabilitate the offender. This theory of punishment reforms the
character of the criminal by punishing him or her. It also tries to educate
the criminal by inflicting punishment. This theory subscribes to the
prevalent norms of contemporary humanism. This theory tries to reform
the character of the criminal by punishment. Thus, it punishes the criminal
in order to reform him or her. For example, if a person has harassed
another person, he or she will be punished so that he or she may be
reformed. That is why Lillie says “the value of this suffering lies in the
capacity to make the offender see the evil of his wrongdoing.” (Lillie,
op.cit., p. 254) So by punishment, the character of the criminal is
reformed.
It tries to educate the criminal or say the offender by punishment. It hopes
that when a criminal is punished, he or she will have the education that it
is wrong to do such a crime. For example, if a person steals something,
then the criminal will be punished so that he or she may be educated. Thus,
the theory punishes the criminal to educate him or her. This theory
subscribes to the prevalent norms of contemporary humanism. AS
Mackenzie states “it fits best in the humanitarian sentiments.” And if they
have committed a crime then they can be reformed. They can be educated.
There is still a chance that they can come back from the misleading path.
There is still hope. Thus, it has a humanistic approach. So reformative or
say the educational theory of punishment is a theory of punishment which
tries to reform a criminal by punishment, which educated a criminal by
imposing punishment upon him or her and not to mention has a humanistic
subscription. When this theory of punishment first arrived, it had a
diametrically opposed view towards the deterrent theory of punishment
and the retributive theory of punishment. It was especially enforced
by the criminologists who did not want to treat the offenders as
criminals but as patients. But gradually the theory developed and
at the present time “there are two general ways of rehabilitation.”
They are the deontological rehabilitation and the consequentialist
rehabilitation. Deontological rehabilitation tries to rehabilitate criminals
as it is the just thing to do. On the other hand, the consequentialist
rehabilitation tries to rehabilitate criminals as everyone will get better off.
Between these two prominent theories of rehabilitation, the majority of
the advocates of rehabilitation are keen towards the latter one. In any
case, the rehabilitation is achieved when the criminal understands that
what he or she has done was wrong and deliberately chooses to refrain
from doing those things again. But still, there are some who think that
crime should be treated as a mental illness. Critical Evaluation of
Reformative Theory of Punishment The reformative theory has the
purpose to reform or educate or rehabilitate the criminal. Thus, the
punishment is aimed to reform the character of the offender. This is very
popular in the realm of criminology as it has humanistic elements within
it as this theory aims to reform the character of the offender. It is thought
that by punishment the criminal will be educated and so he or she will be
able to live and contribute to society in a positive way.
Its root is thought to be grounded by Plato as he thought that “we ought
not to repay injustice with injustice or to do harm to any man, no matter
what we may have suffered.” Thus, it is supported by criminologists as it
holds that criminals have mental disorders. Thus, the crimes they commit
are pathological in manner. As they think that criminals are victims of
social, political, economic upheavals. So, they should have treatment and
should be cured as well as educated. The critics of this theory state that
all crimes cannot be attributed to mental disorder. Furthermore, this
theory cannot reform the hardcore criminals. It is also criticized that the
victim of the crime and his family are disregarded in this theory.
Furthermore, punishment and education do not necessarily mean the same
thing. It is contended that it deems human dignity. It is also held that both
deontological rehabilitation and consequentialist rehabilitation are one-
sided. Finally, this theory disregards deterrence and retribution. At first,
all crimes cannot be attributed to mental disorder. This is because though
there are some criminals who do crimes under the circumstance of being
mentally ill, this is not the only cause of crime. There are ample instances
where people commit crimes by being mentally sound and also knowing
the consequences of the crime. So, critics say that every crime does not
happen because of mental disorder. This theory cannot reform the
hardcore criminals. The reformative theory may work as wonders for the
juvenile delinquents but in the case of hardcore criminals, it is a different
case altogether. The hardcore criminals know that crime is and they do it
anyways. So, critics think that hardcore criminals cannot be reformed by
this theory. Critics think that this theory disregards the victim of the
crime and his or her family. This is because if the criminal is punished for
reforming or educating him not for justice then the actual victim of the
crime and his or her family members are being disregarded as justice has
not prevailed. Thus, it disregards the victim and his or her family. It is
also criticized that punishment and education are not necessarily the same
thing. This is because punishment in some cases implies the implication
of pain, but education does not imply pain but communication. Thus,
some critics think that criminology misunderstands the reformation to be
a benevolent treatment rather than a painful process of punishment.
Besides this instead of punishment, Mackenzie thinks that in many
instances kind of treatment would have a better effect. Lillie follows him
by saying that “it is not always the best way to reform a man by inflicting
pain.” Thus, critics object that punishment and education is not
necessarily the same thing.
Besides these, it is contended that it deems human dignity.
Because the offender is not treated as a moral agent but as a diseased
person who needs to be cure thus, he needs to change his values, and
that is why Hegel says that it is “much the same as when one raises a
cane against a dog; a man is not treated in accordance with his dignity
and honor, but as a dog.” So, it is criticized that it deems human dignity.
It is also held that both deontological rehabilitation and consequentialist
rehabilitation are one-sided. This is because deontological rehabilitation
focuses on the account of the punishment is just, disregarding the utility,
and consequentialist rehabilitation focuses on the account of the
punishment on the basis of utility, disregarding whether it is just or not.
So, it is also criticized that both deontological rehabilitation and
consequentialist rehabilitation are one-sided. Finally, some criticize this
theory disregards deterrence and retribution. This is because its aim is to
reform the criminal by punishment and so it does not aim to demonstrate
to others that the particular act is wrong or trying to attain retribution.
Suggestions to Resolve the Basic Problems of the Theories of
Punishment: In this day and age, we need the theories of punishment
as they can help us to pursue justice, peace, and balance in both the cases
of the individual and the society. Nevertheless, the deterrent, the
retributive and the reformative theories of punishment are not without
their flaws, thus I am suggesting some ways by which the basic problems
of the deterrent theory, the retributive theory and the reformative theory
may be mitigated, and thus it will help us to ensure justice, peace, and
balance in a better manner. That is why I would like to suggest that: in
order to apply punishment, the offender should be actually guilty of the
crime, the offender should be punished considering the external and
internal situations, the punishment should not exceed or fall behind the
level of the crime, punishment should be demonstrated and explained to
that very person and others as much as necessary and possible. In Order
to Apply Punishment, the Offender Should Be Actually Guilty of the
Crime The offender should actually be guilty of the crime. This relieves
the problem of a potentially guilty person from being punished. This will
solve the problem of the deterrence theory where an innocent may be
punished. Besides, it will also mitigate the problem of reformative theory
where the victim is neglected by not adequately punishing the criminal.
So, the offender should actually be guilty of the crime. This relieves the
problem of a potentially guilty person being punished. This is because a
person must be guilty of the offense. But if the person is not actually guilty
then giving him punishment becomes a mockery of the judicial system.
For example, if a person looks at another person as he wants to destroy
him, he may be potentially guilty of the upcoming crime but he is not
actually guilty so he may be consulted but not punished for what he did
not actually do, but if he is punished anyway then it will become a
mockery of the judicial system. So, I disagree with William James thinks
that “people we should blame are the ones whose punishment should
benefit us.” As I think that justification is more important than benefit or
loss. Thus, the criminal should be the one who has taken part in the action
either directly or indirectly to be deemed of guilt thus punishment, thus
they must be guilty. For example, directly in the sense that he voluntarily
does the act and indirectly in the sense that he voluntarily helps to do the
act, so they must be actually guilty. So, this relieves the problem of a
potentially guilty person being punished. This will solve the problem of
the deterrence theory where an innocent may be punished. This is because
like the actual criminal or says the guilty person will be punished so there
is no chance of an innocent person getting punished. So, a criminal will
be punished after the crime has been proved. Which means his guilt has
been proved as well? And by this no innocent person will be punished.
It will also mitigate the problem of reformative theory where the victim is
neglected by not adequately punishing the criminal. This is because the
guilty will be punished, so the victim and along with his or her family will
not be neglected. For example, if a criminal rapes a person and he or she
is proved to be actually guilty of the crime then the criminal will be
punished. Thus, there will be no negligence towards the victim. Therefore,
the victim will not be neglected.         The Offender should Be Punished
Considering the External and the Internal Situations The offender should
be punished considering the external and internal situations. The external
situation should be considered. The internal condition should be
considered as well. Both internal and external condition’s overlapping
tendencies should also be considered. Thus, the offender must be
punished considering the external and the internal situations.
   At first the external situation must be considered. This is because
external situation may entail involuntary actions such as being forced to
do something, or doing it out of extreme necessity or doing something by
mistake. For example, if a person is forced to do something such as
committing a crime held at gunpoint, then it has to be considered as
involuntary action. If a person does a crime because of some extreme
necessity, for example, one steals because if he does not, he or she will
die of starvation, that has to be considered as involuntary action. So, I
agree with Mill as he says “to save a life, it may not only be allowable,
but a duty, to steal, or take by force, the necessary food or medicine, or to
kidnap, and compel to officiate, the only qualified medical practitioner.
Besides this self-defense also falls under this extreme necessity where a
person commits a crime. For example, one kills a person as he or she was
about to get raped by that person. Then it has to be considered as an
involuntary action well. If someone does something by mistake such as
while walking step on a product and destroying it, it also has to be
considered as an involuntary action. All of these are to be considered as
involuntary action as the person did not deliberately do those things. What
scopes did the criminal have and what elements influenced him or her
whether it was a person or the environment or was it as a whole should
also to be considered. But we have to understand that making mistake in
the sense of ignorance and deliberate ignorance in the sense of
carelessness are two different things. The former is not doing something
deliberately. For example, stepping on a product and destroying it. This
is an involuntary action. So, this may not render punishment. And the
latter is to deliberately choose to be ignorant, knowing the consequence
of some sort. For example, not reading the manual before doing
construction work though it is mandatory to do so. And as a consequence,
having property damage to others. This is not involuntary action as it is
done by deliberate negligence. So here punishment should be rendered.
Normally one should voluntarily do something to be punishable for it but
sometimes in the case of punishment involuntary acts are considered as
punishable, it was mainly done for the greater good, according to
necessity. For example, not paying taxes or bills in time irrespective of
voluntary or involuntary action may get one punished. But that
punishment may be less than the amount compared to if it is done
voluntarily. On the other hand, some voluntary actions that can be
regarded as crime may be exempt from punishment because of the greater
good. For example, if one drives to save others life or his own life from
fire though he or she do not have a driving license. Nevertheless, the
external situation should be considered. The internal condition should
be considered as well. Internal conditions should contain the criminal’s
age and the mental health of the criminal. The criminal’s age should be
considered. This is because whether he or she is a juvenile or an adult is
important before giving punishment. The criminal’s mental health should
also be considered. Whether he is at the level of insanity and thus the
offense is rendered as an involuntary action, and so whether he needs
mental treatment is to be cleared before giving him punishment. So, I
agree with Mackenzie as he says “in the case of definite insanity it would
be dealt with best medical knowledge possible.” If necessary, then
medical assistance will be given to the mentally challenged criminals. But
in the case of punishment, not all criminals are at the level of insanity so
that they may be pardoned. For example, a person may be the victim of
anxiety due to birth condition or later trauma in his life but this does not
mean that he should act however his body due to biochemical condition
influences him unless it is a compulsion that he or she cannot control. He
should think it through, and then act. Here acting on hormonal impulse
without thinking is a matter of choice. And this type of deliberate loss of
control over oneself is, in other words, becoming the slave of instinct. One
needs to understand that controlling one’s instinct is controlling the
situation in the long run as our internalities also influence our
externalities. Here that person is not definitely insane. And this goes
against the criminologist’s claim that every criminal should be rendered
as a patient. Nevertheless, the internal condition should be considered as
well.     Both internal and external condition’s overlapping tendencies
should also be considered. That is to say, the things the criminal was
influenced with. The culture, the society, the creed, ideology the family
he or she grew up with the economic, the social, the biological, the
educational, and the religious factors should also be considered. Both
internal and external conditions overlap on the point of the things the
criminal was influenced with. So, both internal and external conditions
overlapping tendencies should also be considered. Punishment should not
Exceed or Fall behind the Level of the Crime The punishment should not
exceed or fall behind the level of the crime. This will solve the problem
of deterrent theory in the sense of punishing a criminal more than he or
she deserves. It will mitigate the problem of revenge of the retributive
theory. It will also solve the problem of retribution where the criminal is
said to have forfeited his or her right in order to have punishment. It also
solves the problem of treating a person as a means by deterrent theory. It
also solves the problem of reformative theory, not punishing the criminal
as he deserves. So, the punishment should not exceed the level of the
crime. This will solve the problem of deterrent theory in the sense of
punishing a criminal more than he or she deserves. This is because the
punishment should be given by the extent of the crime no more, no less
than that. So, for example, if a person steals something he or she will be
punished for that
particular crime by the extent of that crime not to the extent of murdering
someone or not of merely lying. At the same time whether the offender
has directly volunteered in the crime or indirectly volunteered in the crime
or say the manner of involvement should also be concerned, and the extent
of the punishment will follow. For example, one has voluntarily stolen a
car and other has voluntarily helped him or her to steal the car, both of
their punishment should be according to the extent of the manner of
involvement in the crime. But there are some crimes that the voluntary
involvement of any manner should render as identical punishment in all
cases, for example, murder, rape and so on. All cases are not identical so
we may not give identical punishment but we may give similar
punishment considering the extent of the crime. So, this will solve the
problem of deterrent theory in the sense of punishing a criminal more than
he or she deserves. It will mitigate the problem of revenge of the
retributive theory. Retributive theory is said to uplift revenge, so by this
punishment may render more burden to the criminal that he or she
deserves, for example, fining a man twice as much as he should be fined
because of taking revenge. But it will not be done as punishment will not
exceed its limits. And so, I agree with Bentham as he says that if the evil
of punishment exceeds the evil of the offense, then the punishment will
be unprofitable. Thus, it will mitigate the problem of revenge of the
retributive theory. It will also solve the problem of retribution where the
criminal is said to have forfeited his or her right in order to have
punishment. It is said in the retributive theory that the criminal deserves
punishment as he or she has forfeited his right by doing the crime. But
instead of thinking of forfeiting the right of equal treatment it may be
thought that the right is being substituted as the right to be treated
unequally as a consequence of the crime. So, the criminal may be said that
he or she has the right to have the intended burden. For example, by
abusing a child the criminal has substituted the right to equal treatment
with the right to unequal treatment because of the consequence of his
crime, so the criminal has the right of intended burden. So, I agree with
Mill as he says” all persons are deemed to have a right to equality of
treatment, except when some recognized social expediency requires the
reverse.” Therefore, it will also solve the problem of retribution where
the criminal is said to have forfeited his or her right in order to have
punishment. It also solves the problem of treating a person as a means
by deterrent theory. This is because by giving the punishment that the
criminal deserves, he or she is being treated as a person who is achieving
the consequence of his or her doing. Where he or she did something and
is a person enough to face the consequence. And even in the case of
hardcore criminals where the punishment cannot deter them from doing
the same crime, the punishment
should still be applied as it is a question of justice. So, it also solves the
problem of treating a person as a means by deterrent theory. It also solves
the problem of reformative theory, not punishing the criminal as he
deserves. This is because by this the criminal will be punished if he or she
is actually guilty and proved to be mentally sane. Thus, he will be
punished as he or she deserves. So, it also solves the problem of
reformative theory, not punishing the criminal as he deserves.
Punishment should be Demonstrated and Explained to that Very Person
and Others as much as Necessary and Possible Punishment should be
demonstrated and explained to that very person and others as much as
necessary and possible. At first, it should be demonstrated and explained
to that very person and others. Then it should be demonstrated and
explained to that very person and others as much as necessary and
possible. Punishment should be demonstrated and explained to that very
person and others. This is because people learn mostly from experience,
so it is better if one is demonstrated and explained about what a crime is,
why it is so, and the consequence that follows from it. The demonstration
is important because seeing something affects a person more than just
reading or hearing about it. So public appreciation and humiliation may
help people understand more about the consequence of their action.
Encouraging good act and discouraging bad act is a process of social
control as well. Thus, I agree with Mill as he says “some rules of conduct,
therefore, must be imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on
many things which are not fit subjects for the operation of law.” The
explanation is important as the person has the right to know why he is
convicted as a criminal and what may happen next. And within the
explanation, there may be the scope of discussion. So, I also agree with
Mill as he says “one is capable of rectifying his mistakes by discussion
and experience. Not by experience alone.” Thus punishment should be
demonstrated and explained to that very person and others. It should be
demonstrated and explained to the very person and others as much as
necessary and possible. It should be demonstrated and explained as much
as necessary because everything is not needed to be demonstrated and
explained to everyone as there may be things that are unimportant. For
example, it is important to demonstrating and explaining to a person what
will happen as he or she has committed a murder or if anyone would
commit a murder, and also why will it be like that, but it is unimportant
to say the history of the concept of murder. And it is also important to
demonstrate and explain the wrongness of the crime to that very person
and others as much as possible. Because here the ability of the perceiver’s
intelligence and understanding should be considered. For example, a
person may not understand the technical terms or some technical terms of
the crime but he or she may understand the wrongness of the act in
general. So, he must be explained in a way that he or she understands.
Here the demonstration of the punishment will not make the demonstrated
person a mere means as he is getting the consequence of his action. On
the contrary, by doing this people may realize the consequence crime and
so that they may be encouraged to refrain from it too and to do the
opposite. And by doing this people will be accustomed of abstaining from
the criminal activity. And here my conception is similar to Aristotle as he
says “character arises out of the like activity.” So, if one refrains oneself
from committing crimes, he will be less likely to commit crimes in the
future. But in the case of juveniles, the demonstration may be excused for
some crimes, taking his age into consideration. For example, the
demonstration of the death sentence and such. So, punishment should be
demonstrated and explained to that very person and others, as much as
necessary and possible.

Conclusion: All the three theories of punishment; the deterrent theory of
punishment, the reformative theory of punishment, and the retributive
theory of punishment try to theorize the aim of punishment in their own
viewpoints which they think like the best. So, we see the deterrent theory
of punishment aiming to deter future crimes, the reformative theory of
punishment aiming to reform the character of the criminal via punishment,
and the retributive theory of punishment aiming to attain retribution that
the criminal has done by his or her wrongdoing. Nevertheless, all of them
have their own merits and demerits. In order to solve the basic problems
of the theories I think that to apply punishment the offender should be
actually guilty of the crime. The offender should be punished considering
the external and the internal situations. The punishment should not exceed
or fall behind the level of the crime. Punishment should be demonstrated
and explained to that very person and others, as much as necessary and
possible.
                     SCHOOL OF LAW
               DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES


     UNIT 2 – APPROACHES TO SENTENCING


Alternatives to imprisonment-probation-corrective labor-fine: collectives
fines-reparation by the offender/ by the court- Parole: Nature- Authority
for Granting Parole -The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
The Probation of Offenders Act- An Analysis
Introduction:
Meaning Of Probation


“Probo” is a Latin word, the meaning of which is “I prove my worth” i.e.
to see whether he can live in a free society without breaking the law.
“Probatio” means “test on approval”. Webster dictionary meaning of
Probation is the act of proving, proof, any proceeding designed to
ascertain character. Thus, probation means a period of proving or trial.
The offender has to prove that he is worthy of probation.
Probation is a socialized penal device, an extramural alternative of
institutionalization and has come about as the result of modification over
a period of time of doctrine of deterrence into the principle of reformation,
a development that paved the way to the introduction of clinical approach
and the principle of individualization in the handling of offenders.
Probation means discharging a person subject to commitment by the
suspension of sentence, during the regularity of conduct, and imposing
conditions and on default thereof arresting and committing him until
imprisonment is served or the judgment is satisfied It is a substitute for
imprisonment, a conditional suspension of sentence.
The term “Probation” is derived from the Latin word “probare”, which
means to test or to prove. It is a treatment device, developed as a non-
custodial alternative which is used by the magistracy where guilt is
established but it is considered that imposing of a prison sentence would
do no good. Imprisonment decreases his capacity to readjust to the normal
society after the release and association with professional delinquents
often have undesired effects.
According to the United Nations, Department of Social Affairs, the
release of the offenders on probation is a treatment device prescribed by
the court for the persons convicted of offences against the law, during
which the probationer lives in the community and regulates his own life
under conditions imposed by the court or other constituted authority, and
is subject to the supervision by a probation officer.
The suspension of sentence under probation serves the dual purpose of
deterrence and reformation. It provides necessary help and guidance to
the probationer in his rehabilitation and at the same time the threat
of being subjected to unexhausted sentence acts as a sufficient deterrent
to keep him away from criminality. Probation seeks to accomplish the
rehabilitation of persons convicted of the crime by returning them to
society during a period of supervision rather than by sending them into
the unnatural and all too often especially unhealthful atmosphere of
prisons and reformatories. Probation system is based on reformative
theory. It is a scientific approach. It is a rational approach towards the
causation of crime of young offenders and thus they can be saved from
becoming habitual offenders by dumping them into jails. The probation
officer insists on the problem or need of the offender and tries to solve his
problem and see that the offender becomes a useful citizen of the society.
The object of Criminal Law is more inclined towards the reformation of
the offender than to punish him. Instead of keeping an accused with
hardened criminals in a prison, the court can order personal freedom on
promise of good behaviour and can also order a period of supervision over
an offender. This is the concept behind ‘probation’. Black’s law
dictionary defines ‘probation’ as‘allowing a person convicted of some
minor offence (particularly juvenile offenders) to go at large, under a
suspension of sentence, during good behaviour, and generally under the
supervision or guardianship of a ‘probation officer’.

It is believed that imprisonment decreases the capacity of an offender to
readjust to the normal society after the release and association with
professional delinquents often has undesired effects on him and his life
thereafter. Probation is a socialized penal device which has come up as
the result of modification, over a period of time, of the doctrine of
deterrence into the principle of reformation; a development that paved the
way to the introduction of clinical approach and the principle of
individualization in the handling of offenders.
According to a report of the United Nations, Department of Social Affairs,
‘Release of offenders on probation is a treatment device prescribed by the
court for the persons convicted of offences against the law, during which
the probationer lives in the community and regulates his own life under
conditions imposed by the court or other constituted authority, and is
subject to the supervision by a probation officer’. The suspension of
sentence under probation serves the dual purpose of deterrence and
reformation. It provides necessary help and guidance to the probationer in
his rehabilitation and at the same time the threat of being subjected to
unexhausted sentence acts as a sufficient deterrent to keep him away from
criminality.

The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, is based on the concept that young
offenders can be saved from becoming habitual offenders by treating them
amicably and providing them with a chance to reform rather than dumping
them into jails. The probation officer insists on the problem or need of the
offender and tries to solve his problem and sees to it that the offender
becomes a useful citizen of the society.

Statutory Provisions Dealing with Probation
The earliest provision to have dealt with probation was sectionS.562 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. After amendment in 1974 it stands
as S.360 of The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974. It reads as follows:-
‘When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an
offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of
seven years or less, or when any person under twenty-one years of age or
any woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the
offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard
being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the
circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient
that the offender should be released on probation of good conduct, the
Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct
that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to
appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period (not
exceeding three years) as the Court may direct and in the meantime to
keep the peace and be of good behaviour’.

The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 and S.360 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 exclude the application of the Code where the Act is
applied. The Code also gives way to state legislation wherever they have
been enacted. The object of S.360 CrPC is to prevent young persons from
being committed to jail, where they may associate with hardened
criminals, who may lead them further along the path of crime, and to help
even men of more mature years who for the first time may have committed
crimes through ignorance, or inadvertence or the bad influence of others
and who, but for such lapses, might be expected to be good citizens. It is
not intended that this section should be applied to experienced men of the
world who deliberately flout the law and commit offences.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jugal Kishore Prasad v. State of Bihar,
explained the rationale of the provision:
“The object of the provision is to prevent the conversion of youthful
offenders into obdurate criminals as a result of their association with
hardened criminals of mature age in case the youthful offenders are
sentenced to undergo imprisonment in jail.”While dealing with this Act,
the three most important provisions that need to be highlighted are
sections 3, 4 and 6. We will now see each of these sections one by one.

Section 3
Power of court to release certain offenders after admonition.—When any
person is found guilty of having committed an offence punishable under
section 379 or section 380 or section 381 or section 404 or section 420 of
the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860) or any offence punishable with
imprisonment for not more than two years, or with fine, or with both,
under the Indian Penal Code, or any other law, and no previous conviction
is proved against him and the court by which the person is found guilty is
of opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case including
the nature of the offence, and the character of the offender, it is expedient
so to do, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him to any
punishment or releasing him on probation of good conduct under section
4 release him after due admonition.

Section 4
Power of court to release certain offenders on probation of good
conduct.—(1) When any person is found guilty of having committed an
offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and the court
by which the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard to the
circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of
good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him at
once to any punishment direct that he be released on his entering into a
bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called
upon during such period, not exceeding three years, as the court may
direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an offender unless
it is satisfied that the offender or his surety, if any, has a fixed place of
abode or regular occupation in the place over which the court exercises
jurisdiction or in which the offender is likely to live during the period for
which he enters into the bond.

(2) Before making any order under sub-section (1), the court shall take
into consideration the report, if any, of the probation officer concerned in
relation to the case.

(3) When an order under sub-section (1) is made, the court may, if it is of
opinion that in the interests of the offender and of the public it is expedient
so to do, in addition pass a supervision order directing that the offender
shall remain under the supervision of a probation officer named in the
order during such period, not being less than one year, as may be specified
therein, and may in such supervision order, impose such conditions as it
deems necessary for the due supervision of the offender.
(4) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall
require the offender, before he is released, to enter into a bond, with or
without sureties, to observe the conditions specified in such order and
such additional conditions with respect to residence, abstention from
intoxicants or any other matter as the court may, having regard to the
particular circumstances, consider fit to impose for preventing a repetition
of the same offence or a commission of other offences by the offender.

(5) The court making a supervision order under sub-section (3) shall
explain to the offender the terms and conditions of the order and shall
forthwith furnish one copy of the supervision order to each of the
offenders, the sureties, if any, and the probation officer concerned.

Section 6
Restrictions on imprisonment of offenders under twenty-one years of
age.—(1) When any person under twenty-one years of age is found guilty
of having committed an offence punishable with imprisonment (but not
with imprisonment for life), the court by which the person is found guilty
shall not sentence him to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that, having
regard to the circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence
and the character of the offender, it would not be desirable to deal with
him under section 3 or section 4, and if the court passes any sentence of
imprisonment on the offender, it shall record its reasons for doing so.

(2) For the purpose of satisfying itself whether it would not be desirable
to deal under section 3 or section 4 with an offender referred to in sub-
section (1) the court shall call for a report from the probation officer and
consider the report, if any, and any other information available to it
relating to the character and physical and mental condition of the offender.

Important Case Laws on Sections 3, 4 & 6 of The Probation of
Offenders Act
In Keshav Sitaram Sali v. State of Maharashtra it was held by the Supreme
Court that in a case of petty theft the High Court should have extended
the benefit of either section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure or
sections 3 and 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act to the appellant instead
of imposing a sentence of fine on him.

In Basikesan v. State of Orissa, a youth of 20 years was found guilty of
an offence punishable under section 380 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 and
no previous conviction was proved against him. It was held by the court
that the offence committed by the accused was not out of deliberate
preparation or design but it was a fit case for application of section 3 and
he be released after due admonition.

In Daulat Ram v. State of Haryana, it was held that the object of section
6 is to ensure that juvenile offenders are not sent to jail for offences which
are not so serious as to warrant imprisonment for life, with a view to
prevent them from contamination due to contact with hardened criminals
of the jail. Therefore, the provision should be liberally construed keeping
in view the spirit embodied therein.

The question of age of the person is relevant not for the purpose of
determining his guilt but only for the purpose of punishment which he
should suffer for the offence of which he is found guilty. Therefore, where
a court found that offender was not under the age of 21 years on the date
when court found him guilty, sub-section (1) of section 6 will not apply.

Salient Features of The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
The Probation of Offenders Act (Act No. 28 of 1958) contains elaborate
provisions relating to probation of offenders, which are made applicable
throughout the country. We will now observe the salient features of the
Act:
The Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 is intended to reform the amateur
offenders by providing rehabilitation in society and to prevent the
conversion of youthful offenders into obdurate criminals under
environmental influence by keeping them in jails along with hardened
criminals.
·It aims to release first offenders, after due admonition or warning with
advice, who are alleged to have committed an offence punishable under
Sections 379, 380, 381, 404 or Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code and
also in case of any offence punishable with imprisonment for not more
than two years, or with fine, or with both.

This Act empowers the Court to release certain offenders on probation of
good conduct if the offence alleged to have been committed is not
punishable with death or life imprisonment. However, he/she should be
kept under supervision. The Act insists that the Court may order for
payment by the offender such compensation and a cost of the proceedings
as it thinks reasonable for loss or injury caused to the victim. The Act
provides special protection to persons under twenty-one years of age by
not sentencing them to imprisonment. However, this provision is not
available to a person found guilty of an offence punishable with life
imprisonment. The Act provides freedom to the Court to vary the
conditions of bond when an offender is released on probation of good
conduct and to extend the period of probation not to exceed three years
from the date of original order.

The Act empowers the Court to issue a warrant of arrest or summons to
the offender and his sureties requiring them to attend the Court on the date
and time specified in the summons if an offender released on probation of
good conduct fails to observe the conditions of bond. The Act empowers
the Court to try and sentence the offender to imprisonment under the
provisions of this Act. Such order may also be made by the High Court or
any other Court when the case comes before it on appeal or in revision.
The Act provides an important role to the probation officers to help the
Court and to supervise the probationers put under him and to advise and
assist them to get suitable employment.

The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and
Kashmir. This Act comes into force in a State on such date as the State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. It also
provides liberty to State Governments to bring the Act into force on
different dates in different parts of that State.

Duties of A Probation Officer
Sec 14 of the Act deals with the duties of a probation officer. It states:
A probation officer shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions, as
may be prescribed -

(a) enquire, in accordance with any directions of a court, into the
circumstances or home surroundings of any person accused of an offence
with a view to assist the court in determining the most suitable method of
dealing with him and submit reports to the court;

(b) supervise probationers and other persons placed under his supervision
and, where necessary, endeavour to find them suitable employment;

(c) advise and assist offenders in the payment of compensation or costs
ordered by the
Court;

(d) advise and assist, in such cases and in such manner as may be
prescribed, persons who have been released under section 4;

(e) perform such other duties as may be prescribed.

Offences In Which Probation Cannot Be Granted
We will now deal with those cases where probation cannot be granted:
1) In Ahmed v. State of Rajasthan, it was held that the benefit of this Act
cannot be extended to a person who has indulged in an act which has
resulted into an explosive situation leading to possibilities of communal
tension.

2) In State of Maharashtra v. Natverlal, the Supreme Court declined to
accord to the accused found guilty, the benefit of Probation of Offenders
Act because smuggling of gold not only affects public revenue and public
economy, but often escapes detection.

3)Again in Smt. Devki v. State of Haryana, it was held that the benefit of
Section 4 would not be extended to the abominable culprit who was found
guilty of abducting a teenage girl and forced her to sexual submission with
commercial motive.

4)In 2015, a Supreme Court bench consisting of Justices Pinaki Chandra
Ghose and Uday Umesh Lalit has ruled that the benefit of Probation of
Offenders Act cannot be extended to accused involved in crimes against
women. The accused, Sri Chand was alleged to have lured a 12 year old
girl, who was grazing buffaloes in the jungle, and taking her into a room
wherein she was forcibly undressed and the offense of rape was
committed on her. The court while giving the judgment relied on cases
like Azhar Ali v. State of West Bengal and State of Himachal Pradesh v.
Dharam Pal.

It is a settled law that nobody can claim benefit under the Act as a matter
of right. It was observed in State of Sikkim v. Dorjee Sherpa And Ors that
the Court should not take technical views in certain cases and should take
into consideration some other aspects such as possibility of losing the job,
for invoking the provisions of Probation of Offenders Act even in serious
offences. It has further been contended that the Court should also take into
consideration that the convicts belonging to middle class families without
any criminal antecedent often become victim of circumstances because of
undesirable company and other evil influences available to such young
generation.

The provisions of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 normally cannot
be applied to:
· ACB cases
· Section 304 of the Indian Penal Code,
· NDPS Cases
· Section 304-A of the Indian Penal Code
· Section 325 of the Indian Penal Code
· Sections 409, 467, 471 of the Indian Penal Code
· Kidnap and abduction
· Habitual offenders

Conclusion
To conclude, it can be said that the measure of alternative punishment i.e.,
probation and the objective of theory of reformative punishment would be
achieved only if the judiciary and the administration work together. It
would be of great benefit for a country like India, where the jails are often
overcrowded, with frequent human rights violations which would harden
the human inside a person. Probation is an affirmation of the human inside
every being and it must be given importance. The reform and
rehabilitation process have to be worked out in context of existing social
conditions to achieve the ultimate objective to reclaim back those
offenders to orderly society.

Object Of Probation
i) The object of probation is to bring lawbreakers and anti-social persons
into willing cooperation with the community of which he is a member,
thus giving him security which he needs and social protection against his
attacks on person or property.
ii) The function of probation is to effect improvement in the character of
the offender and permanent rehabilitation and reformation of the offender.
iii) Probation involves molding of the individual’s habits in a more
constructive way.
iv) It’s a substitute for imprisonment. Punishment will not serve the
purpose in all cases of offenders.
v) The object is that an accused person who is convicted of a crime should
be given a chance of reformation which he would lose by being
incarcerated by prison.
Analysis Of Section 4 Of Probation of Offenders Act 1958
Release on Probation
Section 4 of the act deals with the power of the court to release certain
offenders on probation of good conduct.
As per Section 4, if any person is found guilty of having committed an
offense not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and the court
by which the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard to the
circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of
good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him at
once to any punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a
bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called
upon during such period, not exceeding three years, as the court may
direct and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

The section further requires that the offender or his surety has a fixed
place of residence or regular occupation in a place where the court
exercises jurisdiction. Also, before making any such order, the court shall
take into consideration the report, if any, of the probation officer,
concerned in relation to the case. However, it is not necessary that the
court has to act on the probation officers report. It can also gather
information from other source and on its own analysis.

The court may also require the offender to remain under the supervision
of a probation officer during a certain period if it thinks that it is in the
interests of the offender and of the public. It can also impose appropriate
conditions which might be required for such supervision. In case the court
does specify such conditional release, it must require the offender has to
enter into a bond, with or without sureties, enumerating the conditions.
The conditions may relate to the place of residence, abstention from
intoxicants, or any other matter as the court thinks appropriate to ensure
that the crime is not repeated.

The non-obstante clause in Section 4 of the Act is a clear manifestation
of the intention of the legislatures that the provisions of the Act would
have affected notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force.
It is a general section under which the benefit is extended to the offenders
under 21 years of age and also offenders who are above 21 years of
age. Discretion is exercised by the court while giving the benefit of
probation to the offenders above 21 years of age. No reasons are to be
recorded when the benefit of probation is granted to the offenders above
21 years of age. Section 4 laid down that the court shall consider the report
of the P.O if any. It is not obligatory on the court to call for and consider
the report of the P.O. in terms of Section 4(2).
An order of release on probation came into existence only after the
accused is found guilty and is convicted of the offense. Thus, the
conviction of the accused or the finding of the court that he is guilty cannot
be washed out at all because that is the sine quo non for the order of
release on probation of the offender. The order of release on probation of
the offender is merely in substitution of the sentence to be imposed by the
court. This has been made permissible by the c statute with a humanist
point of view in order to reform youthful offenders’ ad to prevent them
from becoming hardened criminals.
Meaning of the “character” of the accused
The word character is not defined in the Act. Hence it must be given the
ordinary meaning. The provision of Section 4 vests in the court a
discretion to release a person found guilty of having committed an offense
not punishable with death or imprisonment for life. It is really for the
court, by which the person is found guilty, to determine, having regard to
the circumstances of the case including the nature of the offense and the
character of the offender, whether or not it will be expedient to release
him on probation of good conduct. It is only when the court forms an
opinion that in a given case the offender should be released on probation
of good conduct that the court acts as provided in Section 4.
Power is discretionary:
While granting the benefit under the Act the court shall take into
consideration the nature of the offense. If the offense is not trivial in
nature, the court should not be lenient in granting such a benefit. Power
to release on probation is discretionary and has to be exercised in
appropriate cases.
Conditions:
Conditions to be satisfied for application of Section 4:
(1) the offense committed must not be one punishable with death or
imprisonment for life.
(2) the court must opine that it is expedient to release him on probation of
good conduct instead of sentencing him to any punishment and
(3) the offender or surety must have a fixed place of abode it regular
occupation in a place situated within the jurisdiction of the court.
Relevant factors to be taken into consideration. The convicts have no
indefeasible right to be released. The right is only to be considered for
release on license in terms of the Act and the rules. The Probation Board
and the State Government are required to take into consideration the
relevant factors before deciding or declining to release a convict.
Scope
The provision of Section 4 vests in the court a discretion to release a
person found guilty of having committed an offense not punishable with
death or imprisonment for life. It is really for the court, by which the
person is found guilty, to determine to have regard to the circumstances
of the case including the nature of the offense and the character of the
offender, whether or not it will be expedient to release him on probation
of good conduct. It is only when the court forms an opinion that in a given
case the offender should be released on probation of good conduct the
court acts as provided in Section 4.
A wide discretionary jurisdiction has been conferred on the courts to
release the convicts not involved in very heinous offenses, on probation
instead of incarcerating them to prison. The main object of awarding
punishment is the prevention of crime and reformation of the offender
The policy of the law is that where an offense is an overly heinous one
grant of probation is ruled out as a matter of law. The heinousness of the
offense and its deleterious effect on the body politic, is in the eye of the
law, “if not fundamental, a very relevant factor for the grant or refusal of
probation.”
In Dasappa v. State of Mysore, it is laid down as follows :
“It is only when the court forms an opinion that the offender in a given
case should be released on probation of good conduct that it has to act as
provided by Section 4 of the Act. It was for the accused to have placed all
the necessary material before the court which could have enabled it to
consider that the first accused was an offender to whom the benefit of
Section 4 would be extended “.

For What Offences, Section 4 Cannot Be Applied?

It was settled law that nobody can claim benefit under PO Act as a matter
of right. This was clearly held in AIR 2001 SC 2058. It was observed
in State Of Sikkim vs Dorjee Sherpa And Ors, [xii]that decisions
reported in AIR 1983 SC 654 : 1983 Cri LJ 1043 (Masarullah v. 1State
of Tamilnadu) and 1981 (Supp) SCC 17 (Aitah Chander v. State of
A.P.) have also been referred to contend that the Court should not take
technical views in such cases and should take into consideration some
other aspects such as possibility of losing the job, for invoking the
provisions of Probation of Offenders Act even in serious offenses.
It has further been contended that the Court should also take into
consideration that the convicts belonging to middle-class families without
any criminal antecedent often become the victim of circumstances
because of an undesirable company and other evil influences available to
such young generation. Provisions of Probation of Offenders Act,1958
normally cannot be applied to the following offenses:
   1. ACB cases (AIR 1983 SCC 359),
   2. Section 304 part-II of IPC,
   3. NDPS Cases ((2002) 9 SCC 620),
   4. Section 304-A (AIR2000 SC 1677),
   5. Section 325 IPC,
   6. Sections 409, 467, 471 IPC (AIR 2001 SC 2058;),
   7. Kidnap and, abduction (AIR 1979 SC 1948), and
   8. Habitual offenders, (Kamroonissa v. State of Maharashtra, AIR
      1974 SC 2117), etc.
Analogous Law:
Section 4 is similar to subsections (1) and (7) of Section 360 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which are stated as follows:
(1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an
offence punishable fine, or with imprisonment for a term of seven years
or less, or when any person under twenty-one years of age or any woman
is convicted of an offence not Punishable with death or imprisonment for
life, and no previous conviction is proved against the offender, if it,
appears to the court before which he is convicted, regard being had to the
age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in
which the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender
should be released on probation of good conduct, the court may, instead
of sentencing, him at once to any Punishment, direct that he be released
on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties to appear and receive
sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three years)
as the Court may direct and in the meantime to keep the peace find be of’
good behaviour :
Provided that where the first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the
second class not specially empowered by the High Court, and the
Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section should
be exercised, he shall record his opinion to that effect. and submit the
proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class forwarding the accuses to or
taking, bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall dispose
of the case in the manner provided by sub-section (2).
The court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-section
(1) shall be satisfied that an offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place
of abode or regular occupation in the place for which the court acts or in
which the offender is likely to live during the period named for the
observance of the conditions.
CASE LAWS
LANDMARK CASES
I. Uttam Singh vs The State (Delhi Administration) 21 March, 1974
The appellant was convicted under s. 292 I.P.C. and sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment and fine for selling a packet of playing cards portraying on
the reverse luridly obscene naked pictures of men and women in
pornographic sexual postures. The conviction and sentence was affirmed
by the High Court.
It was contended that the sentence was very severe on the ground that only
one single offense had been established and secondly that he might be
released Linder the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
Facts: The accused has a shop at Kishan Ganj, Delhi. It is no more in
controversy that on 1st February 1972, the accused sold a packet of
playing cards portraying on the reverse luridly obscene naked pictures of
men and women in pornographic sexual postures to P.W. 1. This sale was
arranged by the police Sub-Inspector (P.W. 4) on receipt of secret
information about the accused uttering these obscene pictures.
On getting a signal from the purchaser a raid was made in the accused’s
shop when two more packets of such obscene cards were also recovered
in addition to the packet already sold to P.W. 1. The ten-rupee note, which
was the price of the said set of playing cards and which had been earlier
given-by the Sub-Inspector to P.W. 1, was also recovered from the person
of the accused.
At the trial, the accused was convicted under Section 292, Indian Penal
Code and sentenced to six months’ rigorous imprisonment and to a fine
of Rs. 500/-, in default further rigorous imprisonment for three months.
The High Court affirmed the conviction as well as the sentence.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the sentence is very
severe on the ground that only one single sale has been established in this
case and also only three packets of cards were recovered from the accused.
He further submitted that the accused is entitled to be released on
probation under Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
Held – The accused is married and is said to be 36 years of age. Having
regard to the circumstances of the case and the nature of the offense and
the potential danger of the accused’s activity in this nefarious trade
affecting the morals of society particularly of the young, we are not
prepared to release him under section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act.
These offenses of corrupting the internal fabric of the mind have got to be
treated on the same footing as the cases of food adulterators and we are
not prepared to show any leniency. The appeal was, therefore, rejected.
II. Ishar Das vs State Of Punjab on
The appellant, who was less than 20 years was convicted for an offense
under s. 7(1) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, and was
ordered to furnish a bond under s. 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958. The High Court revised the sentence, because of Section 16 of the
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act Prescribed a minimum sentence of
imprisonment for 6 months and a fine of Rs. 1000.
It is Manifest from plain reading of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Act
that it makes no distinction between persons of the age of more than 21
years and those of the age of less than 21 years. On the contrary, the said
subsection is applicable to persons of all ages subject to certain conditions
which have been specified therein. Once those conditions are fulfilled and
the other formalities which are mentioned in section 4 are complied with,
power is given to the court to release the accused on probation of good
conduct.
The question which arises for determination is whether despite the fact
that a minimum sentence of imprisonment for a term of six months and a
fine of rupees one thousand has been prescribed by the legislature for a
person found guilty of the offense under the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Act, the court can resort to the provisions of the Probation of
Offenders Act.
In this respect sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders
Act contains the words “notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force”. The above non-obstante clause points to
the conclusion that the provisions of Section 4 of the Probation of
Offenders Act would have an overriding effect and shall prevail if the
other conditions prescribed are fulfilled.
Those conditions are:
(1) the accused is found guilty of having committed an offense not
punishable with death or imprisonment for life,
(2) the court finding him guilty is of the opinion that having regard to the
circumstances of the case, including the nature of the offense and the
character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of
good conduct, and,
(3) the accused in such an event enters into a bond with or without sureties
to appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period not
exceeding three years as the court may direct and, in the meantime, to
keep the peace and be of good behavior.
HELD: Section 4(1) of the Probation of Offenders Act contains the non-
obstante clause notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, and hence the section would have overridden
effect and shall prevail if its other conditions are fulfilled; especially when
the Probation of Offenders Act was enacted in 1958 subsequent to the
enactment in 1954 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
As the object of Probation of offender’s act 1958 is to avoid imprisonment
of the person covered by the provisions of that act, the said object cannot
be set at naught by imposing a sentence of the fine which would
necessarily entail imprisonment in case there is a default in the payment
of fine.
The Supreme Court held that the Probation of Offenders Act was
applicable to the offenses under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act,
1954.
III. Public Prosecutor v. N.S. Murthy
The accused was tried for committing murder of his wife but he was
convicted under Section 323 of IPC as the injury caused by him was
simple in nature. He was released on Probation by the trial court but the
High Court sentenced him to six months R.I. It was held that the conduct
of the accused immediately after the occurrence as well as the trial was
one of the relevant and material factors to be taken into account before
exercising powers under Section 4(1) of the Probation of Offenders Act
1958. In regard to the conduct of accused the court made the following
observation:
“In the present case, the accused did not admit his guilt at any stage. The
conduct of the accused is not that of a man of good character. Admittedly
he ran away after the incident. He was kept in custody of P.W 3 and was
handed over to the police on the day following the date of offense at the
inquest. He never repented for what had happened to his wife either
immediately after the occurrence or at any time subsequent thereto. His
statement under Section 342 CrPC makes it abundantly clear that he is not
entitled to have the benefit of Section 4(1) of the Act.
RECENT CASES
I. Sukhnandan v. State of M.P
The High Court while dealing with a question as to whether the benefits
of the provisions of the Act may be granted to the accused, for outraging
the modesty of woman it has been held after considering the provisions of
Section 4 as well as Section 12 of the Act , it would be just and proper
that the applicant, who is in service and his service record is found not to
be good and also he is having five children and is the sole bread earner,
the sentence of fine even imposed on him may attach disqualification, be
given the benefit of the provisions of the Act
Facts – On 31-10-1990 at 12 o’clock while Parbatia Bai (P.W. 1) was
returning from the well, accused met her and followed her. He asked
where her husband has gone. Parbatia told that her husband has gone for
earning wages. He demanded liquor from Parbatia, but Parbatia refused.
He tried to drag Parbatia and took her near the Jack-Fruit Tree (Kathal
Ped) and slapped Parbatia.
Parbatia cried, her bangles were broken and her Saree had torn, then the
accused ran away from the spot. Parbatia complained about the matter to
Muniram, her husband. Both of them then went to the police station on 2-
11-1990 at 11:00 a.m. and lodged the F.I.R. Offence under Sections 354
and 323 was registered. She was sent for medical examination. Ex. P-5 is
a medical report. The applicant was arrested and the challan was filed.
The accused was serving as Peon in the Education Department. His
service record is said to be good. He is having five children, three
daughters, and two sons, and the conviction awarded to him may result in
removal from service. Therefore, the benefits of the provisions of the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 may be granted to him.
Held : Having thus considered the provisions of Section 4 as well as
Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, in the opinion of this Court,
it would be just and proper that the applicant, who is in service and his
service record is found to be good and also he is having five children and
is the sole bread earner, the sentence of fine even imposed on him may
attach disqualification, be given the benefit of provisions of the Probation
of Offenders Act. The State counsel was specifically asked, who stated
that he has no objection to this effect.
 II. Ashok Kumar Dogra vs The State (N.C.T. Of Delhi) on 29
September 2008
Facts : On 26.6.1995, while driving a red line bus bearing registration No.
DL- 1P-2315 at Peera Garhi Chowk, Delhi, the petitioner hit a scooter
bearing No. DL-1S-1132. The scooter rider, who was injured succumbed
to his injuries later on. PW-8, Ct. Randhir Kumar was an eye witness to
the accident.
Before the Metropolitan Magistrate, Ct. Randhir Kumar deposed that the
accident was a result of rash and negligent driving of the petitioner.
Considering the entire evidence produced by the prosecution the
petitioner was convicted by the Metropolitan Magistrate. The appeal
preferred by the petitioner was also dismissed by the Sessions Court,
holding that there is no infirmity in the order passed by the Trial Court.
On 28th March 2008, counsel for the petitioner confined his plea in this
matter to the reduction of sentence and/or the benefit of Sections 3 and 4
of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
The counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner has faced the
rigors of trial for nearly twelve years and has already served more than
five months of his sentence. Furthermore, the petitioner is the only earning
member of the family and has to support his wife and four minor children.
It is also contended that the petitioner has no history of ever being
involved in any criminal proceedings. Counsel of the petitioner submitted
that keeping in mind these factors, either the sentence of the petitioner
may be reduced or the petitioner may be released on probation of good
conduct as contemplated by Sections 3 and 4 of the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958.
Counsel for the State, on the other hand, opposed the contention of the
petitioner and relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in Dalbir Singh
Vs. State of Haryana 2000 Cri.L.J. 2283. In that case, whilst dealing with
the question of benefit of probation being granted to offenders under
Section 304-A of the IPC, the Supreme Court categorically stated that the
benefit of any such probation should not be extended to persons convicted
under Section 304-A for rash and negligent driving.
Held – While considering the quantum of sentence, to be imposed for the
offense of causing death by rash or negligent driving of automobiles, one
of the prime considerations should be deterrence.
The punishment sentencing the petitioner to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for three months under Section 279 IPC, with a fine of
Rs.500/-; and rigorous imprisonment for one year with fine of Rs.5,000/-
under Section 304-A IPC awarded by the Court of the Metropolitan
Magistrate and confirmed by the Court of Sessions was held to be quite
reasonable. The revision petition was accordingly dismissed.
III. Mukhtiar Singh vs State Of Punjab on 16 March 2010
The trial Court convicted the petitioner for the offense and sentenced him
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year and to pay a
fine of Rs.5000/- and in default of payment of fine, he was ordered to
further undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months. Aggrieved
against the same, petitioner had filed an appeal. The Appellate Court
dismissed the same, upheld the conviction and maintained the sentence.
Facts – On 9th November, 1995, ASI Jagsir Singh was present along with
his companion officials at Sirsa Kainchian in connection with patrol duty.
At that time, secret information was received that the present petitioner is
engaged in the distilling of illicit liquor and is operating a working Still in
the fields of Jit Singh son of Harnam Singh at Ghaggar drain.
On the receipt of secret information, ruqa was sent to the Police Station
for registration of the case and a raiding party was constituted. When the
raiding party reached the spot, it found the accused feeding fire below the
hearth. The working still was dismantled. The equipment and raw material
was cooled down and was taken into possession. A separate recovery
memo was prepared, vide which the equipment of the working Still and
175 kg of Lahan (raw material used for preparing the illicit liquor) were
taken into possession.
From the testimony of the witnesses, it has held that the petitioner was
operating a working Still and was engaged in distilling illicit liquor. It was
submitted that the occurrence had taken place on 9th November, 1995. A
period of more than 14 years has elapsed and during this period, the
petitioner has not committed any other offense.
It was further submitted that at the time of occurrence, the petitioner was
aged about 33 years. He has a large family to support and is the sole
breadwinner of his family. It has been submitted that petitioner be granted
an opportunity to reform himself and rehabilitate in the society.
In Isher Dass v. State of Punjab, AIR 1972 SC 1295, Hon’ble Supreme
Court held that subsection (1) of Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders
Act containing the non-obstante clause, would have an over-riding effect
and shall prevail if the other conditions prescribed were fulfilled.
The Full Bench held as follows:- “To conclude on the legal aspect,
therefore, it must be held that the mere prescription of the minimum
sentence under Section 61 (1)(c) of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 is no bar
to the applicability of Sections 360 and 361 of the Criminal Procedure
Code, 1973 and the same is not a special reason for denying the benefit of
probation to a person convicted thereunder. In the alternative, it is equally
no bar to the applicability of Sections 4 and 6 of the Probation of
Offenders Act. The answer to the question posed at the outset is rendered
in the negative.”
Taking into consideration that in the last 14 years, petitioner has
committed no other offense, the age and antecedents of the petitioner, the
Court was of the view that ends of justice will be fully met in case
petitioner is released on probation under Probation of Offenders Act, 1958
for a period of one year. He shall furnish personal/surety bonds to the
satisfaction of the trial Court with an undertaking that he shall maintain
peace, good conduct, and behavior during the period of probation.
Conclusion
To conclude, it can be said that the measure of alternative punishment i.e.,
probation and the objective of the theory of reformative punishment
would be achieved only if the judiciary and the administration work
together. It would be of great benefit for a country like India, where the
jails are often overcrowded, with frequent human rights violations which
would harden the human inside a person.
Probation is an affirmation of the human inside every being and it must
be given importance.
The reform and rehabilitation process have to be worked out in the context
of existing social conditions to achieve the ultimate objective to reclaim
back those offenders to an orderly society.
The provision of Section 4 vests in the court a discretion to release a
person found guilty of having committed an offense not punishable with
death or imprisonment) for life. It is really for the court, by which the
person is found guilty, to determine, having regard to the circumstances
of the case including the nature of the offense and the character of the
offender, whether or not it will be expedient to release him on probation
of good conduct. It is only when the court forms an opinion that in a given
case the offender should be released on probation of good conduct that the
court acts as provided in the Section.
Where, however, the court is not satisfied with the justification of a release
on probation of good conduct, it will certainly impose upon the offender
penalty as provided by the Indian Penal Code. In case of offenders under
twenty-one years of age, special provision has been made in Section 6
Section 4 is general. It applies to all kinds of offenses, whether under or
above twenty-one years of age. Section 4 empowers the court in
appropriate cases to release an offender on probation of good conduct
“instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment”.
Section 4 speaks of punishment and not of imprisonment. The court will
not punish him in any manner if on the facts it is satisfied that a particular
person guilty of the offense of the nature enumerated in Section 4 should
be released on his entering into a bond. The word ‘punishment’, therefore,
is wide enough to comprehend both the punishment of imprisonment and
the punishment of a fine. Therefore, Section 4 empowers a court to remit
the fine also and on the plain wording of the section, it will be
unreasonable to contend that remission of the fine was not within the
competency of the court.

Probation: A Study in The Indian Context - Probation of Offenders
Act
The earlier penological approach held imprisonment, that is, custodial
measures to be the only way to curb crime. But the modern penological
approach has ushered in new forms of sentencing whereby the needs of
the community are balanced with the best interests of the accused:
compensation, release on admonition, probation, imposition of fines,
community service is few such techniques used. In this material, the
advantages of probation are highlighted along with how it could be made
more effective in India. The term Probation is derived from the Latin word
probare, which means to test or to prove. It is a treatment device,
developed as a non-custodial alternative which is used by the magistracy
where guilt is established but it is considered that imposing of a prison
sentence would do no good. Imprisonment decreases his capacity to
readjust to the normal society after the release and association with
professional delinquents often has undesired effects.

According to the United Nations, Department of Social Affairs, the
release of the offenders on probation is a treatment device prescribed by
the court for the persons convicted of offences against the law, during
which the probationer lives in the community and regulates his own life
under conditions imposed by the court or other constituted authority, and
is subject to the supervision by a probation officer. The suspension of
sentence under probation serves the dual purpose of deterrence and
reformation. It provides necessary help and guidance to the probationer in
his rehabilitation and at the same time the threat of being subjected to
unexhausted sentence acts as a sufficient deterrent to keep him away from
criminality. The United Nations recommends the adoption and extension
of the probation system by all the countries as a major instrument of policy
in the field of prevention of crime and the treatment of the offenders. This
part of the material focus is on the legislative and administrative aspects
of probation, and means by which probation may be made more effective
in India.
Law of Probation in India
Section S.562 of the Code if Criminal Procedure, 1898, was the earliest
provision to have dealt with probation. After amendment in 1974 it stands
as S.360 of The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974. It reads as follows:
When any person not under twenty-one years of age is convicted of an
offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment from a term of
seven years or less, or when any person under twenty-one years of age or
any woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the
offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard
being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the
circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient
that the offender should be released on probation of good conduct, the
Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct
that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to
appear and receive sentence when called upon during such period (not
exceeding three years) as the Court may direct and in the meantime to
keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

S.361 makes it mandatory for the judge to declare the reasons for not
awarding the benefit of probation. The object of probation has been laid
down in the judgment of S. 562 is intended to be used to prevent young
persons from being committed to jail, where they may associate with
hardened criminals, who may lead them further along the path of crime,
and to help even men of mature years who for the first time may have
committed crimes through ignorance or inadvertence or the bad influence
of others and who, but for such lapses, might be expected to make good
citizens. In such cases, a term of imprisonment may have the very opposite
effect to that for which it was intended. Such persons would be
sufficiently punished by the shame of having committed a crime and by
the mental agony and disgrace that a trial in a criminal court would
involve.
In 1958 the Legislature enacted the Probation of Offenders Act, which
lays down for probation officers to be appointed who would be
responsible to give a pre-sentence report to the magistrate and also
supervise the accused during the period of his probation. Both the Act and
S.360 of the Code exclude the application of the Code where the Act is
applied. The Code also gives way to state legislation wherever they have
been enacted.
Section 4 of the Act provides for probation.
S.4 Power of Court to release certain offenders on probation of good
conduct
(1) When any person is found guilty of having committed an offence not
punishable with death or imprisonment for life and the Court by which
the person is found guilty is of opinion that, having regard to the
circumstances of the case including the nature of the offence and the
character of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation of
good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the court may, instead of sentencing him at
once to any punishment direct that he be released on his entering into a
bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called
upon during such period, not exceeding three years, as the court may
direct, and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour.

S. 6 of the same Act lays special onus on the judge to give reasons as to
why probation is not awarded for a person below 21 years of age. The
Court is also to call for a report from the probation officer before deciding
to not grant probation.

The provision under the Code and the Act are similar, as they share a
common intent, that, punishment ought not to be merely the prevention of
offences but also the reformation of the offender. Punishment would
indeed be a greater evil if its effect in a given case is likely to result in
hardening the offender into repetition of the crime with the possibility of
irreparable injury to the complainant instead of improving the offender.

Yet there are a few differences, which have been enumerated below.
S.4 of Probation of Offenders Act S.360 of The Cr.P.C.

Any person may be released on probation, if he has not committed an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life. (No distinction is
made on ground of sex or age) Any person not under 21 years of age, if
convicted of an offence punishable with imprisonment for not more than
7 years or when any person under 21 years of age or any woman is
convicted of an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for
life may be released on probation. It is not necessary that the person must
be a first offender. This section applies only when no previous conviction
is proved against the offender.

Any magistrate may pass an order under this section. Magistrate of the
third class or of the second class not specifically empowered by the state
government had to submit the proceeding to Magistrates of the first class
or Sub-Divisional magistrates. Supervision order may be passed directing
that the offender shall remain under the supervision of a Probation Officer.
No such provision.

Besides these two enactments, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2000 also provides for the release of children who have
committed offences to be released on probation of good conduct and
placed under the care of any parent, guardian or other fit person, on such
parent, guardian or other fit person executing a bond, with or without
surety, or any fit institution as the Board may require, for the good
behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period not exceeding
three years.

Procedure For Probation Service
S. 4(2) and S. 6(2) of the Probation of Offenders Act provide that the judge
would consider the report of the probation officer before deciding on
whether to grant probation. S. 14 of the said Act lays down the duties of
the Probation Officers.

The pre-sentence report of the Probation Officer is the fundamental
document for the guidance of the Court whether to grant the benefit of
probation to the accused or not. The object of the pre-sentence report is to
appraise the court about the character of the offender, exhibit his
surroundings and antecedents and throw light on the background which
prompted him to commit the offence and give information about the
offenders conduct in general and chances of his rehabilitation on being
released on probation.
The judge may also pass a supervision order under section 4(3) of the Act,
whereby the offender is placed under the supervision of a probation
officer and certain conditions are imposed upon him. This is mostly in the
form of regular visits to the supervising officer. Some of the conditions
which must be followed have been laid down in S. 4(4). On the application
of the probation officer such conditions may be varied- S. 8(2) and also
the offender may be discharged- S. 8(3). If the offender fails to follow the
conditions laid down by the Court, the original sentence against him may
be revived S. 9.

The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
provides for the report of a probation officer or a recognized voluntary
organization to be considered before passing a sentence. The Magistrate
appointed as a member of the Board constituted under this Act must know
something of child psychology. The Board would pass orders against a
juvenile. The Act provides for the setting up of Observation and Special
Homes by the State Government where the juvenile could be placed. Here
the rehabilitation and social integration of the child would take place. It
also provides for an Aftercare programme which would take care of the
delinquent child after he has been discharged from these homes, based on
the report of the Probation Officer. The Probation officers appointed
under the probation of Offenders Act would also function under the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act.

Probation in India is mostly dependent on the policies of the State rather
than a uniform Central Policy. In Karnataka a State level Probation
Advisory Committee has been constituted with High Court Judge as
Chairman with official and non-officials as members. A District level
Probation Advisory Committee has been constituted in each district
consisting of the District and Sessions Judge as Chairman with official
and non-officials as members. After Care Programmes have been set up
to improve the lives of those released on probation.
The After Care Programme, in Kerala, is intended to rehabilitate released
prisoners and probationers coming under the supervision of District
Probation Officers. By utilizing this amount, they can engage in small
scale income generating activities. The amount of assistance is
Rs.10,000/- per head. If the amount is insufficient for meeting the
expenses this can be attached with some bank loan. Department of
Juvenile Welfare and Correctional Services was set up in Andhra Pradesh
in 1990. It gives the following probation services taking care of
probationers released by the courts and ex-convicts, released juveniles,
after-care work, counselling and guidance to reform themselves and not
to revert to crime and for their rehabilitation through Govt. Welfare
Agencies.

Benefits of Probation Service
Probation keeps the offender away from the criminal world. Further, the
fear of punishment in case of violation of probation law has a
psychological effect on the offender. It deters him from law breaking
during the period of probation. Thus, probation indirectly prevents an
offender from adopting a revengeful attitude towards the society.
Moreover, sentencing an offender to a term of imprisonment carries with
it a stigma, which makes his rehabilitation in society difficult. The release
of the offender on probation saves him from stigmatization and thus
prepares him for an upright living. The shame of going through a trial
process would have sufficiently chastised him. According to the labelling
theory, a stigmatizing label once applied, is very likely to cause further
deviance or create the deviance. People tend to conform to the label even
when they didn't set out that way.

Probation seeks to socialize the criminal, by training him to take up an
earning activity and thus enables him to pick up those life-habits, which
are necessary for a law-abiding member of the community. This
inculcates a sense of self-sufficiency, self-control and self-confidence in
him, which are undoubtedly the essential attributes of a free-life. The
Probation Officer would guide the offender to rehabilitate himself and
also try and wean him away from such criminal tendencies.
Before the implementation of probation law, the courts were often
confronted with the problem of disposing of the cases of persons who
were charged with neglect of their family. In such cases there was no
alternative but to send them to prison, which was an unnecessary burden
on the State exchequer. With the introduction of probation as a method of
reformative justice, the courts can now admit such offenders to probation
where they are handled by the competent probation officers who impress
upon them the need to work industriously and avoid shirking their family
responsibilities.

An analysis of crime statistics would show that a large segment of
offenders consists of the poor, the illiterate and the unskilled. Such
offenders are seen to be victimized twice: once, when they are denied of
their basic human needs in open society and forced to live in a sub-culture
of social marginality, and, again, when they are grinded in the mill of
criminal justice for having infringed the law. Probation would thus be an
effective means to deliver justice to them, they would not be incarcerated
and also, they would be trained which would improve their life later.

The society is also served. The object of society that all its members
playing a positive role by seeking their self-rehabilitation is achieved by
the probation system, it is indeed an effective method of preserving social
solidarity by keeping the law-breakers well under control. Also, during
the probation period, the offender is sent to various educational,
vocational and industrial institutions where he is trained for a profession
which may help him in securing a livelihood for himself after he is finally
released and thus lead an absolutely upright life. And whatever work an
offender is doing as a probationer, he is contributing to the national
economy. Thus, he no longer remains a burden on the society.

Further, correctional task of probation staff requires closer contact with
inmates during his period of probation. This helps the probation
supervisor to get a deeper insight into the real causes of crime and
suggests remedies for their eradication.
Criticisms Against the Concept of Probation and Their Counter
There are some critics who look at probation as a form of leniency towards
the offenders. To quote Dr. Walter Reckless, probation like parole, seems
to the average laymen a sap thrown to the criminal and a slap at society.
Probation is still generally perceived as a lenient approach rather than a
selective device for the treatment of offenders who are no threat to public
safety. Probation system lays greater emphasis on the offender and in the
zeal of reformation the interests of the victim of the delinquents are
completely lost sight of. This obviously is against the basic norms of
justice. Keeping in view the increasing crime rate and its frightening
dimensions, it is assumed that undue emphasis on individual offender at
the cost of societal insecurity can hardly be appreciated as a sound penal
policy. Some criticize probation because it involves undue interference of
non-legal agencies in the judicial work which hampers the cause of
justice.

Further, when non-custodial correctional measures are used arbitrarily,
without being resorted to on objective grounds, there is danger of men of
means taking undue advantage and abusing the system as against those
who would really deserve but have no advocacy or support, and of the
whole approach becoming counter-productive and coming into public
disrepute.

The answers to these criticisms would lie in the fact that the aim of the
criminal justice system is to correct the offender and for some offences
this would be best done outside the prison. Further, laying down strict
guidelines to determine when probation should be awarded would defeat
the very purpose of the concept. The broad parameters laid down age of
the offender, surrounding circumstances, nature of the offence, etc.
provide a broad framework for the judge to apply his discretion. It would
also defeat the purpose if probation has to be granted when certain
conditions are satisfied, if for example the facts on record show clear pre-
meditation to do a wrongful act.
Responding to the other criticism, it is essential that non-legal agencies,
namely probation officers, interference is only meant for smooth
functioning, and also it is not mandatory for the judge to consider using
the probation officer always. He may not ask for a pre-sentence report,
may not put the offender under supervision.

Problems in the Practical Implementation of Probation in India
S. 6 of the Probation of Offenders Act, which makes it easier for a person
below 21 years of age to benefit from probation. This is regardless of their
antecedents, personality and mental attitude. It might lead to recidivism
because many of them may not respond favourably to this reformative
mode of treatment. Also, in many cases it is difficult to ascertain whether
the delinquent is a first offender or a recidivist.

The Probation of Offenders Act, in sections 4(2) and 6(2), lays down that
report of the probation officer is considered before awarding probation.
But, the Courts generally have shown scant regard for the pre-sentence
report of the probation officer because of lack of faith in integrity and
trustworthiness of the Probation Officers. In their view calling for the pre-
sentence report would mean unnecessary delay, wastage of time, undue
exploitation of the accused by the probation officer and likelihood of
biased report being submitted by him, which would jeopardize the interest
of the accused and would be contrary to the object envisaged by the
correctional penal policy.

On personal interview with some judicial officers and probation officers,
conducted by Abdul Hamid, it has come to light that neither judicial
officers feel it desirable to get report from the probation officers, nor the
probation officers feel it obligatory on their part to submit their reports in
the courts unwarranted. Section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act does
not make supervision of a person released on probation mandatory when
the court orders release of a person on probation on his entering into a
bond with or without sureties. This is not in accordance with the probation
philosophy, which considers supervision essential in the interests of the
offender, against corrective justice.
The lower judiciary in India has not at all taken into consideration the
objects and reasons of this act, while applying its discretion in regard to
grant of probation. In an umpteen number of cases the accused had to
move the High Court and even the Supreme Court to get the relief of
probation. If an accused gets relief of probation only in the High Court or
the Supreme Court after passing through the turmoil of a long and
cumbersome judicial process, he would, psychologically, be diverted
towards hardened ness and the whole purpose of the Act would be
forfeited.

Variation or discharge of the probationer is based solely on the report of
the probation officer; this leaves the probationer at the mercy of the
Probation Officer.
The after-probation services are not very effective. Thus, even
considering that a sentence of probation has been passed and the offender
is placed under supervision it is nothing more than a regular visit to the
officer. There is no scientific process of rehabilitation and the Probation
Officers aren’t adequately trained. They are recruited between 20 and 26
years of age. They are grouped into districts and supervised by a
state/provincial chief. There is no in-service training and occasional
refresher courses, and thus they are not adequately trained.

Further, often there is a lack of interest for social service among the
probation personnel. Lack of properly qualified personnel, want of
adequate supervision and excessive burden of casework are attributed as
the three major causes of inefficiency of the probation-staff.

Suggestions To Make Probation Service fulfil Its Purpose
A few suggestions have been given in the paper which may be
implemented at the legislative and the administrative level, which would
make probation effective in India.
Changes that could be brought about in the law are enumerated below.
These changes are mostly applicable to the Probation of Offenders Act as
it is more widely applicable than S.360 of the Code.

Due importance must be given to the reports of the probation officers by
making necessary amendments in section 4(2) and section 6(2) of the Act.
Probation must be based on thorough investigation into the case history
of the offender and the circumstances associated with his crime. United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-Custodial Measures also
provides that the judicial authority must avail of such a report.

Recidivists have often proved a failure in the process of probation. It has,
therefore, been generally accepted that probation should only be confined
to the cases of juveniles, first offenders and women offenders. Though
S.360 of CrPC lays down that only first offenders will be granted this
benefit, if they are not below 21 years of age, no such condition has been
laid down in the Act. Necessary amendment may be done to incorporate
the same.

It must be made mandatory for offenders to be placed under supervision
of a probation officer, by amendment under S.4(3) of the Act, as that
would best serve the philosophy of probation. If the officer feels that the
offender would not commit a crime, he could then submit to the court an
application for the offender’s discharge. Also, it has been left to the
discretion of the Probation officer to decide and inform the Court about
necessity to vary an order of probation or to discharge the probationer, so
there must be a complaint mechanism provided is a probationer wants to
complain against a decision concerning the implementation made by the
implementing authority, or the failure to take such a decision.

The proviso to Section (4) of the Act lays down that probation would be
granted only after the offender or his surety, have fixed place of abode or
regular occupation. A large segment of offenders consists of the poor, the
illiterate and the unskilled. It would not be possible for them to fulfil the
conditions in all cases; hence the proviso should be amended to not make
it mandatory, and leave it at the jurisdiction of the Court. Amendment
could be made to The Code of Criminal Procedure to include the
provisions for pre-sentence report and supervision.

To make the judiciary more responsive, an amendment could be brought
about in The Probation of Offenders Act which would make it mandatory
for the judiciary to lay down the grounds as to why the benefit of probation
must not be given, on the lines of S.361 of the Code.

The provisions under the Probation of Offenders Act and the Code of
Criminal Procedure could be amended to be similar to the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, where more detailed procedures
are laid down, like for the setting up of observation homes, report of the
probation officer. Changes could be brought about in the way
administration deals with probation. Some of them are enumerated below.

India, being a developing country can’t spend heavily on correctional
measures, as its emphasis would be more on economic improvement. Due
to lack of economic resources most developing countries violate the UN
Standard Minimum Rules. It wouldn't be possible for India to adopt all of
the measures prescribed by the UN, but India could adopt a few of the
measures.

The first among them must be to have trained probation personnel. This
isn't there today because the task of the probation officers is not given
much importance in India. It is considered to be a mere formality, but if
utilized well they would be most effective. The quality of probation
service must be improved by making the service conditions of the
probation staff more lucrative. This will attract well-qualified and
competent persons to the profession. The probation personnel ought to be
specially trained so that they can discharge their duty as probation officer
competently.

A nation-wide uniform scheme of training for probation personnel with
emphasis on social-work and rehabilitative techniques would serve a
useful purpose to improve the efficacy of probation service in India.
Guidelines for the training of Probation officers as have been laid down
in the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for Non-Custodial
Measures, may be followed to the extent possible.

South Africa, though a developing country makes it necessary that desired
entrants have degrees in criminology, psychology, or social work. There
are also monitoring staff who work parallel to probation officers. Loans
are offered for full and part-time study and short courses. Thus, it is no
excuse that probation may be implemented only in the developed and rich
countries.

Further an increased investment on correctional services for the poor,
illiterate and unskilled would be most productive not only in reducing
crime but also in improving the quality of life among the strata the come
from and are ultimately to return to. The Kerala Government has provided
for an After Care Programme to rehabilitate probationers. They are given
an assistance up to Rs.10,000/- per head. By utilizing this amount, they
can engage in small scale income generating activities. The amount of
assistance is. If the amount is insufficient for meeting the expenses this
can be attached with some bank loan. Such services could be extended to
the rest of India.

Further, this system must be extended to rural courts where there is
general lack of social agencies to undertake the task of rehabilitation of
offenders. Rural delinquents may be more responsive to this correctional
method of treatment than the urban offenders because of their relatively
simple life-style. In developing probation and aftercare services it should
be ensured that women and children are specially assisted.

In U.S., Prediction Tables are compiled to plan probation strategies. Such
tables may help in anticipating the probable result of correctional
treatment on different offenders. There, they have proved immensely
helpful in estimation of offender’s personality for individualized
treatment. For example, a juvenile delinquent from a broken home would
be less responsive to treatment than a person from a good family
background.

The present system in parts of the country, where the offender only has to
present himself before the probation officer on a regular basis would not
suffice. At present the work of probation is assigned to different
departments in different States. In some states probation service is placed
under the Social Welfare Department while in others in functions under
the Panchayat Department or the Home Department. It is advisable to
have an independent Department of correctional Services on the pattern
of the state of Gujarat at the national level to exclusively deal with
rehabilitation of offenders, of which probation is one of the techniques.
An attitudinal change, must be sought and brought about among the
judicial officers towards the significance of the probation system, this
would make the concept more workable and beneficial. Probation in India
as of today is mostly at the States initiative. Instead, a central policy
towards probation must be formulated.
Conclusion
The object of the criminal justice system is to reform the offender, and to
ensure the society its security, and the security of its people by taking
steps against the offender. It is thus a correctional measure. This purpose
is not fulfilled only by incarceration, other alternative measures like
parole, admonition with fine and probation fulfill the purpose equally
well. The benefit of Probation can also be usefully applied to cases where
persons on account of family discord, destitution, loss of near relatives, or
other causes of like nature, attempt to put an end to their own lives.

Its aim is to reform the offender and to make him see the right path. This
can be achieved as has been said previously, not only by legislative action
but also by sincerity on the part of the administration. In some parts of the
country, it is being implemented in the right spirit. The example of Kerala
and Andhra Pradesh have been described in the project.

The success of probation is entirely in the hands of the State Government
and the resources it allots to the programmes. Resources are needed to
employ trained probation officers, to set up homes for those on probation
and also for their training besides others. Thus while concluding it can be
said that the concept of Probation would be effective only where the
judiciary and the administration work together there must be a common
understanding between the Magistrate (or) Judge and the Probation
Officer. Probation would be effective only when there is a sincere attempt
made to implement it. It would be of great benefit for a country like India,
where the jails are often overcrowded, with frequent human rights
violations which would harden the human inside a person. Probation is an
affirmation of the human inside every being and it must be given de
importance.

Parole in India – Current state and the Need for Reforms- I
Introduction
Crime is a matter of public importance in the society. The way a society
responds to crime is what shapes its future. If such way of responding is
harsh or arbitrary in its impact, it works a gross injustice on those
caught within its toils. Ways of administration of criminal justice play a
significant role in understanding a society’s ways of dealing with crime.
Criminal Justice Administration in this era is different from the past. With
changing times, the focus on correction, reformation and rehabilitation
has increased and harsh, retributive forms of punishments are now losing
value. Time and again, multiple reports across the world have focused on
this aspect. To some extent, the Indian mentality is not far behind other
countries in following this liberal trend and the same is evident from the
fact that numerous petitions have been filed in this regard. Several
judgements of the recent times have focused on the need for prison
administration to become more criminal friendly. Increasing significance
coupled with decreasing recidivism and the need for reintegrative and
reformative forms of punishment is shifting the paradigm of criminal
justice to a new and more liberal level.
Re-socialisation and assimilation of prisoners is the primary goal of
prisons. The concept of prison administration is grounded on
rehabilitation and individual growth of the offenders along with ensuring
social security. In order to attain them, it is important that forms of
punishment become more reformative in nature. On this premise, the
prison administration and legislature have designed several therapeutic
programs. One of these programs is the conditional release of prisoners.
Such release could be labelled as parole or furlough depending on its
nature. Both of these, with an aim of reformation of prisoners and
humanisation of the prison framework form fundamental part of the
prison administration system. Furlough is a leave of absence that is
usually granted to a member of a missionary or some service. Parole
means a conditional or time bound temporary release of a prisoner during
his sentence with a specific purpose. It is granted on the promise of good
behaviour.
The current situation of the Covid-19 Pandemic has led to the filing of
multiple parole requests and due to the absence of a uniform code in India
dealing with parole, different states have expressed different opinion on
the same, hence resulting in a compromise of equality with regards to
criminal justice advancement. This part of the material is divided into two
parts. The present part seeks to deal with parole in India as laid down by
certain statutes and judicial pronouncements. Alongside, it takes into light
the ongoing COVID- 19 pandemic and the need for grant of parole. The
second part in this series will discuss on the requirement of reforms and
suggestions. Further, it will also elaborate on the possible misuse of the
law on parole and how to tackle the same.
Parole in India
Parole as a concept finds its origin in military law. Prisoners of war were
granted interim release so that they could return to their homes and live as
part of the society for some time on a promise of returning when such time
ends. With passing time, Parole became part of the criminal justice
administration of India to provide prisoners with an opportunity to spend
some time being part of the society. However, it could only be granted to
a prisoner if such prisoner had served some part of his sentence already.
As established in the case of Budhi v. State of Rajasthan, the concept of
Parole serves a threefold purpose:

  1. As a motivating factor for prisoners’ reformation.
    2. Ensure as much intactness in the family relations of the prisoners as
       possible, as they may be prone to breakage due to continued
       incarceration of the prisoner for a long time.
    3. Help the misled offenders to gradually become part of the society
       and adapt to its folds.
It is a device ensuring temporary release of prisoners grounded on good
behaviour so that they can escape the penal custody for some time
and maintain their family and societal links. This helps in facilitation of
rehabilitation and social re-assimilation. It helps in giving a situational
solace to the parolee to fulfil certain needs and such parolee is mandated
to report to the supervisory officer regularly for the time he is out. In
simple words, a prisoner can seek parole and stay out of custody for a
temporary period of time while he is yet to complete his sentence.
Now, the question arises as to whether the period on which a prisoner is
out on parole counts as part of the sentence or not? There have been
different opinions of the Supreme Court at different points of time on this.
In the case of Smt. Poonam Lata vs M.L. Wadhawan & Ors., the Supreme
Court of India said that “it must accordingly be held that the period of
parole has to be excluded in reckoning the period of detention.” However,
a few years later the Supreme Court in the case of Sunil Fulchand Shah v.
Union of India, said that “A temporary release of the person detained
does not change his status as his freedom and liberty are not fully
restored. Therefore, the period of temporary release on parole cannot be
excluded from the maximum period of detention.” thereby overruling the
judgement delivered in the Poonam Lata case.
The Bombay High Court, in the cases of Kantilal Nandlal Jaiswal v.
Divisional Commissioner, Nagpur and Hariom Vijay Pande v. State of
Maharashtra, through Divisional Commissioner held that parole is a
limited legal right available to a convict. However, the Supreme Court in
the case of The Home Secretary (Prison) v. H. Nilofer Nisha clearly
stated that, “the grant of remission or parole is not a right vested with the
prisoner. It is a privilege available to the prisoner on fulfilling certain
conditions.”
Moving forward, while considering the rehabilitation of the offenders, it
is also important to keep in mind the rights of victim and the security angle
attached to the release on parole. There have been instances of convicts
resorting to committing crimes while they are released on parole. A very
landmark case of Saibanna v. State of Karnataka pertains to the killing of
a woman by her husband which resulted in him being served with life
imprisonment. While this person was out on Parole, he suspected his
second wife to be cheating on him and killed her and his daughter too.
With regards to safety of the society and rights of the victims, there cannot
be two opinions. The rights of an accused cannot hold preference over
rights of victim and the society. Had it been so, they would have only
resulted in misplaced sympathy being placed on the accused.
Now, in order to strike a balance between the need for providing prisoners
with the opportunity to connect to the society and maintain their family
links by way of getting parole and at the same time, avoid such incidents
from happening, there existed a provision in the Delhi guidelines on
Parole. According to it, those prisoners accused of heinous crimes such as
murder, rape, dacoity, etc would get prohibited from getting temporary
release. However, this was struck down in the case of Dinesh Kumar v.
Govt. of NCT of Delhi for being violative of Article 14 of
the Constitution of India.
Despite holding recognition as administrative value, parole is not
recognised as a Right in India. A prisoner’s claim to parole is not absolute
and the discretion with regards to granting to parole to the said prisoner
rests with prison authorities to some extent.
A recent Supreme Court judgement in the case of Asfaq v. State of
Rajasthan shreds some light on the parole law in India. The major
takeaways from the judgement are:
Parole is the conditional release of a prisoner grounded on good behaviour
on the condition that the said prisoner will keep reporting to the authority
regularly. It is merely a suspension of his sentence for some time, while
the quantum of the said punishment remains unchanged.
Situations in which parole could be granted are:
“(i) a member of the prisoner’s family has died or is seriously ill or the
prisoner himself is seriously ill; or
(ii) the marriage of the prisoner himself, his son, daughter, grandson,
granddaughter, brother, sister, sister’s son or daughter is to be celebrated;
or
(iii) the temporary release of the prisoner is necessary for ploughing,
sowing or harvesting or carrying on any other agricultural operation of his
land or his father’s undivided land actually in possession of the prisoner;
or
(iv) it is desirable to do so for any other sufficient cause;
(v) parole can be granted only after a portion of sentence is already served;
(vi) if conditions of parole are not abided by the parolee, he may be
returned to serve his sentence in prison, such conditions may be such as
those of committing a new offence; and
(vii) parole may also be granted on the basis of aspects related to health
of convict himself.”
However, different states have different guidelines with regards to parole
and a decision as to whether parole has to be granted in some case or
not depends on the guidelines of the state concerned.
Some state guidelines mention two categories of parole:
Custody Parole – Usually granted in situations of emergency including
death of a family member, marriage of a family member, and some family
member undergoing serious illness.
Regular Parole – Granted in the other cases such as critical family
conditions including accident or death of a family member, child delivery
by the convict’s wife in case of absence of any other family member to
take care, serious damage to life or property, maintaining social and
family ties, or to file special leave petition.
Since no provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 talks about
parole and there is no uniform legislation in India dealing with parole,
different states have their own different Acts governing this. As a result,
there is some grey area with regards to matters pertaining to parole. Unlike
the United States of America or the United Kingdom, India does not have
a codified legislation on Parole and the authority to decide matters
pertaining to parole is only derived from these statutes and judgements.
Plea Bargaining and Criminal Justice in India
Crime, criminals and criminality have always been serious concern for
society, state and individuals. Individuals formed society to have
protection for his life, property and liberty. Society to bear such liabilities
created state which ultimately developed criminal justice system. Hereby,
criminal justice system is developed for providing protection to life,
liberty and property of individual but in developmental process individual
for whose protection criminal justice system was developed, became
neglected. Traditionally criminal justice system attempts to protect
accused and his interests. Recently demands are made for justice to
individual victim who is actual sufferer of crime commission. Recently
some measures are created for providing justice to individual victim. Such
measures are in process of development, and thereby, for effective justice
measure development to provide justice to victim there is a need to make
continuous review. Plea bargaining is one such measure recently included
in Indian criminal justice system to provide justice to victim. This paper
analyses plea bargaining in reference to providing of justice to victim in
India.
Introduction
Recently in Indian criminal justice system plight and injustice to
individual victims has been emphasized and demands are made for
providing actual, effective and sufficient justice to them. In recent years
many provisions have been added to the Criminal Procedure Code
(hereinafter CrPC) in order enable victims of crime to raise their
grievances at appropriate forum, and further in justice imparting their
sufferings should be taken care and accordingly decisions should be
given. One of them is plea bargaining. In India the concept of plea
bargaining has been accepted and included in the CrPC but it is not
completely transplanted from other legal systems, like the American one,
but adopted with some modifications. Provisions relating to plea
bargaining in Indian criminal justice system are provided in Chapter XXI-
A of CrPC which was added by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2005 (2
of 2006) which came into force on 5.7.2006. Plea bargaining is based on
concept of restorative justice and in this regard many provisions have been
added in the CrPCedure Code by some recent criminal law amendments.
Previously, usually allegations were made that criminal justice system is
favourable to the accused and in criminal procedures attempts are made
to protect the interest of accused with complete neglect of victim and his
problems. Restorative justice talks about justice to victim who is actually
suffered of the criminal acts. Responsibility has been imposed on the state
for compensating victims, for proper treatment of physical and
psychological injury in cases of sexual or acid attacks. Cases amount of
fine are determined according to the need of medical expenses to cover
the full amount the victim had to spend. An appeal against the court‟s
decision may be brought before the Supreme Court. Criminal justice now
is emphasising the effective justice to victim and it is considered as one
of the important objectives. In National Human Rights Commission v.
State of Gujarat1 Supreme Court observed:
“It needs to be emphasised that the rights of the accused have to be
protected. At the same time the rights of the victim have to be protected
and the rights of the victim cannot be marginalised. Accused persons are
entitled to a fair trial where their guilt or innocence can be determined.
But from the victims’ perception the perpetrator of a crime should be
punished. They stand poise equally in the scale of justice.”
Principles of Justice for Victims of Crimes and Abuse of Power
Criminal justice system makes all the attempts to tackle problem of crime
and criminality and to protect society from the impacts of crime.
Traditionally criminal justice system considers victim of crime is society
and society is represented through State, thereby, traditionally concept
crime even when widened, society and state are considered as victim of
crime. Individual victim against whom crime is committed has always
been neglected and traditionally been treated as mere informant and
witness in criminal case. That is why real victim of crime who has suffered
injuries of crime commission has always been a neglected and need of
justice. Article 4 of Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims
of Crimes and Abuse of Power, 1985, directs member states of United
Nations for treating victims of crime with compassion and respect their
dignity:
“Victim should be treated with compassion and respect for their dignity.
They are entitled to access to the mechanism of justice and to prompt
redress, as provided for by national legislation, for the harm that they have
suffered.”
For achieving these objectives, the United Nations directed in Article 5 of
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crimes and
Abuse of Power, 1985, to member nations to develop judicial and
administrative mechanisms for victim redressal, and further, to provide
effective communication with victim to inform him about the rights
available to him:
“Judicial and administrative mechanism should be established and
strengthened where necessary to enable victims to obtain redress through
formal or informal procedures that are expeditors, fair, inexpensive and
accessible. Victim should be informed of their rights in seeking redress
through such mechanisms.”
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crimes and
Abuse of Power, 1985, puts emphasis on restitution of victims and for this
purpose direction is given for imposition of responsibility on offenders.
Offender has caused suffering to victim, thereby, for restitution also
responsibility must be imposed on offender. This measure also reminds
offenders that what they have done and the problems they caused.
Imposition of responsibility on offender for restitution of victim functions
in two parallel ways. It provides effective remedy to the victims who are
restituted, and at the same time it teaches the offenders that their wrongful
acts are completely unacceptable and proscribed which have caused a
serious hardship to other member of society. The later aspect compels
offenders for introspection and they may be reformed. Declaration of
Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crimes and Abuse of Power,
1985, directs member states to enact and develop measures for restitution
and compensation to victim of wrongful acts and for this purpose
responsibility has to be imposed on offender and when it is not sufficient
then the State itself should compensate.2 Article 8 of the Declaration
directs implicitly for development of measure like plea bargaining
through which responsibility is imposed on offender to compensate and
restitute the victim. Article 8 of Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crimes and Abuse of Power 1985 provides:
“Offenders or third parties responsible for their behaviour should, where
appropriate, make fair restitution to victims, their families or dependents,
such restitution should include the return of property or payment for the
harm or loss suffered, reimbursement of expenses incurred as result of the
victimization, the provision of services and the restoration of rights.”
Crimes are committed against individual victim but traditionally the
victim has always been neglected. Criminal law evolved for providing
protection to life, property and liberty of members of society but when
acts are committed offending such protected subjected then in that
situation the criminal traditionally does not care of such member of
society. Criminal law in adversarial system tilted towards accused person
and all cares and protections are provided to him, when justice concepts
are developed in criminal law it is keeping in focus criminal not the
Three ways to compensate victim of crime are prescribed in Indian
criminal justice system – 1. Fine is imposed on offender as punishment
and from fine amount some amount is provided by court to victim as
compensation. In India section 357 CrPC provides provisions in this
reference. In this case compensation is directly not paid by offender, he is
punished by imposition of fine. Now from fine amount court awards
compensation. Fine goes in state fund, therefore here it means
compensation is paid by state indirectly. 2. State has responsibility to
protect persons from crime, criminals and criminality; on crime
commission state has failed in bearing its responsibility, thereby state has
to substantiate the injury caused to person due to crime commission. In
Section 357-A CrPC liability is imposed on state to pay compensation to
accused. Generally, such compensation is paid, when fine imposed is not
sufficient to compensate the victim or offender is not identified or accused
is acquitted or immediate relief is needed to victim. 3. Traditionally,
compensation to victim of crime is paid by state; compensation to victim
is not directly paid by offender. Recently a new development has taken
place in criminal justice by prescribing measure for payment of
compensation directly by offender to victim of crime. For this purpose,
measure of plea bargaining is introduced in Chapter XXI-A of Criminal
Procedure Code. In plea bargaining offender under mutual satisfactory
disposition which a kind of agreement directly pays compensation to
victim of crime and in return he is subjected to reduced punishment.
victim. Victim is usually misconstrued as only society and state
completely forgetting the person who in reality suffered offending act and
incurred resultant injury. Criminal law has traditionally neglected the
person individual victim for whose protection criminal law originated,
developing and existing. Recently demands are made for shifting attention
criminal law towards actual victim of crime. In India recently criminal
justice system is continuously providing new and new measures for
providing justice to victim of crime. It is claimed that one such measure
is plea bargaining. Plea bargaining is American measure used for disposal
of case and providing speedy and restorative justice to victim. Law is
always society specific, therefore, in India plea bargaining measure is
adopted but it is included in criminal justice with modifications. In India
accused after plea bargaining is not completely exonerated from his penal
liability under criminal law but only his penal liability is reduced on
payment of compensation amount agreed between accused and victim in
pursuance of plea-bargaining procedure but at the same time concept of
plea bargaining appears to be misfit in our criminal justice system.
Meaning and Concept of Plea Bargaining:
In plea bargaining the accused admits commission of crime and takes
responsibility to compensate the victim for injury caused and in return to
penal liability of accused is reduced. Plea bargaining has some references
to confession, plea of guilt and compounding of offences. Plea bargaining
is a kind of agreement between the accused and the prosecution regarding
disposition of criminal allegations. It is a sort of compounding of case, in
compounding of case parties to case settle the allegation of crime
commission, similarly here in case of plea bargaining in compounding is
made between parties to case making consequence of reduced
punishment. Plea bargaining procedure initiates with plea of guilt and on
this basis compromise (compounding) is made between parties to case. In
plea bargaining disposition is prepared under supervision of Court and it
becomes final only on acceptance and accordingly passing of order by
court. Plea bargaining is a sort of contractual agreement and it becomes
absolute only on accepting by court. Black‟s Law dictionary defines plea
bargaining:
“The process whereby the accused and the prosecutor in a criminal case
work out mutually satisfactory disposition of the case subject to court
approval. It usually involves the defendant’s pleading guilty to a lesser
offence or to only one or some of the counts of a multi-count indictment
in return for a lighter sentence than that possible for the grave charge.”
Plea bargaining is a process of preparation of mutually satisfactory
disposition of the case subject to acceptance by court. Plea bargaining is
made at pretrial stage and with successful plea bargaining by which
mutually satisfactory disposition is prepared and accepted by court, first
stage of trial which is used for identifying criminal concludes; with
acceptance of guilt by accused himself, there is no need of proceeding in
the said regards. Now proceeding is directly takes place for
determination of sentence and sentence is also decided in accordance with
disposition prepared by accused and other parties to case. Hereby, plea
bargaining is measure used at pre-trial stage at which by agreement
between prosecution, accused and victim, accused pleads guilty for
lenient and reduced sentence. Section 265-A of the CrPC mentions stage
for plea bargaining and it shows that it is made before trial; in case
investigated by police officer, on the submission of police report, and in
complaint case, on issuance of process u/s 204 CrPC. Hereby, plea
bargaining stage initiates at cognizance stage in case instituted on police
report and in case instituted on complaint, after taking of cognizance. It
indicates that plea bargaining has to make before initiation of trial, but it
cannot make absolute limitation and even after initiation of trial, plea
bargaining may made. „Bargaining‟ word used is self-explanatory that
plea of guilt is bargained, accused bargains that he may accept guilt when
lesser punishment is inflicted and prosecution and victim in case based
police report, and victim in complaint case, bargains for compensation
amount. Further prosecution is relieved from heavier responsibility of
proving case beyond reasonable doubts (burden of proof). On successful
bargain when disposition is prepared between parties to case under
supervision of court, it takes form of agreement which indicated by
expression „mutually satisfactory disposition of the case‟ used in Section
265-B (4) (a) CrPC. On acceptance by court agreement arrived between
party becomes absolute. Plea bargaining excludes need of trial and
proving case by prosecution and case directly enters in sentencing stage
which is also decided according to disposition prepared by parties to plea
bargaining.
In reference to plea bargaining in various criminal justice systems, various
measures of plea bargain are used. In plea bargaining any one of three
bargaining is used, charge bargain, count bargain and sentence bargain. In
charge bargain accused pleads guilty for lesser charge than originally
framed charge. Count bargain measure is used when accused is originally
charged for many charges and in plea bargaining accused pleads guilty for
some charges and remaining charges are withdrawn. One another
measure; sentence bargain is used in which accused pleads guilty for
charges alleged against him but in mutual disposition agreement is made
for reduced punishment. In India sentence bargain measure of plea
bargaining is used and, in this regard, provisions are provided in Chapter
XXI-A of CrPC.
Plea bargaining is an agreement by which prosecution and accused
bargain and voluntarily settle case against accused through which accused
agree to plead guilty in exchange of concession in penal liabilities.
Before 2006 Plea Bargaining was not permitted in India:
Plea bargaining is American concept and there it is much developed but
in Indian Criminal Justice System it has never be considered as
appropriate measure to tackle crime challenge. Plea bargaining is
considered as challenging our whole concepts of criminal justice system.
For the first time in India by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2005
provisions relating to plea bargaining has been added.
Law Commission in its 142nd report in 1991, 154th report in 1996 and
177th report in 2001 recommended for inclusion of measure of plea
bargaining in Cr.P.C. Law Commission recommended inclusion of plea
bargaining for speedy disposal of case, thereby, as a measure to provide
speedy justice to victim. Law Commission in 142nd Report observed:
“The need for introducing the scheme has become compulsive in a
situation where trial of a criminal case culminating in an acquittal can take
as many as 33 years in a relatively petty case (involving alleged
misappropriation of Rs. 12000, Rs. 4000 and Rs. 2000) and result in
expenditure of as much as a crore of rupees to the State exchequer, with
no corresponding benefit to the community. And in a situation, as reported
on 16.8.1989 in Indian Express, where the Courts in a city like Bombay
in 1988 recorded 124 rape cases but could dispose of only one and in first
six months in 1989 recorded 67 cases but could dispose of not a single
case”.
There is more than ample justification for introducing the scheme in as
much as:
(1) It is not just and fair that an accused who feels contrite and wants to
make amends or an accused who is honest and candid enough to plead
guilty in the hope that the community will enable him to pay the penalty
for the crime with a degree of compassion and consideration should be
treated on par with an accused who claims to be tried at considerable time-
cost and money-cost to community.
(2) It is desirable to infuse life in the reformative provisions embodied in
Section 360 of the CrPC and in the Probation of Offenders Act which
remain practically unutilized as of now.
(3) It will help the accused who have to remain as under-trial prisoner
awaiting the trial as also other accused on whom the sword of Damocles
of an impending trial remains hanging for years to obtain speedy trial with
attendant benefits such as
(a) end of uncertainty,
(b) saving the litigation cost,
(c) saving the anxiety-cost,
(d) being able to know his or her fate and to start a fresh life without fear
of having to undergo a possible prison sentence at a future date disrupting
his life or career,
(e) saving avoidable visits to lawyer’s office and to court on every date of
adjournment.
(4) It will, without detriment to public interest, reduce the back-breaking
burden of the court cases which have already assumed menacing
proportions.
(5) It will reduce congestion in jails…”
Further, Malimath Committee (2001-2003) recommended for prescribing
of plea bargaining as measure for disposal of criminal cases. Malimath
Committee recommended that offences which do not affect the society, it
is desirable to encourage settlement of case without trial. Plea bargaining
was included in Criminal Procedure Code by addition of new Chapter
XXI-A of Code But considering difference of our societal considerations
and crime problem, the concept of plea bargaining has been completely
modified as it is not applicable for serious crimes, crimes against women
and children, crimes affecting socio-economic condition of country and
habitual criminals, and further, criminal is not exonerated from his penal
liability but he will have reduced penal liability. Usually plea bargaining
is rationalised on the basis of speedy justice; it is usually observed that
delayed justice is denial of justice. Day by day piling of cases is increasing
causing great hardships before victims, ultimately before the society. it is
considered that disposal of cases by use of plea bargaining may be helpful
for disposal of cases and thereby in providing speedy justice to common
mass. In case plea bargaining, need for trial of case does not arise, only
on the basis of mutually agreeable disposition case enters in Second phase
of proceeding that is sentencing stage, at which court takes evidences for
determination of punishment decided on the basis of disposition prepared
during plea bargaining, plea bargaining is preferred on the basis that it is
less time and money consuming. Further, appeal under statutory provision
is not permitted, only it is permissible under Constitutional provisions.
Plea bargaining is beneficial for accused also that on the basis of his
pleading of guilt and payment of compensation, he may be liable for lesser
punishment. Whenever accused offered for accepting guilt but ultimately
negotiations between accuse, prosecution officer and victim fails, then
protection is available to accused u/s 265-K of Code that his statement
cannot be used for any purpose except the purpose mentioned in Chapter
XXI-A CrPC; such protection is necessary otherwise accuse will never
offer for plea bargaining, thereby provision relating to plea bargain may
become ineffective. Section 265-K CrPC is given with non-obstant clause
which prevails over all other related provisions, it is major protection
provided to accused who offers plea bargaining. Section 265-K CrPC
provides:
“Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, the statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for
plea bargaining filed under Section 265 B shall not be used for any other
purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter.”
Pleading of guilt and plea bargaining are related but different aspects in
criminal trial. Pleading of guilt has always been permitted and further, it
is necessary stage in criminal trial. Pleading of guilt is acceptance of guilt
without any excuse or justification. After framing charge, reading and
explaining the charge trial court ask for pleading of guilt, and when court
finds that pleading of guilt was voluntary, only on this basis accused may
be convicted and then after evidences are taken for sentence infliction.
Such pleading of guilt is generally made because of penitence and remorse
felt by accused due to crime commission. Plea bargaining is bargain of
pleading of guilt. In plea bargaining accused makes pleading of guilt but
it is bargained for no punishment or lesser punishment. In India it is later
situation means accused makes pleading of guilt and offer
compensation to victim and bargains it for reduced sentence. Thereby, in
plea bargaining pleading of guilt is made subject to reduction of
punishment. Pleading of guilt is very important and inclusive part of plea
bargaining but plea bargaining and pleading of guilt are two different
things.
The whole concept of plea bargaining is exception to general and basic
rules of criminal justice. In confession and pleading of guilt accused
accepts crime commission and in it is implicit that accused has accepted
the penal liability but on this basis never concept is advanced in criminal
justice to reduce the penal liability but concept is well laid down that only
on the basis of acceptance of guilt accused may be convicted and he has
to bear his liability as provided by law. When plea bargaining is seen at
its face, it appears it is selling of conviction and some compensation by
the criminal to the prosecution for reduced sentence. In Kasambhai Ardul
Rehmanbhai Shaikh v. State of Gujarat4 SLP was filed under Article 136
of Constitution before Supreme Court against the decision of Gujarat
High Court passed in suo moto revision of order passed by the Judicial
Magistrate first class, Balasinor convicting accused appellant for offence
u/s 16 (1) (a) (i) r/w 7 Prevention of Food adulteration Act 1954 and
sentencing with much minimal punishment that is with simple
imprisonment till rising of court and fine of Rs. 125/= or in default of
payment of fine to undergo imprisonment for 30 days. Accused
committed adulteration in turmeric powder, thereby, he was liable u/s 16
(1) (a) (i) r/w 7 PFA Act 1954. In this case after taking some prosecution
evidences, plea bargaining took place between accused, prosecutor and
Magistrate. Magistrate on this basis convicted and sentenced. High Court
made revision suo moto and enhanced punishment to three months
imprisonment and fine Rs. 500 and in case of default of fine imprisonment
of 30 days. Decision of High Court was challenged before Supreme Court
through filing of SLP. At that time plea bargaining was not incorporated
in Indian law but from the decision it was appearing that assurance was
given to accused person that on plea of guilt negligible punishment may
be inflicted. The Supreme Court observed that food adulteration
dangerous acts which affect the common mass and in such kind of cases
there should not be any lenient punishment. Supreme Court set aside the
order of High Court and remanded case to Judicial Magistrate to proceed
from stage of plea of guilt. Justice P N Bhagwati thought that plea
bargaining might act as allurement and it might not do justice imparting
and violative to norms settled in Maneka Gandhi case. Plea bargaining
may cause corruption and collusion and ultimately lower the standard of
justice. Justice P N Bhagwati observed in this case:
“[…] It is obvious that such conviction based on the plea of guilt entered
by the appellant as a result of plea bargaining cannot be sustained. It is
our mind contrary to public policy to allow a conviction to be recorded
against an accused by inducing him to confess to a plea of guilty on an
allurement being held out to him that if he enters a plea of guilt, he will
be let off very lightly. Such a procedure would be clearly unreasonable,
unfair and unjust and would be violative of the new activist dimension of
art. 21 of the Constitution unfolded in Maneka Gandhi’s Case. it would
have effect of polluting pure fount of justice, because it might induce an
innocent accused to plead guilty to suffer a light and inconsequential
punishment rather than go through a long and arduous criminal trial…or
let off a guilty accused with a light sentence, thus, subverting the process
of law and frustrating the social objective and purpose of anti-adulteration
statute. This practice would also tend to encourage corruption and
collusion and as a direct consequence, contribute to the lowering of the
standard of justice. There is no doubt in our mind that the conviction of
an accused based on a plea of guilty entered by him as a result of plea
bargaining with the prosecution and the magistrate must be held to be
unconstitutional and illegal…”
In Kasambhai Ardul Rehmanbhai Shaikh v. State of Gujarat case Supreme
Court observed that plea bargaining was violative rule laid down in
Maneka Gandhi case dictum, thereby it was observed that plea bargaining
was unconstitutional. Court further observed that plea bargaining was
unreasonable, unjust and unfair thereby violative to Article 21 of
Constitution. Crime is not only committed against individual victim but
committed against the whole society. Crime and criminals pose a serious
problem before the society at large. In such situation private bargain
between criminal and victim with participation of instrumentality, having
heavier responsibility to tackle problem of crime and protect individuals
from fear of victimisation and save the society from crime, criminal and
criminality, does not seem to be just and proper. In State of UP v.
Chandrika5 Supreme Court observed that plea bargaining is against the
public policy. In this case appellant state filed SLP under Article 136 of
Constitution against judgment of Allahabad High Court. In this case
accused was alleged for commission of homicide; in Session Trial he was
convicted under first part of section 304 IPC and sentenced for
imprisonment for eight years. Appeal was filed before Allahabad High
Court where plea bargaining was made regarding not challenging of
conviction order and on this basis High Court reduced sentence for
imprisonment which convict has already undergone as under-trial
prisoner and as convict after conviction by the trial Court. Decision of
High Court was challenged by State of UP before the Supreme Court.
Supreme Court decided that case cannot be decided on the basis of plea
bargaining but it should be decided on the basis of merit. Sentence should
commensurate to crime committed and there should not be lenient
imposing of sentence for crime commission; order of High Court was set
aside. Supreme Court observed in this case:
“Hence, it is settled law that on the basis of plea bargaining Court cannot
dispose of the criminal cases. The Court has to decide it on merits. If
accused confesses his guilt, appropriate sentence is required to be
imposed. Further, the approach of the Court in appeal or revision should
be to find out whether the accused is guilty or not on the basis of evidence
on record. If he is guilty, appropriate sentence is required to be imposed
or maintained. If the appellant or his counsel submits that he is not
challenging the order of conviction, as there is sufficient evidence to
connect the accused with the crime, then also the Court’s conscious must
be satisfied before passing final order that the said concession is based on
the evidence on record. In such cases, sentence commensurating with the
crime committed by the accused is required to be imposed. Mere
acceptance or admission of the guilt should not be a ground for reduction
of sentence. Nor can the accused bargain with the Court that as he is
pleading guilty sentence is reduced.”
From 2006 Plea Bargaining is Permitted Procedure of Criminal Justice in
India
Recommendations of Law Commission and Malimath Committee were
accepted by legislature and by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2005
provisions relating to plea bargaining were included in Criminal
Procedure Code by adding one new Chapter XXI-A in which Sections 265
A to 265 L deal with this aspect of criminal justice administration. Section
265-A CrPC clearly specifies that plea bargaining shall not be applicable
in case of offences affecting socio-economic conditions of country.
Central Government by issuance of notification on 11th July 2006
declared offences punishable under nineteen Acts as offences affecting
socio-economic conditions of country and in case of such offences plea
bargaining is not applicable. Such aforesaid Acts are Dowry Prohibition
Act 1961, The Commission of Sati Act 1987, Indecent Representation of
Women (Prohibition) Act 1986, Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956,
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005, SC-ST
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989, Cinematograph Act 1952 etc.
Protection of socio-economic condition of country is necessary
responsibilities imposed on state, it can never be jeopardised by act
committed by any person. Now days many offences are committed which
challenge well-being of society which can never be permitted and in such
case no lenient reaction can be permitted, therefore explicitly it is
provided in Section 265-A CrPC for non-applicability of plea bargaining
in case of socio-economic offences to be specifically notified in this
regard. The list of Acts forming this category is inclusive and from time
to time other Acts may be added in this category.
Furthermore, Section 265-A CrPC declares for non-applicability of plea
bargaining in respect of offences against women. In list of Acts notified
by Central Government as penalizing offences affecting socio-economic
conditions of country many Acts deal solely with offences against women.
In addition to that general provision is given declaring inapplicability of
plea bargaining in reference to any offence against women. Security and
protection of women are considered prime responsibility of society,
thereby, stern punishments are prescribed for offences against women
because of that deterrence may be created and potential criminals shall
not dare to commit crime against women. In recent years crimes against
women are posing a serious challenge before society at large due to
commission of such offences in brutal manner and further nature and rate
of such crime commission is becoming more and more serious and
alarming. Thereby, in case of offences against women, it is explicitly
declared for inapplicability of plea bargaining for such offences.
Furthermore, Section 265-A CrPC declares that plea bargaining is not
applicable for commission of offences against children below the age of
fourteen years. Children are future of society needed to be protected. They
are in constructive phase, thereby, wrongful acts may badly affect their
socialisation, personality building and ultimately whole perception about
society; children are always needed to be protected. In this regard never
lenient punishment can be inflicted on offender endangering well-being
of children; such offender cannot be given any benefit of plea bargaining.
In Section 265-L CrPC protects children one another very important
aspect. For reformation and rehabilitation of children a very enlightened
enactment has been made. When any offence is committed by child, he
cannot be deprived from reformative and rehabilitative procedures
provided in Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act in the
name of plea bargaining. But confusion arises after amendment in
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000 in 2015 and
a new Act was passed Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act 2015 by which some children for commission of some offences are
treated as adult criminals and penalised, and in such case whether
provisions relating to plea bargaining will be applicable for such children
or not. Such children are not reformed by reformative and rehabilitative
measures given in Juvenile Act but tried and punished like adult, therefore
they should not be deprived of benefit of plea bargaining in same manner
as it is available to adult criminals. Section 265-L CrPC provides:
“Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any Juvenile or Child as defined
in sub-clause (k) of Section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act 2000 (56 of 2000).”
Plea bargaining is not permitted for habitual criminals. Habitual criminals
by repeated commission of crime particularly same or similar kind of
crime clearly shows that that accused has developed criminal mentality
and maturity in criminal culture, such person is hardened criminal difficult
to be reformed and always he may pose problem for society at large by
his repeated crime commission. With such hardened criminal measure is
provided in criminal law that he may be liable for more stern punishment
in comparison to first offender. Recidivist person cannot be subjected to
reformative action for which he is never amenable and lenient punishment
which he may be indicative to him as the criminal justice is favourable is
for crime commission. In case of habitual criminal, always need is felt to
give stern message that whenever he will manifest his criminal mentality
in the form of crime commission he shall be subjected to severe
punishment. Plea bargaining can never be suitable measure for dealing
with habitual criminal. Section 265-B (4) (b) CrPC explicitly provides that
when court finds that the accused offering for plea bargaining has
previously convicted by court for same offence for which now he is
charged then plea bargaining shall not be permitted and he shall be tried
in the case.
Serious crime create grave impact over the society at large, usually such
crimes create fear of victimisation in members of society. Generally, for
effective tackling of serious crimes criminal law prescribes stern, severe
and longer extent of punishment. Malimath Committee recommended that
for serious crimes plea bargaining has not to be permitted. In case of
serious crime need is felt to create deterrence in criminal elements to
prevent commission of such crimes. Lenient reaction to serious crime and
criminals committing such crime cannot be effective measure to deal with
crime and criminality in the society. Thereby, Section 265 A CrPC clears
that plea bargaining is not permitted in case of serious crimes. Section
265 A permits plea bargaining only for offences which are not punishable
by death penalty, life imprisonment or imprisonment exceeding seven
years. The provisions contained in Section 265-A CrPC clearly specifies
that for serious crimes plea bargaining cannot be permitted; it is permitted
only for offences punishable with fine or imprisonment for a term
extending up to seven years or both. Section 265-A (1) CrPC provides:
“This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom-
(a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police
station under Section 173 alleging therein that an offence appears to have
been committed by him other than an offence for which the punishment
of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term
exceeding seven years has been provided under the law for the time being
in force; or
(b) a Magistrate has taken cognisance of an offence on complaint, other
than an offence for which the punishment of death or of imprisonment for
life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years, has been
provided under the law for the time being in force, and after examining
complainant and witnesses under Section 200, issued the process under
Section 204, but does not apply where such offence affects the socio-
economic condition of the country or has been committed against a
woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years.”
Hereby, plea bargaining is not permissible in cases when:
1. Age of offender is below 18 years of age.6
2. Accused is previous convict for the same kind of offence for which
person is accused and have applied for plea bargaining.
3. Offence for which person is accused affects socio-economic conditions
of country.
4. Offence is committed against woman or child below 14 years of age.
5. Offence comes in category of serious crime. Generally, such offences
are identified by prescription of severe punishments. When offence is
punishable by death penalty, life imprisonment, or imprisonment
exceeding seven years.
6. Application for plea bargaining moved by accused is not voluntary.
7. Parties participating in meeting for working out mutual satisfactory
disposition failed to make such disposition.
Plea bargaining is made at pre-trial stage generally before the framing of
charge. Section 265-A CrPC mentions stages in the case for moving of
application for plea bargaining:
6Section 265-L CrPC provides that Chapter XXI A is not applicable for
juvenile or child defined in Section 2 Juvenile Justice Act 2000. JJ Act
2000 has been repealed and substituted by JJ Act 2015. Though Section
265 L has not been amended to mention JJ Act 2015 but it will be
applicable as the objective of Act of 2ooo and Act 2015 are same. Section
2 of JJ Act 2015 defines similarly that child or juvenile is person below
18 years age.
1. In case in which police lodged FIR and investigation is made; in such
case plea bargaining is permissible only after submission of police report.
On conclusion of trial u/s 173 CrPC police officer submits police report
on which Magistrate takes cognizance u/s 190 CrPC. Section 265-A (1)
(a) CrPC directs that after submission of police report, at any stage
accused may voluntarily give proposal for plea bargaining. Thereby, in
case based on police report application for plea bargaining may be moved
at any time during cognizance and afterward.
2. In case based on complaint, accused may voluntarily move application
for plea bargaining after completion of examination of complainant and
witness u/s 200 CrPC and issuance of process u/s 204 CrPC. Thereby, in
complaint case accused may give offer for plea bargaining at any time
after completion of cognizance.
For plea bargaining establishing of case is also a necessary requisite; when
case is investigated by police officer through detailed investigation with
submission of police report case is prima facie established while in
complaint case the complainant directly files case before the Magistrate,
thereby, case is prima facie established only after examination of
complainant and witness’s u/s 200 CrPC and such establishing of case is
indicated by issuance of process. Because of it, in police case accused may
offer for plea bargaining after submission of police report means during
cognizance and afterwards while in complaint case such offer may be
given after taking of cognizance and afterwards.
Main provision relating to plea bargaining is given in Section 265-B
CrPC, it clears that proposal for plea bargaining is moved by accused by
filing of application before the trial court. Accused person does not give
proposal for bargain directly to prosecution or victim but it is given to
court. Court after receiving application from the accused for plea
bargaining, issues notice to Public Prosecutor in case instituted on police
report or complainant in case instituted on complaint and accused to
appear in the court on fixed date. First most responsibility imposed on
court is to find out whether such proposal for plea bargaining moved by
accused is voluntary, for this purpose court on fixed date examines
accused in camera, in absence of other party to case. On examination of
accused person court may have any one of the three situations:
1. Court is satisfied that accused voluntarily offering for plea bargaining.
In this situation plea bargaining is permitted and court provides time and
opportunity to accused and public prosecutor or complainant, as the case
may be, to work out mutually satisfactory disposition. Or
2. Court finds that accused involuntarily applied for plea bargaining.
Accused may be pressurised or due to some other reason he has no
willingness for plea bargaining. On identifying this type of situation court
shall not permit plea bargaining; court shall initiate trial proceeding. Or
3. Court finds that accused is previous convict for same kind of offence,
in this situation plea bargaining shall not be permitted and court initiates
trial proceeding.
In second and third situations plea bargaining is not permissible; as soon
as Court identifies these situations proposal for plea bargaining is rejected
by court and proceeding for trial is continued again. In first situation, it
means when accused person is not a habitual criminal committing same
kind of offence and offer for plea bargaining is moved voluntarily, court
permits and facilitates for proceedings relating to plea bargaining. Further
for plea bargaining due to provisions contained in Section 265-A CrPC it
is necessary that offence for which accused is charged should be
punishable with fine or imprisonment for term not exceeding seven years
or with both. Hereby, plea bargaining is permissible when offer for it is
moved by accused voluntarily, accused is not a habitual criminal and
offence for which accused is charged is not punishable with death
punishment, life imprisonment or imprisonment exceeding seven years.
When court finds out that the accused was not previously convicted for
same kind of offence, offence for which the accused is charged does not
come in prohibited category and the accused has offered for plea
bargaining voluntarily, court may direct for the conduct of proceeding for
plea bargaining. In case instituted on police report for proceeding of plea-
bargaining court issues notice to Public Prosecutor, investigating officer
who made investigation of the case and the victim of the case or when
case is instituted on complaint court issues notice to the accused and the
victim of the case, these persons make meetings to work out mutually
satisfactory disposition of case. Court has responsibility to supervise and
control the meeting to ensure that the entire process is completed
voluntarily by parties participating in the meeting to prepare mutually
satisfactory disposition of case. If they desire, accused and victim are
permitted to participate in meeting along with their respective pleaders. In
disposition prepared during proceeding main component is amount of
compensation to be paid by accused to the victim.
Plea bargaining as claimed is based on restorative justice there by attempt
is made to provide speedy justice and further, his injury suffered is taken
care of and attempted to satisfy by providing compensation to him. In plea
bargaining victim gets compensation and response to that accused
becomes liable for reduced punishment. In criminal law compensation
providing is not new thing; it has been traditionally available in criminal
proceeding in India. But always in criminal justice system in India
compensation is awarded out of fine collected from the criminal.
Traditionally criminal is punished by imposition of fine or other
punishments or both; when fine is imposed as punishment, either whole
amount of fine or some part of realised amount of fine is given as
compensation to victim. Such traditional measure to compensate victim is
provided in Section 357 CrPC. One more development has taken in recent
past that compensation may be given by state to victim of crime
commission. In this regard now provisions are given in section 357-A
CrPC. State has responsibility to protect citizenry against crime
commission and State has failed, thereby it has to compensate aggrieved
person. State has failed in tackling crime problem, thereby, responsibility
to compensate victim. Under Section 357-A CrPC compensation is given
by State. In Section 357 CrPC compensation is given from fine amount
collected from criminal; fine forms part of public exchequer, thereby,
from another perspective this compensation may also be taken as paid by
state. In criminal justice system in India traditionally criminal is punished
but never compensation is directly paid by the criminal to victim. In civil
law such compensation payments are made which is paid by wrongdoer
to injured person. Plea bargaining is exception to aforesaid well
established rule of criminal law and in pursuance of it compensation is
directly paid by offender to victim of offence. Further, compensation
amount is decided by offender and victim by mutual bargain. This aspect
of proceeding of plea bargaining brings the criminal proceeding similar to
contract making. In Law of Tort also such sort of proceeding is not
permitted; in Law of Tort amount of compensation is always determined
by court and never parties to dispute are permitted to decide the remedy
themselves.
Section 265-E (a) CrPC specifically clears that main purpose of plea
bargaining is determination of compensation amount payable by offender
to victim of crime. For payment of compensation and determination of
compensation amount voluntary bargains are made amongst offender,
Prosecution officer, investigating officer and victim in case based on
police report and between offender and victim in case based on complaint.
Court during bargain keeps vigil on whole bargain and settling of matter
which is called disposition should take place voluntarily, in this regard
specific duty is imposed on court u/s 265-C CrPC. When in persons
participating in the meeting for plea bargaining failed to work out
mutually satisfactory disposition, Court has to record its observation and
proceed in trial from the stage the application under Section 265-A (1)
CrPC was filed in the case. When in bargain parties have succeeded in
arriving at mutually satisfactory disposition, the Court has now the
responsibility to prepare report of such disposition which is signed by
presiding officer of court and all the persons participating in the meeting.
Section 265-D CrPC provides:
“Where in a meeting under section 265 C, a satisfactory disposition of the
case has been worked out, the Court shall prepare a report of such
disposition which shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court and
all other persons who participated in the meeting and if no such
disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such observation
and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Code from
the stage the application under sub-section (1) of section 265-B has been
filed in such case.”
On successfully working out mutually satisfactory disposition, it is
accepted by court through preparation of report on it which is signed by
presiding officer of the court and persons participating in meeting. Now
after it there is no need of trial; on the basis of pleading of guilt in
disposition of case accused is convicted. Now case enters in sentencing
stage; court passes compensation order in accordance with disposition
prepared u/s 265-D CrPC. further court takes evidences and Court
considers whether convict has prospect of reformation; on identifying
such situation with him, he may be released after due admonition or
probation of good conduct u/s 360 CrPC or Probation of Offenders Act
1958, as the case may be. When court identifies that accused has no
prospect of reformation but he has to be sentenced then court takes
evidences for determination of nature and extent of punishment. In plea
bargaining offender is not completely exonerated from his liability, he is
still liable for punishment but on the basis of payment of compensation
and acceptance of crime commission (pleading of guilt) he is treated
leniently and his penal liability is reduced. When offence is punishable
with maximum imposable punishment, Section 265-E (d) CrPC prescribes
that court may sentence the accused to one fourth of the punishment
provided for the offence or extendable punishment. In some cases,
minimum sentence is also provided for the offence particularly offences
under special penal statute are punishable by minimum and maximum
punishment. In case of maximum punishment court has discretion, no
doubt it is judicial discretion but court is empowered to determine any
extent of punishment extending up to maximum prescribed punishment.
In some cases, minimum punishment is also prescribed; minimum
sentence is mandatory sentence court has no discretion for minimum
imposed sentence, court is bound to impose minimum sentence and then
court has discretion to extend it up to maximum sentence. But in case of
plea-bargaining minimum sentence is also reduced and in Section 265-E
(c) CrPC provides that when for offence minimum punishment is
provided in penal statute, court in case of plea bargaining may sentence
the accused to half of minimum sentence provided for offence. In case of
plea-bargaining sentence to be imposed on accused is determined that
when offence is punishable by maximum sentence only, sentence to be
imposed on accused shall be one-fourth of maximum sentence, and when
offence is punishable by minimum and maximum sentence both, sentence
to be imposed shall be half of minimum sentence provided for the offence.
Minimum and maximum sentence may be imprisonment or fine or both,
and hereby, accordingly one half and one fourth of punishments may be
calculated. Court passes judgment in open court. In beginning when
proposal for plea bargaining was moved by accused, court examines
accused in camera to find out whether such offer was made voluntary. At
the stage of pronouncement of judgment, Section 265-F CrPC declares
that judgment shall be pronounced in open court.
Section 265-G CrPC declares that judgment passed by court on plea
bargaining is final and it cannot be challenged by any party to case except
under Constitutional provisions. In plea bargaining every party to case
voluntary prepare mutually satisfactory disposition, therefore later on they
cannot be permitted to challenge disposition prepared and accepted by
them and accordingly judgment passed by court. Due to it Section 265-G
CrPC declares orders passed by Court as unappeasable order under
provisions of Criminal Procedure Code but it shall remain subject for
challenge under Constitutional provisions contained in Article 136, 226
and 227 of Constitution. Section 265-G CrPC provides:
“The judgment delivered by the Court under Section 265 G shall be final
and no appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ
petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall lie in any
Court against such Judgment.”
Only pendency of cases against accused does not debar the accused from
getting benefit of plea bargaining. In Chapter XXI-A some prohibitions
are given like offence with which accused is charged affects socio-
economic conditions, offence is against woman or child under fourteen
years age, or accused is previous convict; in these case accused is
prohibited from making plea bargaining. Further, court may reject
application for plea bargaining when such application is not voluntary
moved. But court cannot reject the application for plea bargaining on any
other ground which is not mentioned in Chapter XXI-A of Criminal
Procedure Code. When aforesaid situations are not present then court will
not deny to facilitate the plea bargaining. Now it is only for prosecution
or victim to reject the offer for plea bargaining. In Rahul Kumpawat v.
Union of India Through CBI7 Rajasthan High Court decided this case on
4th November 2016 and observed that trial court can reject the application
for plea bargaining only on those grounds which are mentioned in Chapter
XXI-A of Code. In this case application for plea bargaining was moved
accused but it was rejected by court on the ground that many cases were
pending against the accused. Appeal was made before the High Court u/s
482 CrPC. High Court observed that plea bargaining is American concept
developed since 19th Century. In India it has been included in Criminal
Procedure Code from Section 265-A to 265-L, and now any issue relating
to it should be decided according to these provisions. Court can reject
application for plea bargaining only on those grounds mentioned in the
provisions; rejection on any other ground, which is not mentioned in the
provisions, is not proper. For this case High Court found that ground of
rejection of plea-bargaining application is not mentioned in the
provisions, therefore, set aside order of rejection order and case was
remanded to trial court for reconsider according to legal provisions. Rahul
Kumpawat v. Union of India Through CBI High Court observed:
“A bare perusal of Section 265-A CrPC makes it explicitly clear that mere
pendency of criminal cases against an accused cannot be cited as an
embargo for entertaining plea bargaining under Chapter XXI A CrPC.
Moreover, in the instant case, accused-petitioner as volunteer to enter into
plea bargaining and therefore, it was expected of the learned trial Court to
consider the same as per mandate of Chapter XXI A CrPC. While it is true
that plea bargaining in Indian Legal System is infancy but its recognition
is clearly discernible in CrPC after introduction of Chapter XXI A w.e.f.
05.07.2006. Broadly in the system of pre-trial negotiations where the
accused pleads guilty in return, he can fructify concessional treatment
from the prosecution. The underline object is to shorten the litigation and,
therefore, in adherence of legislative intent, the Courts are also expected
to accede to the prayer of the accused person in appropriate cases to ensure
speedy disposal.”
Rajinder Kumar Sharma v. The State8 case was decided by Delhi High
Court on 26 February 2007. In this case petitioner accused opened a fake
account in Bank in the name of complainant and got encashed a cheque
worth Rs 17640/- belonging to complainant sent by Unit Trust of India.
Complainant filed FIR, case was investigated by police officer and on
completion of investigation, and he submitted charge-sheet. Complainant
and petitioner accused were close relatives, some relatives mediated and
accused returned the amount of cheque and they made settlement out of
court. Now petitioner accused filed petition u/s 482 requesting for
quashing of FIR. High Court refused and petition was dismissed. Court
decided
that offences which affect society compromise cannot be permitted. Those
offences which are of trivial nature, compounding may be permitted but
offences which are graver and serious are not against individual but
against society, in such case compounding cannot be permitted. Plea
bargaining and compounding of case has some difference. Court observed
plea bargaining is permitted and lenient punishment is inflicted in such
case as criminal is repenting for crime commission and he is prepared for
some punishment. Criminal mentality may not create problem in future in
case of plea bargaining as the person is repenting. Further he is going to
suffer some punishment. In case of compounding repent is not shown and
further any punishment even lesser extent is not going to be inflicted.
Delhi High Court observed:
“A Crime under IPC or any other penal law is not a crime against an
individual, it is crime against the society and the State and that is the
reason that State or any of its agencies is the prosecutor in criminal cases.
The suppression of crime is the most important function of State. The
maintenance of law and order and compliance of laws by the citizen is the
responsibility of the State. Criminal law has been mainly concerned with
protection of elementary social interest in the integrity of life, liberty and
property. The legislature in its wisdom considered some offence as trivial
offence and some offence more serious and of graver nature. Those
offences which did not affect the society at large have been made
compoundable under Section 320 CrPC. However, all offence under IPC
or under other Acts have not been made compoundable because the
legislature considered that some offence cannot be compoundable and the
perpetuator of such offence must be punished according to the law, so that
the criminal tendency is curbed. Recently, the legislature has introduced
plea bargaining under law so as to benefit such accused persons who
repent upon their criminal act and are prepared to suffer some punishment
for the act. The purpose of plea bargaining is also to see that the criminals
who admit their guilt and repent upon, a lenient view should be taken
while awarding punishment to them”
Conclusion:
In Indian Criminal Justice System plea bargaining is a new measure for
providing justice to victim of crime. Plea bargaining is prescribed to
compensate victim for loss caused to him due to crime commission; it is
based on consideration that monetary amount may help in restitution of
victim. Traditionally, in Indian society emphasis is given for retribution
and deterrence for victim satisfaction whether it is individual victim or
society at large, and further, for protection of society by tackling crime,
criminal and criminality. Compensation by criminal to victim of crime
and payment under mutual satisfactory disposition which is a kind of
agreement arrived between criminal and victim of crime and in return
criminal becoming liable for reduced punishment is considered in Indian
society completely different concept in Indian criminal justice system and
Indian societal considerations. Plea bargaining is always much criticised
in India. Crime problem day by becoming more and more serious even
the existence of society is challenged by increased rate of crime
commission, need is to cope problem effectively and for this purpose need
is to reform the criminal or deter the criminal from crime commission.
Whenever any act is declared as crime, certainly act may be serious
otherwise it would have not been declared as a crime but declared as a
civil wrong. Only due to certain reasons for some crimes, procedure
applicable may have been changed, thereby, it should not be taken as
crime is only against individual, but it should be taken that the crime is
always serious, only due to some rational reasons different procedure may
have been provided. Differentiation that particular crime is against the
individual and particular crime is against society, may not be appropriate
way of application of criminal justice. Whenever any act is declared as
crime always it should be taken that act is dangerous one and only because
of it act may have been declared as crime. Crime problem can be tackled
by infliction of effective and appropriate punishment or reformative
measures. It may reform the criminal or create deterrence and thereby
reform the criminal and he may not commit crime. Such actions against
criminal may cause and strengthen social solidarity, increase assurance in
victim that he is protected against crime and criminals, thereby, save the
individuals and ultimately members of society from fear of victimization.
But plea bargaining provides a completely opposite consideration. In
penal statutes minimum and maximum punishments are prescribed to
inflict effective sentence after detailed analysis. But in plea bargaining
neither consideration is given for deterrence creation nor for reformation
of accused. Whole criminal justice considers reformation and deterrence
of criminal and potential criminals as main objectives; and further,
criminal justice ultimately focus on protection of victim and society; these
are ultimate objectives of criminal justice system. Plea bargaining is not
based on aforesaid basic considerations of criminal justice. Already for
petty offences provisions were provided in Criminal Procedure Code
permitting compounding9 and for some other offences complainant is
permitted to withdraw the case10. Effect of inclusion of provisions of plea
bargaining is extension and widening of compoundable offence for
covering those offences also which have traditionally been considered
more serious. Plea bargaining is claimed for having victim centric and
victim restorative focus but detailed analysis shows that plea bargaining
actually provide protections to accused, It is soft and favorable to accused.
Minimum punishment is always taken as mandatory sentence and on
conviction it is mandatory to inflict minimum sentence but on plea
bargaining even minimum sentence is reduced and half of minimum
sentence is inflicted. Bargaining between the accused and the victim in
which ultimately there is exchange of reduction of punishment and
compensation create situation in which it appears that there is selling of
crime; one person committed crime and now on payment of money, he
becomes lesser liable, another person suffered injury due to crime
commission but now by taking of money, he is selling his injuries. This
whole procedure of plea bargaining appears to legalise the
In Section 320 CrPC compounding of offences is permitted; for some
offences accused and victim may make compounding without permission
of court and after compounding they inform the court and accordingly
case is dismissed; for remaining offences mentioned in Section 320 CrPC
accused and victim may make compounding with permission of court.
In Section 257 CrPC complainant is permitted to withdraw summon case
with permission of court at any time before the permission of court. When
number of accused is more than one, in such case complainant may
withdraw case in the aforesaid manner against all the accused persons or
any of them.
crime commission. Proposal for plea bargain is given by accused;
whenever accused may find in the case that evidences available against
him in the case are direct, sufficient and substantial as it appears that
ultimately, he may be convicted and sentenced, he may give such offer
and on successful plea bargain, accused may become liable for much
lesser punishment only on expending some money giving it as
compensation to the victim. No doubt two checks are created and thereby
tried to check such loopholes and drawbacks, firstly, offer has to be
accepted by victim, when he is not interested in reducing liability of
accused by taking compensation then he may refuse and in such case
criminal will have effective liability for crime as prescribed by substantive
law, and secondly, court has final say in the case, whole proceeding takes
place in supervision of court, it is responsibility of court to see whether
plea bargaining is voluntary, and ultimately, disposition prepared by party
becomes absolute only on passing order by court in accordance with
disposition prepared by prosecution, victim and accused in case based on
police report and in accordance with disposition prepared by accused and
victim in complaint case. The victim is the person for whose protection
criminal law originated and has continued existence. Criminal justice has
ultimate objective to protect life, property and liberty of individuals and
ultimately to protect the whole society. Every measure prescribed in
criminal justice should have focus for justice to individual victim and
ultimately justice to society at large, thereby, there is continuous need for
reviewing of measures used for justice imparting.
                     SCHOOL OF LAW
               DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES


        UNIT 3 – SENTENCING AND IMPRISONMENT


Sentencing: Types of sentences: Indian penal code and special laws-white
collar crimes-pre-sentence hearing: summary punishment-habitual
offender-plea bargaining Imprisonment: The prison system-Rights of
prisoners –State of jails in India today-classification of prisoners-open
prisoners judicial surveillance, basis, development, reforms- Group
Counseling and Re-Socialization Programme.


Prison Reforms in India
Prison reforms in India are a much-debated subject matter and have been
the point of discourse for many Committees appointed by the Government
of India. However, despite many suggestions made on multiple occasions,
the ground-level situation with respect to Prison reforms remains gloomy
and stagnant. This paper seeks to study the evolution of prisons in India
from the middle of the nineteenth century and the various challenges in
the Prison institutions in India and their reform.
Introduction
Unchi Diwaron Ke Peechhey Lohey Ki Salakhon Kay Andar Rehtey
hain Muqaffal Kuch Insan Insan Jo Nahi Ik Ginti hai


(Locked behind High walls and Iron walls , An unfortunate human world
slumbers Here they have lost even their names, And now they are just a
roll of numbers)


Imprisonment is the final stage of the Criminal Justice Process. It simply
means the curtailment of the liberty of an individual as a punitive measure
for crime committed by him. However, when we talk of the persons
lodged in prisons, we are not simply talking about those whose cases have
been decided resulting in a conviction but also those persons whose cases
are still being heard by the court of law. Such persons are denoted by the
term undertrials. Besides convicts and undertrials, innocent children may
also be housed within jail premises in case either or both the parents are
inmates and there is no person to look after them. Usually, children below
four to six years of age are placed inside prisons in accompaniment of
their parents.

Having talked about an indicative group of persons that we may encounter
as jail inmates; our core discussion revolves around some key standards
of treatment to jail inmates that are universally recognized. These form
the minimal principles recognized globally comprising of the entitlements
of prisons as human beings in the peculiar situations and terms of
confinement. Judging by the degree of their presence or absence, we
deliberate on the necessity and progress achieved by India in reforming
prisons and thus transforming them from "abodes of the condemned" to
"training for a new beginning." Thus, we must at the outset understand the
requirements of dignified treatment of Prisoners as co- human beings
emphasized by the International Law.
International Law on Prison Standards

Key instruments that reflect the consensus of the international community
press for minimum prison standards specifically the rights of prisoners.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights lays special
emphasis on the rights of prisoners. India ratified the convention in 1979
and thus it is imperative to incorporate these standards into the municipal
law. Article 10 of the ICCPR deserves to be reiterated here.
   1. All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity
      and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.
   2. (a) Accused persons shall, save in exceptional circumstances, be
      segregated from convicted persons and shall be subject to separate
      treatment appropriate to their status as unconvicted persons;
      (b) Accused juvenile persons shall be separated from adults and
      brought as speedily as possible for adjudication.
   3. The penitentiary system shall comprise treatment of prisoners the
      essential aim of which shall be their reformation and social
      rehabilitation. Juvenile offenders shall be segregated from adults
      and be accorded treatment appropriate to their age and legal status.

Apart from the ICCPR , the ICESCR or the International Covenant for
Economic , Social and Cultural rights , 1966 also voices the rights of
prisoners. This means that the international community not only
recognizes first generation rights of prisoners but also the second-
generation rights that are the main concern of the ICESCR. Both ICCPRC
and ICESCR reflect the spirit of the Universal declaration of human rights
or the UDHR , 1948.


Since the Second World War, human rights have been quantified and set
down in treaties and conventions. In 1948, the United Nations General
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Later, two
covenants were adopted, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (ICCPR), and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights (ICESCR)


Another landmark development on the international level has been the UN
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, 1955
comprising of 95 rules pertaining to prison standards. These
comprehensive rules have been classified into 5 parts. A significant
contribution of these rules has been the emphasis on respecting the
religious belief and moral principles of prisoners along with the principle
of non-discrimination.


The instrument also talks about the necessity of segregation of various
categories of prisoners such as men and women , undertrials and convicted
inmates, young /child offenders and adult inmates inter alia while
stressing on the separation of those held under civil laws and those lodged
under criminal laws.


The Basic Principles for Treatment of Prisoners 1990 of the UNO and
Body of Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of
Detention or Imprisonment, 1988 also strength the rights-oriented
position vis a vis prisoner under international law. These particularly
mandate that prisoners must be informed of the charges alleged against
them, especially in cases of corporeal punishment . All persons under any
form of detention or imprisonment shall be treated in a humane manner
and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person.5
Thus, it has been amply indicated that the approach of international law
is rights-oriented when it comes to the question of prisoners.

History of Prison In India

Macaulay's Minute of 1835 laid down the foundations of Prison system in
India as we see it today. Subsequently, a committee called the Prison
Discipline Committee was set up to look into the prison system in India.
The Committee submitted its report in 1838 recommending the rigorous
treatment of inmates rejecting humanitarian needs and reforms. This
development has to been seen in the context of an imperialistic foreign
rule.

In the same period, the Construction of the Central Prisons began pursuant
to Macaulay's Minute and advanced rapidly between 1836 and 1838).
Contemporary Prisons in India are thus, a legacy of the British as they still
stand continuing their nearly two-hundred-year-old function.

The enactment of the Prison's Act in 1861 and 1894 mark yet another
landmark event in the history of Prisons in India. This colonial law forms
the basis for the present jail management and administration. The review
of Prison problems that had preceded the Act was continued afterwards
also.In 1919-1920 the Indian Jail Committee for the first time in India's
colonial history declared reform and rehabilitation to be the objectives of
Prison administration. This legacy was carried on by many post-
independence committees.


A key change that was introduced during colonial times was the vertical
division of legislative and executive powers made by the Government of
India Act, 1935.This law transferred the subject matter of "prisons" from
Central list to State list.


The significance of this event lies in the fact that in the post-independence
era this division of powers gave rise to non-uniformity in Prison laws and
management across various States of India. In 1951 Government of India
invited a UN expert , Dr Reckless to study jails in India and suggest
management and policy reforms. Dr. Reckless submitted his report
entitled," Jail Administration in India" and pleaded for reforms and
revision of the outdated jail manuals.
Modern Prison Manual

In 1957 An All-India Jail Manual Committee was appointed by the
Government of India to prepare a Jail Manual which submitted its report
in 1960. This forms the bedrock of Prison management in India until
today.In 1972 , the Union Home Minister appointed a Working Group to
make suggestion with respect to prison management in India . The Group
made recommendations to frame a much-needed National Policy on
Prisons and classification of Prisons lodging different categories of
inmates.

The Committee on Jail Reforms under Justice Mulla was set up by the
Government of India in 1980 to review the laws, rules, regulations for
protecting society and reforming offenders. The Mulla Committee
submitted its report in 1983 . The problems highlighted by the Committee
and the reforms suggested by it are relevant even today and preponderate
in any discourse on Prison reforms in India. It suggested that the
Government is duty bound to provide dignified living Conditions for
Prisoners and gave a humanitarian opinion vis a vis prison reforms that
had hitherto been focusing more on security aspects. The Justice Krishna
Iyer Committee of 1987 taking a similar stance highlighted the plight of
women prisoners and emphasized the need to induct more women in the
Police Services and management to inculcate a gender- sensitive approach
in prison management. Later on , The National Police Commission made
a recommendation in 1977 to overhaul the legislative framework by
enacting a new Police Act to replace the two hundred year old Police Act
of the nineteenth century.


Challenges In Indian Prison System

The forthcoming section of this article deals with the main problems
besetting the India Prison management and administration. The main
problem in India Prison System is that ever since the laying down of the
foundations of this system around two hundred years have gone by. Not
only has the social structure and life of the individuals changed over this
period but the population of the country has also grown manifold. Today
India is the second most populous country in the world.This is when the
infrastructure of our prisons , the brick and mortar has served its time. It
is nnedful to upgrade the existing prisons and set up new ones because the
existing infrastructure is overflowing its capacity resulting in
overcrowding.

The saturation of prisons has been found to be over 100% in some of the
prison establishments and in some extreme cases to the percentage of over
500% of the total capacity. This overcrowding aggravates the gross living
conditions within jails leading to grave violations of inmates' human
rights. The unsatisfactory living conditions affect every aspect of inmates
daily existence such as food, cleanliness, etc. The prisoner already reeling
under social stresses around this time is thrust forward into a battle with
the tensions of jail life. As a result the health , both mental and physical ,
of the prisoner suffers.


The inadequacy of prison programs further aggravates this situation. The
lack of proper legal aid and abuse of authority by the staff who sometimes
take unfair advantage of the prisoner's dependency and make unwarranted
demand in lieu of fulfilling basic needs of the prisoner such as food , even
to the degree of demanding sexual favours. The staff also indulge in
corruption and extortion , this more than often benefits the privileged
inmates with powerful networks of criminals backing them.

In concert with these corrupt staff , the powerful inmates enjoy all kinds
of illegal luxuries whereas the poor are discriminated against because they
do not have to their credit similar patronage. This highlights the
discrimination between inmates in jail. The Mulla Committee had
therefore, stressed on safeguarding the rights of the economically
backward inmates with much emphasis. The staff that do not indulge in
corruption face problems too due to inadequacy of human rights training.

The result of these problems is that the inmates upon release are not
prepared to re-intergrate wih the society. The reformation of the prisoner
which is the main objective of todays punitive institutions is undermined.
Also the health of the inmate suffers tremendously. It has been seen that
the rate of disease incidence such as HIV-AIDS and Tuberculosis is many
times greater in prison populations compared to the general populations.

This problem does not only involve the physical health but also the mental
health of the inmates. It was found by a study done by NIMHANS6,
Bengaluru in 1998 in the Central Prison in Bengaluru that the suicide rate
among women inmates was fifty percentage points higher than the
incidence of suicide among women in the general population. This
revealed that women are often more vulnerable to extremely challenging
situations within the prison walls.


Judicial Approach in Prison Reforms

Supreme Court has taken disparate approaches due to judicial
subjectivism. However, the main philosophy that can be discerned from
the judicial judgments is that: every saint has a past and sinner has a
future. The Court has taken a reformative approach in many important
judgments giving a boost to the discourse on prison reforms.

Therefore, in Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration , the Court held that
the Priosn is not denuded of all human rights upon entering the prion
premises even as his right to liberty is fundamentally curtailed.However
this must not ipso facto prejudice his other fundamental rights. In M H
Hoskot v State of Maharashtra , it was held that the state is duty bound
to ensure that the right to free legal aid under Article 39A is made
available to the prisoner.In Prem Shankar v. Delhi Administration, it was
held that handcuffing is prima facie an inhumane practice. In Ghiassudin
Case , it was held that prison institutions must serve a therapeutic role to
cure social morbidity in the prisoner's guilt.


In State of Gujrat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujrat , it was held that the
prisoners are entitled to minimum wages for the work done inside the
prison and must enable them to prepare for integration in the society upon
release.

Critical Analysis Of Challenges In Prison Reforms

There are around 1387 Prisons in India with a capacity of over 3.5 Lakh.
However, the total inmates occupying these establishments account to the
rune of 4.18 Lakh .Moreover, around 64% of the inmates in all the jails
are undertrails. Therefore, the first challenge that arises from both human
rights perspective and internal security point of view is the upgradation of
infrastructure. Thus can be done through improvement in budgetary
allocations to the prison establishments. We have seen that under the
recently launched modernization of police forces scheme, the utilization
of funds has been as tardy as the allocation of them.


Secondly, prisons are a state subject , this creates difficulty in having
uniform prison management. The Union can only frame models for the
states to incorporate and help in coordinating between states , encouraging
them to adopt best practices.

Thirdly and most importantly , prisons do not have voting rights as per
the present Election law in India. Therefore , prisoners are not a political
constituency for the ruling class and hence , remain irrelevant politically.
Unless this changes , it is in fact very difficult to imagine any reform will
be forthcoming with tangible results . This is because the provisions of
the Representation of People's Act excluding prisoners from the right to
vote disincentive the political class from taking concrete action for prison
reforms.
Fourthly, the poor treatment meted out to prisoner's poses a very serious
challenge internationally given that India's requests for extradition have
on multiple occasions been declined due to the apprehension that once
extradited , the offenders might be subjected to torture and inhumane
treatment in Indian jails. This stalled the extradition of Neils Holck alias
Kim Davey accused in the Purulia Arms Drop Case by the Netherlands
Government .Likewise the repatriation of Sanjay Chawla by the UK,
Karamjit Sigh by the European Court of Human Rights are some
instances. The Government of India must take corrective steps at home
and beyond.This can be addressed by ratifying the Convention against
Torture. India has been criticized for having lingered too long in fulfilling
the ratification of the Convention.


Finally , Key Judicial verdicts have broadly defined the contours of
prisoner's human rights that must necessarily be ensured . These must be
protected by checking systemic lapses and implementing the
recommendations of the various committees set up the Government of
India for the past decades. The recent case of Stan Swamy (2021) where
he being a specially challenged and elderly inmate was not ensured the
use of a sipper for drinking water warranted by peculiar conditions of
health that did not permit him to hold a glass of water, the said inmate had
to vindicate his rights only after approaching the court of law. This should
not be necessary if the prison management makes sure that prioner's basic
needs are met especially where the inmate is undergoing special condition
of health.


The question of Children accompanying parents in jail lodgings because
they have nobody else in the world to take care of them is a glaring
example of human rights violation in jail premises. Children of a very
tender age upto four or maximally six years of age learn and live within
the jail premises inspite of being innocent and get acquainted with the law
and order lexicon and most often learn abusing and cursing at a very
young age . They never go out and there most nascent childhood is spent
in the jail which become their earliest memories for a lifetime.Even where
the children are taken outdoors to parks or playgrounds, they are conveyed
in ambulances and police vans. This needs to be changed by allocating
budget and also incorporating a child-sensitive approach in the policy and
rules as a compulsory requirement.


Conclusion
Beginning with the Mulla Commmittee, many important Committes such
as the Malimath Committee, The Justice Krishna Iyer Committee and
most recently , the Justice Roy Committte (2018) have been set up to
review the situation of prisons in India and suggest reforms. However, the
implementation of the reforms has been lax and the necessary political
will to bring a change is invisible.It is imperative governments realize the
importance of every human life by valuing and cherishing the potential of
jail inmates as members of our society who can contribute in the future,
given proper correctional and reformative treatment.


The policy worldwide is tending towards the open jail systems and
rehabilitation of Prisoners. India must take concrete steps to fill up the
policy and legal lacunae and approach the problem with as much a
humanitarian angel as an objective relevance for the state. Finally, every
human life is valuable and deserves the dignity owing to it. Thus, violation
of human rights cannot be condoned even as we face practical challenges
in protecting the same


White-Collar Crime in India

Introduction
The concept of white-collar crimes refers to a wide range of illegal acts
committed by respectable people in various businesses establishing as part
of their occupational roles. These kinds of crimes usually occur in large
and complex organizations. It refers to the wrong or crime committed by
the elites people belonging to a higher class of society during their
occupation. So, it can also be called as the crime of educated and
professional elites. In Indian society, there are numerous types of white-
collar crime, ranging from finance, management, law, engineering,
medicine, offences to environmental violations, and health care frauds on
individuals, communities, and society in general.

There are more or less complexity and uncertainty in such crimes which
is not noticeable like other offences. It is difficult to identify the victims,
and victims are unaware of victimization. So, a certain profession offers
beneficial opportunities for criminal acts and corrupt and immoral
practices that hardly attract public attention. They are inclined to corrupt
and dishonest practices because of their neglect at social and educational
institutions, their greediness, profit-making mania, or want to reach on top
by a short cut. These deviants have negligible regard for honesty and other
ethical values. Hence, they carry on their illegal activities with impunity
without fear of loss of prestige or status. The crimes of this nature are
called, “White Collar Crimes”.

Historical Background
The well-known definition of white-collar crime was firstly coined by the
eminent American sociologist Edwin H. Sutherland in the late 1930s.
Sutherland as criminologists thought that wrong or crime was
concentrated among the urban and argued that the “respectable people
from the upper social classes committed a great deal of harmful
criminal acts in the course of their occupations and the furtherance
of their economic and business interests.” According to Sutherland
(1949), “upper-class criminality was ignored by the government and the
general public because the perpetrators did not fit the common stereotype
of the criminals.” Offender based approach to defining white-collar crime
emphasize as a crucial characteristic of white-collar crime the high social
status, power, and respectability of the actor. The most well-known
offence-based definition was proposed by Herbert Edelhertz in 1970.
Edelhertz defined white-collar crime as “an illegal act or series of illegal
acts committed by nonphysical means and by concealment or guile to
obtain money or property, to avoid the payment or loss of money or
property, or to obtain business or personal advantage”. The offence-based
definition distinguishes white-collar crimes from other types of crime in
the manner as they are committed rather than the characteristics of the
person who commits them. White-collar crime highlights concerning a
person who in the course of his or her occupation, utilizes respectability
and high social status to perpetrate an offence.

Who is the white-collar criminal?

In 1989 Croall in his book stated: “White-collar criminals have
traditionally associated with high status and respectable offenders: the
‘crimes of the powerful’ and corporate crime.” A white-collar offence
reveals that offenders were typically small businesses, employees, and
those more properly described as ‘criminal businesses’. This could be
attributed to the ‘immunity’ of the corporate offender from prosecution.
Croall argued that “such patterns of offending reflect not only
enforcement policies but also wider structural and market factors.”
Therefore white-collar criminals are concentrated on the corporate
offender and makeover simplistic distinctions between ‘corporate’ and
other varieties of white-collar offending. White Collar Crimes are mostly
economic offences are broadly categorized in certain classes like banking
& allied fields such as commercial, chit fund & insurance frauds tax &
duty evasion smuggling, violation of Industrial, labour, and
environmental regulation, black marketing, adulteration of food drugs,
and hawala & other Benami transactions. The crimes are also seen in drug
trafficking and money laundering activities, bribery, and other corrupt
practices. Government officials are frequently reported to be engaged in
many such crimes like bank scans, fraud & computer-generated crimes,
counterfeiting coins & currency, black money, and misappropriation of
government funds are the most frequently reported cases in India.
White-collar criminal includes the following attributes

The person has high social status and considerable influence, enjoying
respect and trust, and belongs to the elite in society. The elite have
generally more knowledge, money, and prestige, and occupy higher
positions than other individuals in the population occupied. Elite members
are active in business, public administration, politics, congregations, and
many other sectors in society.
The person exploits his or her position to commit financial crime. The
person does not look at himself or herself as a criminal, but rather as a
community builder who applies personal rules for his or her behaviour.
The person may be in a position that makes the police reluctant to initiate
a criminal investigation.
The person has access to resources that enable the involvement of top
defence attorneys and can behave in court in a manner that creates
sympathy among the public, partly because the defendant belongs to the
upper class, often a similar class to that of the judge, the prosecutor, and
the attorney.
Legal Profession & White-Collar Crime
 The Industrial Revolution played a magnificent role to develop white-
collar crimes in India. The modern free enterprise gave rise to critical legal
intricacies pertaining to property rights and diverse legal matters that
paved the method for the birth of a replacement category of professionals
of advocates who within the name of providing justice started abetting
within the wrong and thereby pursued their slender interest. The modern
legal professionals started disregarding the righteous oath of serving the
society and commenced trying to find the legal loopholes and
concentrated in the main in serving to out the wealthy entrepreneurs to
grow richer. The white-collar crimes committed by these legal
practitioners exclusively reaching in finding out illegal ways of tax-
evasion. There are unethical practices like fabricating false evidence,
participating skilled witnesses, thereby violating moral standards of the
legal profession and dilatory techniques in collusion with the ministerial
workers of the courts.
Medical Profession & White-Collar Crime

 White-collar crimes in India are so widespread in different professions
like medical practitioners, engineers, businessmen, politicians, and
therefore the list goes on. The issuance of false certificates, carrying out
illicit abortions, merchandising out sample medicine, and drugs, even in
some cases adulterated medicine and medicines to the patients are usually
done by medical practitioners.

White-Collar Crime in Educational Institutions & Corporate Firms
White-collar crimes are practised in day-to-day life by certain
professionals within the course of their profession like educational
institutions do are available in the league to operate with freedom. A
nastier role is played by the private institutions that are least bothered in
providing the education, however, only concentrate on creating a business
at the price of a child’s future. In India, whenever any major scandal
involves the media focus, a thorough investigation continuously finds an
unlawful involvement of political parties in it. So far because the
businessmen are involved, their acts of white-collar crimes go beyond
count. They’re termed because the company criminals who often, are
involved in felonious contracts, combination, and conspiracies of trade
restraints, unfair labour practices, merchandising of adulterated foods and
medicines, bribing of public officers so on and so forth. They cash in of
the company veil and indulged during several crimes.

Anti-White Collar Legislation in India
The enactment of the prevention of corruption commission, 1963
established the Central Vigilance Commission in 1964. The Central
Vigilance Commissioner was vested with considerable autonomy and
legal authority to consolidate the anti-corruption work performed by the
various Ministries of the Union government. The two main tasks of the
CVC were: prevention of corruption and maintenance of integrity; and
ensuring just and fair exercise of administrative powers vested in various
authorities by statutory rules or by non-statutory executive orders. The
CVC vested with the power to inquire into and investigate complaints
against acts or omissions, decisions or recommendations, or
administrative procedures or practices because they are wrong or contrary
to law or unreasonable, unjust, or improperly discriminatory per the rule
of law. The Government established the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) in 1963 to investigate the cases of bribery and corruption, as well
as violations of central fiscal.

The Parliament enacted various other acts like The Anti-Corruption Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1967, The Benami transactions (Prohibition) Act,
1988, The Consecration of Foreign Exchange and prevention of
smuggling Activities Act, 1998, The Foreign Exchange Management Act
1999, Prevention of Money Laundering Act,2002, The Prevention of
Corruption Act, (Samvat) 2006, The Right to Information Act 2005 to
curb white-collar crimes and to punish the culprits.

The Prevention of Corruption (Amendment) Act, 2018

 This act was passed to enhance the transparency and accountability of the
government. The act introduces the offence of giving a bribe as a direct
offence. However, a person who is compelled to give a bribe will not be
charged with the offence, if he reports the matter to law enforcement
authorities within seven days. The Bill makes specific provisions related
to giving a bribe to a public servant and giving a bribe by a commercial
organization. The act redefines criminal misconduct to only cover
misappropriation of property and possession of disproportionate assets. It
does not cover circumstances where the public official:uses illegal means,
or abuses his position, disregards public interest and obtains a valuable
thing or reward for himself or another person. The act modifies the
definitions and penalties for offences related to taking a bribe, being a
habitual offender, and abetting an offence. It introduces the powers and
procedures for the attachment and forfeiture of property of public servants
accused of corruption. The act adds the provision for prior sanction to
prosecute former officials. The act only provided for the prior sanction to
prosecute serving public officials. It deletes the provision that protects a
bribe giver from prosecution, for any statement made by him during a
corruption trial. This may prevent bribe givers from appearing as
witnesses in court. Under the Act, the punishment for corruption was “a
minimum of 6 years, which was extendable up to 3 years fine”. This has
been enhanced to a minimum of 3 years, which is expandable up to 7 years
with fine, which can go up to 10 years for a repeat offender”.

Conclusion
The phrase “white-collar crime” has not been defined in the code. The
dimensions of white-collar crime are so wide that after analysing the
provisions of IPC 1860, we may conclude that certain offence under
Indian Penal Code is closely linked with white-collar crimes such as
bribery, corruption, and adulteration of food, forgery, etc. The provisions
of the Indian Penal Code dealing with white-collar crimes should be
amended to enhance punishment particularly fine in tune with changed
socioeconomic conditions White collar crimes are the crimes that cause
harm to the economy of the country as a whole. It threatens the country’s
economy by bank fraud, economic thefts, evasion of tax, etc. It not only
affects the financial status of a country or a person but has also a negative
impact on society. Punishment regarding White collar crime should be
stricter as harsh punishment can prevent these crimes to a great extent.
People are not aware of most of these crimes so public awareness through
any communication medium is also necessary. The government should
impose strict regulations regarding economic thefts in the country.
                      SCHOOL OF LAW
                DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES



                UNIT 4 – THE POLICE SYSTEM


The Police System- Structural Organization of Police- Mode of
Recruitment and Training- Powers and Duties of Police- Cr.P.C. and
Other Laws- Constitutional Imperatives- Relationship Between Police
and Prosecution- Liability of Police for Custodial Violence- Police and
Public Relations-Police force in India-the role of police- functions of
police

Organization Structure Powers and Functions

Introduction

Police are agents or agencies, usually of the executive, empowered to
enforce the law and to ensure public and social order through the
legitimized use of force. The term is most commonly associated with
police departments of a state that are authorized to exercise the police
power of that state within a defined legal or territorial area of
responsibility. In the administration of criminal justice, the role of police
are of primary importance. The criminal justice process gets ensued and
initiated through the police. Besides its key role in the criminal justice
process the police role in the society concerns with maintenance of law
and order and security of persons and property. It is therefore the most
important agency of law enforcement and maintenance of peace and civil
order in the society. This unit is concerned with the role of police and its
importance in criminal justice administration.
This Part of the material concerns with the organization of the police and
its origins and development. The structure of the police system would be
another aspect of discussion which would consider different kind of police
system existing in the country and their operational aspects. The powers
of the police in context of the criminal law and procedure would be
discussed in connection with the role of police in overall criminal justice
system. Closely related to the power are the functions of police which
would be discussed in context of the governance of the country and the
role of police in enforcing the law of the land.
The Police as an Agency of Criminal Justice
The word ‘police’ is derived from the Greek word “Politeia” or its Latin
equivalent “Politeia” which broadly means citizenship, state or the
administration of the government. The word police therefore means a
system of government or the power of the state. In the modern usage the
word police came to be used to refer to an agency of the state to maintain
security and peace and to enforce the criminal law.

Police force has always been an indispensable part of the state
organization in almost all civil society of the world. Since ancient times
there has been some agency all over the world to apprehend criminals and
produce them before the king or the officers having judicial powers. The
King also had his own spies to collect intelligence and information for
running the state and for the better administration of the state. However
with the progress of the civilization and development of knowledge the
dimension of the police work has increased many folds. With the
advancement of the society complexity of the police job has increased in
many folds.
In modern context police can be defined as an organization that is an
agency of government to enforce various laws, maintain public peace,
order and security, control traffic, provide security to the citizens, protect
the individual's rights as per constitution, specially provide security to the
weaker sections of the society and maintain order in the society. Police
have to act as an intelligence agency, collecting intelligence for internal
security and criminal intelligence for crime prevention, crime detection,
and crime control. As a part of criminal justice system police has to
investigate criminal cases and bring criminals before the court of law for
justice. The police have to perform multi furious duties, functions and
roles in a civilized society forming a major arm of governance.
Organization
Origin
The history of the development of the police organization dates back to
ancient times which finds mention in the ancient Greek, Roman, Chinese
and Indian texts. The Indian Historical reference of ancient times also
have numerous mentions of police system be it Mahabharata, Ramayana,
Makushita or the various religious or secular texts of Gupta dynasty,
Maurya dynasty and Mughals. The first police force comparable to
present-day police was established in 1667 under King Louis XIV in
France, although modern police usually trace their origins to the 1800
establishment of the Marine Police in London, the Glasgow Police, and
the Napoleonic police of Paris. The first modern police force is also
commonly said to be the London Metropolitan Police, established in
1829, which promoted the preventive role of police as a deterrent to urban
crime and disorder.

The colonial British government in India established the modern police
system in India. It was obvious that the various police commissions
established by the British and the police act of 1861 had important
contributions in the development of police system in India. However, the
colonial interest of the British Empire had great imprint over the
organization and structure of police system in India.

The Organization of Police
Police forces are usually organized and funded by some level of
government. The level of government responsible for policing varies
from place to place, and may be at the national, regional or local level.
In some places there may be multiple police forces operating in the same
area, with different ones having jurisdiction according to the type
of crime or other circumstances. For example, in the UK policing is
primarily the responsibility of a regional police force; however,
specialist units exist at the national level. In the US policing there is
typically a state police force, but a municipality may have its own police
force. National police agencies also have jurisdiction over serious
crimes or those with an interstate component.

Characteristics of Indian Police Organizations

The Police Act of 1861 largely governs Indian police forces. The Police
Act gives each State Government the power to establish its own police
force. In addition to the Police Act, other legislation such as the CrPC
also regulates the police system. Based on the Police Act of 1861, the
Indian police have three basic characteristics:
1. The police force is organized, maintained and directed by several
States of Indian Union;
2. The Indian police system is horizontally stratified like military forces
organized into different cadres; and
3. The police in each State are divided vertically into armed and
unarmed branches.
The Indian police organizational setup has virtually remained the same
since past century. It is ironical that the Police Act of 1861 has hardly
changed due to changes in an around them. Despite the new democratic,
secular, socialistic, welfare and humanitarian values vouched for in the
Constitution after independence in 1947, the Indian police, by and large
follows the philosophy of Para-militarism.
The constitution of India provides that the police is the state subject. It is
therefore for the state to maintain peace and security within their territorial
jurisdiction. There are, however, certain situations which authorize the
Centre to intervene in the law-and-order problems of the State because the
Centre is under a duty to protect the States from internal disturbances.
Primarily it is the duty of the State govt. to maintain the civilian police
force. Besides the state police force there are certain police force
establishments at the Union level, such as the Border Security Force, the
Railway Protection Force, the Central Reserved Police Forces, or the
Central Industrial Security Force.

The police set up in India is essentially divided into following broad
categories: -
1. The general police which looks after the general police work and assist
in crime investigation, detection crime control and it’s also involved in
law-and-order maintenance and enforcement of law.
2. The special arm force are paramilitary force which are there to assist
the general police in maintaining the law and order and performing
specialize duties like border securities large scale riots, election duties,
VIP and Industrial security, disaster relief and general public order
maintenance. Apart from these to basic categorization there are
specialized police services which take care of particular policing jobs like
a) Railway police
b) Intelligence Police agencies
c) Traffic police
d) Women Police
e) Border Security Police
f) Specialized Investigative Police Agencies
g) Armed Reserves
h) Specialized Security Agencies

The above category exists at state level as well as at the central level.
Administrative Control under State Government
The constitution confers exclusive power on the States to control and
regulate the functioning of the police as the maintenance of law and
order and police are State subjects.
Structure

The structure of Police administration has derived its basic format from
the traditional. Mughal administration which was later on adopted and
reformulated by the British colonial govt. in India. The police structure
has under would very few changes after the British left India in 1947.
The bulk of the police personals in the country are related to the state
police services rest of the police personals come from various
central police organizations.

The DGP reports to the home secretary, a career civil servant belonging
to the IAS. The Home Secretary is accountable directly to the Chief
Secretary, the head of the civil service, and subsequently, to the Minister
in charge of the Home Department, an elected functionary who forms part
of the Cabinet that is responsible to the State Assembly.

Till a few years ago, an officer of the rank of Inspector-General of Police
headed each force. The level was upgraded to Director-General mainly to
widen the career prospects of IPS officers and, incidentally, to take into
account the greater responsibility thrust on the higher echelons in the
context of heightened political and social tensions. At the bottom of the
pyramid is the Police Constable (PC), who constitutes the 'cutting edge'
of the force. Between him and the DGP, there are nine levels of officers.


The Police Headquarters

Each state has a police head quarter at the apex of the police
administration which is headed by the DGP who looks after the
administration of the police force of the entire state. The Police
headquarters is constituted of several specialized police departments
which look after different specific functions of police by supervising and
controlling district police set up which is ultimately the functional outlet
of the police work the various police dept. or branches at the headquarters
are generally headed by one Additional Director General of police.
There are generally following branches
1. Criminal investigation department
2. Intelligence
3. Railway
4. Administration
5. Training
6. Special armed force
7. Provisioning and planning
8. Telecommunication
9. Complaints
10. Special crime record bureau or computer


District Police Administration

Each state is divided into a number of districts for convenient civil
administration. The head of the District Police Force is the Superintendent
of Police (SP) who is accountable to the District Collector in matters of
preservation of peace and control of crime. The SP controls a large
number of police stations (PS) - the lowest formation of the local police
machinery. Each station is headed by a Station House Officer (SHO) who
could be of any rank, but is invariably a Sub-Inspector (SI) in a rural area,
and an Inspector or Deputy Superintendent (DSP) in a town. The extent
of geographical area covered by each police station varies from state to
state. On an average, a rural station
covers 100 sq. miles and an urban station, 25 sq. miles. The SHO is in
charge of the administration of the Police station, the operation of their
staff, and other duties relating to detection, investigation, and prevention
of offences. Under the Police Act of 1861, other officers of a higher rank
than the SHO may exercise the same powers as an SHO within their local
area of appointment.
Each State has its own hierarchy and nomenclature. Some States employ
the Police Commissioner System, while others use the traditional
Directorate System described above.


 Police Station
The word ' Police Station' is defined in section 2 (s) of CrPC 1973 wherein
'Police Station' means 'any post or place declared generally or specially
by the State Government, to be Police Station, and includes any local area
specified by the State Government in this behalf .
A Police Station is the nodal office of the Police through which the Police
Department carries out its statutory duties of prevention and detection of
crime and maintenance of law and order and all other allied functions
within the ambit of these two broad categories of work. Additionally, it
serves as a 24- hour, 365 days a year contact point for victims of crime or
more correctly, interface point between police and public. To carry out
these vital functions, a police station consists of a building official and
residential premises manpower and equipment. However, for a Police
Station to exercise any legal powers, it
has to be notified by the Government with its exact geographical
jurisdiction and location of the Police Station. As per the Criminal Justice
System existing in India, legal powers to initiate any action against crime
is dependent upon the place of occurrence of the
incident. Hence for any Police Station to exercise any legal action, the
crime should have occurred in an area, which should have been notified
as the area of jurisdiction of that Police Station. Further, the State Govt.
and not the Director General of Police exercises this power of notification.

Rural and Urban Police
The diverse nature of social and economic organization and the
geographical lay out of urban places as compare to the rural one’s results
in diversity of police functions and organization in rural areas as compare
to urban areas. The massive urban expansion has created greater
challenges before police organizations in different states. The Indian
Police act of 1861 basically caters to the rural life as majority of
population at that time was living in villages. The functions and the
organizational structure of police station are diverse in rural areas as
compared to urban areas. While there is no division of work in rural
police station, in the essentially urban ones, work is distributed among
three distinct sections, viz, law and order, crime and traffic.
Law and order personnel handle all matters concerning preservation of
public peace such as patrolling, mob control, etc. Those constituting the
crime section investigate all offences listed in the Indian Penal Code (IPC)
and special enactments. The traffic section looks after the regulation of
vehicular traffic in public places. Apart from manning
specific points at road intersections, its personnel in some states, also
handle investigation of road accidents.

While the staff of a town police station works in shifts, those in a rural
station do not enjoy this benefit. They are expected to be available all the
time, although, on paper, they are entitled to off-duty once a week. Police
stations in the big cities have a much smaller area to cover, as compared
to their rural or small-town counterparts. The number of stations vary
with cities. For instance, Madras city the capital of Tamil Nadu, with a
population of nearly 6 million has 82 police stations and 4 outposts.
Police Commissionerates:
A distinctive feature of the Indian Police is the commissionerate system
that prevails in major cities. Before Independence, this was available only
in the three Presidency towns of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
Gradually, this has been extended to several others, including the nation’s
capital, New Delhi. This system provides for a greater freedom to the
police from the Executive Magistrate in the matter of crowd control and
issue of licenses, such as those required for buying arms and running
cinema houses and hotels. In a typical commissionerate, the
Commissioner ( normally of the rank Additional DGP in major cities and
IGP/DIG in the smaller ones) is assisted by one Additional and several
Joint Commissioners, each of whom looks after a geographical area or a
specific function, such as law and order, crime, traffic, etc. Next come the
Deputy Commissioners (equivalent to a District SP) who have Assistant
Commissioners, Inspectors and Sub Inspectors and the constabulary
working under them.

In the Police Commissioner system, a senior experienced and a mature
police officer is directly in charge of policing and has complete authority
over his force and is functionally autonomous. He is directly accountable
to the Government. Under the system, the public has not to run to two
different authorities i.e. District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police,
to process their application for licenses, permits etc. This avoids delay and
inconvenience to public. The conferment of magisterial powers on Police
Commissioner brings efficiency in prevention and detection of crime and
maintenance of law and order in major cities.

The Armed Police in India

The civilian police system in India has basically two divisions. The
general police functions are performed by the district force or the general
civilian police. There is a provision of having a special armed group in
each state which is generally called the Special Armed Force which is
available for handling grave incidents which threaten
public peace and require professional and which handling. The special
armed reserve is available for this purpose at the headquarters of each
districts under the operational control of SP. The special arm reserves are
well trained to cater to jobs demanding extreme physical fitness and
mental toughness. There are situations when even the armed reserve at the
district headquarter may be insufficient. It is tackle such really serious
public order problems that there is the provision of keeping special armed
reserves in every state at the disposal of the Director General. The special
armed reserves are organized into a number of battalions headed by a
Commandant who is of the rank of SP. Generally a special armed force
may have a force of around 1000 police personals.
The Criminal Investigation Department
A special group of investigators called the Criminal Investigation
Department (CID) is available at every state police headquarters to take
the investigation of grave occurrences, such as a political murder, large
scale rights, bank robbery involving large sum of money or theft of
precious art etc. This wing is also used for conducting inquiries into
allegation of misconduct by police personal and other police agencies.


The Intelligence Wing in Indian Police

Every government requires an agency that keeps track of the activities of
anti-social and anti-national elements, who aim at fomenting disaffection
against the lawfully constituted government and disrupting normal life.
Also needed is a facility to monitor public opinion or the performance of
the government so that quick corrective action is initiated to prevent a
breakdown of law and order or economic stability. This twin role is
fulfilled by the Intelligence branch at district and state levels. It is
sensitive group, which has to be manned by personnel proven integrity
and ability for collecting information in an unobtrusive manner. On
matters of mutual interest, such as terrorism, VIP security, religious feud
(especially Hindu-Muslim conflict), the State Intelligence coordinates
with the Intelligence Bureau (IB) of the central government.

Powers and functions of police
The police as law of enforcement officer are required to serve the
community by protecting all persons against illegal acts which is
consistent with high degree of responsibility required as per the law. The
police functions are multi furious and multi dimensional. The powers
given by the law to the police makes the police one of the most important
elements in the initiations of criminal justice process and at the same time
makes the police completely responsible as an agency working towards
social cohesion and public peace. The functions of police in the modern
democratic society have multiplied and the role expectation has also
increased. Major functions of police can be
listed through the following points .
1. Promote and preserve public order;
2. Investigate crimes and where appropriate, to apprehend the offenders
and participate in subsequent legal proceedings connected therewith;
3. Identify problems and situations that are likely to result in
commission of crimes;
4. Reduce the opportunities for the commission of crimes through
preventive patrols and other appropriate police measures;
5. Aid and cooperate with other relevant agencies in implementing
appropriate measures for prevention of crimes;
6. Aid individuals who are in danger of physical harm;
7. Create and maintain a feeling of security in the community;
8. Facilitate orderly movement of people and vehicles;
9. Counsel and resolve conflicts and promote amity;
10. Provide other appropriate services and afford relief to people in
distress situations;
11. Collect intelligence relating to matters affecting public peace and
crimes in general including social and economic offences, national
integrity and security; and
12. Perform such other duties as may be enjoined on them by law for the
time being in force.
13. To protect constitutional guarantees such as right of free speech and
assembly.
14. To assist those who can’t care for themselves; the intoxicated, the
addicted, the mentally ill, the physically disabled, the old and the young.
15. To create and maintain a feeling of security in the community.
16. Regulation and control of private morals and public decencies of life.
The primary functions of police is the prevention and detection of crime
and to maintain public peace and order in the society. The rights and
duties of the police to inflict punishment are limited. Since there job is to
pick up criminals from the society they play vital role in bringing the
offenders to the justice. The major functions which the police is lawfully
required to perform can be discussed in the following heads :
Patrolling and Surveillance

Patrolling is the visible police function for the purpose of general watch
and word. Patrol and surveillance provide the most direct and effective
means of preventing crime. A police beat is a given route or area to be
covered by constable on patrol. In a town it usually means streets and
building in a given locality while in a rural area it may comprise one or
more villages or a stretch of road. Patrolling police officer keep a general
watch over a particular beat in order to prevent crime.

In insurgency area armed police units do routine patrolling either on foot
or on vehicles depending upon the locality. Police patrolling is also an
exercise in area dominance by the law enforcement agencies especially
where there are acute law and order insurgency related problems.

Surveillance is another important function of police which is based on anti
crime branch. Each police station generally has list of criminals and anti
social elements which required special watch. Surveillance activity
involves various method of keeping such watch.

Preventive functions and Arrest

One of the important task assigned to the police is to make arrest of law
breakers and suspected criminals and to take them into custody in order
to prevent crime. The preventive powers of the police are contain in the
code of criminal procedure which also defines legal elements of such
power. The police may arrest a person on a warrant issued by a competent
court. An arrest made on a warrant is in fact a case of arrest made by the
Court through police. But at times, the circumstances
may require the police to make an arrest without warrant. The police may
arrest without warrant when they apprehend the commission of a crime or
when they have reason to believe that crime has been committed by the
suspected person.
The police can arrest and take into custody vagabonds, habitual rogues,
persons with doubtful antecedents, of those who are conditionally
released from jail or person for the sake of maintenance of law and order
within their territorial jurisdiction.

Conditional release an Accused on bonds etc.

The police has the powers to release an accused on a bond with or
without surety in case there is no sufficient evidence or reasonable
ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the accused to a
magistrate.

Investigation by the police

The purpose of the investigation is to collect evidence and to apprehend
the culprit. The police can question any person supposed to be acquainted
to be the facts and circumstances of the case. An investigation is defined
as all the proceedings under the CrPC for the collection of the evidence,
conducted by a police officer or any person authorized by a magistrate.
The principal agency with
the power under law to carry out investigation is the police force. An
investigation is initiated after an registration of an FIR regarding a
cognizable offence. The police may start investigation in the cognizable
without the prior permission of the magistrate while in case of non-
cognizable offence the permission of magistrate is needed. Thus, during
the course of investigation, the police is empowered to make search, order
production of documents, seize any suspicious property, call witnesses,
require them to attend court and arrest persons suspected
or having committed crime without warrant. After the investigation, a
police report is prepared upon which proceedings are instituted before a
Magistrate. The law requires that every investigation should be completed
without undue delay.
Nevertheless, delays do occur in the process of investigation for one
reason or the other. The conclusion of a police investigation should be
contained in a final report. At the completion of an investigation, the
police should submit this report with all the details of the case to a
magistrate. If the accused is to be prosecuted, this report is called a charge
sheet or challan. If there is a charge sheet, it should list relevant charges
along with the laws which have been contravened. After
looking at the charge sheet, the magistrate decides to either (a) proceed
with the case, (b) order further investigation of the case, or (c) dismiss the
charges against the accused.

Essential Constituents of Investigation.
During the course of investigation done by a police officer, following
steps are generally taken which constitute a typical investigation.

• The police authorities will proceed to the scene of an incident.
• They will ascertain the facts and circumstances of the case.
• They will attempt to discover and arrest the suspect(s).
• They will collect evidence relating to the incident through

a. examination of various people (including the accused), and
b. search of places and seizure of things considered necessary for
the investigation and for production at trial.

• They will form an opinion about whether the material collected forms
the basis of a case to placed before a magistrate for trial and, if so, file a
charge sheet under S.173 CrPC.
The police powers and functions related to investigation involve search,
seizure, questioning, interrogation, arrest, etc. The powers and functions
involve however are not unlimited, these powers are well defined by law
and procedure. The individual liberty and freedoms guaranteed under the
constitutions limit the powers and functions of the police officers during
the discharge of their duties.
Public Peace and law and order management
The maintenance of public peace and law and order within a police
jurisdiction is given high priority in police function. Thus criminal
procedure court gives power to the police to use restrain civil force for
dispersal of unlawful assembly the police may arrest people. In order to
prevent public nuisance, writing or unlawful conduct. The police may
initiate a process of taking security for keeping the peace. Police may
also initiate process for removal of nuisance and for active maintenance
of public order and social tranquility.
Police accountability
Police forces have the authority to exercise force to enforce laws and
maintain law and order in a state. However, this power may be misused
in several ways. For example, in India, various kinds of complaints are
made against the police including complaints of unwarranted arrests,
unlawful searches, torture and custodial rapes. To check against such
abuse of power, various countries have adopted safeguards, such as
accountability of the police to the political executive, internal
accountability to senior police officers, and independent police oversight
authorities.
Accountability to the political executive vs operational freedom
Both the central and state police forces come under the control and
superintendence of the political executive (i.e., central or state
government). The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2007)
has noted that this control has been abused in the past by the political
executive to unduly influence police personnel, and have them serve
personal or political interests. This interferes with professional decision-
making by the police (e.g., regarding how to respond to law and order
situations or how to conduct investigations), resulting in biased
performance of duties.

To allow the police greater operational freedom while ensuring
accountability, various experts have recommended that the political
executive’s power of superintendence over police forces be limited. The
Second Administrative Reforms Commission has recommended that this
power be limited to promoting professional efficiency and ensuring that
police is acting in accordance with law. Alternatively the National Police
Commission (1977-81) suggested that superintendence be defined in the
law to exclude instructions that interfere with due process of law, or that
influence operational decisions, or that unlawfully influence police
personnel transfers, recruitments, etc. The Supreme Court has also issued
directions to states and the centre in 2006 in this regard.

Directions of the Supreme Court in Prakash Singh vs Union of India
In 1996, a petition was filed before the Supreme Court that raised various
instances of abuse of power by the police, and alleged that police
personnel perform their duties in a politically partisan manner. The
Supreme Court issued its judgement in 2006, ordering the centre and
states to set up authorities to lay down guidelines for police functioning,
evaluate police performance, decide postings and transfers, and receive
complaints of police misconduct. The court also required that minimum
tenure of service be guaranteed to key police officers to protect them from
arbitrary transfers and postings.
A summary of the Supreme Court judgement and its implementation are
provided in the Annexure.

Independent Complaints Authority

The Second Administrative Reforms Commission and the Supreme Court
have observed that there is a need to have an independent complaints
authority to inquire into cases of police misconduct. This may be because
the political executive and internal police oversight mechanisms may
favour law enforcement authorities, and not be able to form an
independent and critical judgement. For example, the United Kingdom
has an Independent Office for Police Conduct, comprising of a Director
General appointed by the crown, and six other members appointed by the
executive and the existing members, to oversee complaints made against
police officers. Another example is that of the New York City Police
which has a Civilian Complaint Review Board comprising of civilians
appointed by local government bodies and the police commissioner to
investigate into cases of police misconduct. India has some independent
authorities that have the power to examine specific kinds of
misconduct. For example, the National or State Human Rights
Commission may be approached in case of human rights violations, or the
state Lokayukta may be approached with a complaint of corruption.
However, the Second Administrative Reforms Commission has noted the
absence of independent oversight authorities that specialise in addressing
all kinds of police misconduct, and are easily accessible. In light of this,
under the Model Police Act, 2006 drafted by the Police Act Drafting
Committee (2005), and the Supreme Court guidelines (2006), states are
required to set up state and district level complaints authorities.

Directions of the Supreme Court in Prakash Singh vs Union of India

Context: In 1996, a petition was filed before the Supreme which stated
that the police abuse and misuse their powers. It alleged non
enforcement and discriminatory application of laws in favour of persons
with clout, and also raised instances of unauthorised detentions, torture,
harassment, etc. against ordinary citizens. The petition asked the court
to issue directions for implementation of recommendations of expert
committees.
Directions: In September 2006, the court issued various directions to
the centre and states including:

  •   Constitute a State Security Commission in every state that will lay
      down policy for police functioning, evaluate police performance,
      and ensure that state governments do not exercise unwarranted
      influence on the police.




  •   Constitute a Police Establishment Board in every state that will
      decide postings, transfers and promotions for officers below the rank
      of Deputy Superintendent of Police, and make recommendations to
      the state government for officers of higher ranks.



  •   Constitute Police Complaints Authorities at the state and district
      levels to inquire into allegations of serious misconduct and abuse of
      power by police personnel.




  •   Provide a minimum tenure of at least two years for the DGP and
      other key police officers (e.g., officers in charge of a police station
      and district) within the state forces, and the Chiefs of the central
      forces to protect them against arbitrary transfers and postings.

  •   Ensure that the DGP of state police is appointed from amongst three
      senior-most officers who have been empanelled for the promotion
      by the Union Public Service Commission on the basis of length of
      service, good record and experience.
   • Separate the investigating police from the law-and-order police to
      ensure speedier investigation, better expertise and improved rapport
      with the people.
   • Constitute a National Security Commission to shortlist the
      candidates for appointment as Chiefs of the central armed police
      forces.
 Status Note on Police Reforms in India
Police reforms has been on the agenda of Governments almost since
independence but even after more than 50 years, the police is seen as
selectively efficient, unsympathetic to the under privileged. It is further
accused of politicization and criminalization. In this regard, one needs to
note that the basic framework for policing in India was made way back in
1861, with little changes thereafter, whereas the society has undergone
dramatic changes, especially in the post-independence times. The public
expectations from police have multiplied and newer forms of crime have
surfaced. The policing system needs to be reformed to be in tune with
present day scenario and upgraded to effectively deal with the crime and
criminals, uphold human rights and safeguard the legitimate interests of
one and all.
Committees / Commission on Police Reforms
Various Committees/Commissions in the past have made a number of
important recommendations regarding police reforms. Notable amongst
these are those made by the National Police Commission (1978-82); the
Padmanabhaiah Committee on restructuring of Police (2000); and the
Malimath Committee on reforms in Criminal Justice System (2002-03).
Yet another Committee, headed by Shri Ribero, was constituted in 1998,
on the directions of the Supreme Court of India, to review action taken by
the Central Government/State Governments/UT Administrations in this
regard, and to suggest ways and means for implementing the pending
recommendations of the above Commission.
Constitutional Limitations of Central Government
 “Police” being a State subject in the seventh schedule to the Constitution
of India, it is primarily the State Governments who have to implement the
various police reforms measures. The Centre has been making consistent
efforts to persuade the States from time to time to bring the requisite
reforms in the Police administration to meet the expectations of the
people.
 In    this      regard,    the    recommendations    of     the   various
Committees/Commissions were sent to the State Governments/UT
Administrations for taking necessary action. Successive Union Home
Ministers have been addressing the Chief Ministers/Administrators of
States/UTs in this regard.
Important recommendations of the various Committees/
Commissions and the specific action taken by the Central
Government
(A) Reports of The National Police Commission
 The National Police Commission (NPC) was constituted in 1977 to study
the problems of police and make a comprehensive review of the police
system at national level. The NPC dealt with wide range of aspects of
police functioning. The National Police Commission submitted eight
reports during the period February 1979 to May 1981. The first report was
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1.2.1980. The remaining seven reports
were released in March 1983 with the specific directive from the Central
Government to all State Governments/UT Administrations that these
reports may be examined quickly and appropriate action taken. The
Central Government took initiatives in persuading the State
Governments/UTs to implement the recommendations of the National
Police Commission.

The major recommendations of the NPC to amend the Code of Criminal
procedure 1973 were considered in the Chief Minister’s Conference on
the Administration of Criminal Justice System held on 13th November
1992. The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill 1994
introduced in the Rajya Sabha had, inter alia, contained these
recommendations.
(B) Reports of the Ribero Committee
7. On the directions of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Prakash
Singh vs Union of India and others pertaining to implementation of the
recommendations of the National Police Commission, the Government
had on 25th May, 1998, constituted a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri J.F. Ribeiro, IPS (Retd.). The Ribeiro Committee
submitted two reports which were filed in the Supreme Court during
1998 and 1999, respectively.

 The Rebeiro Committee endorsed the recommendations of the NPC
with certain modifications. The case came up for hearing on 10.2.2005
and the Hon’ble Court directed Union of India and respective State
Governments including NHRC to file their responses with regard to the
direction issued in the Vineet Narain case and implementation of
recommendations of Rebeiro Committee.
(C) Report of the Padmanabhaiah Committee on Police Reforms

 Government had set up a Committee in January, 2000 under the
Chairmanship of Shri K. Padmanabhaiah, former Union Home Secretary,
to suggest the structural changes in the police to meet the challenges in
the new millennium. The Committee submitted its report to the
Government on 30.8.2000. In all, there are about 240 recommendations
made by the Committee. The recommendations have been examined in
this Ministry. Out of 240 recommendations of the Committee,
recommendations regarding review of allocation of cadre policy, direct
IPS officers to be given charge of district, to post IAS/IPS as judicial
magistrate, police commissioners system in cities, division of NICFS,
compulsory retirement to those not empanelled as DIG, review of cadre
allotment policy of IPS for NE, recruitment of Constables and sub-
Inspectors from the boys who have passed 10th & 12th Examination and
giving them 2/3 years training in Police training Schools/Police Training
Colleges respectively, maximum age of entry of IPS to be reduced to 24
years and federal offences etc were not accepted, after examination.

As many as 154 recommendations pertaining to recruitment, training,
reservation of posts, involvement of public in crime prevention,
recruitment of police personnel, delegation of powers to lower ranks in
police, revival of beat system, use of traditional village functional village
functionaries, police patrolling on national and state highways, designs of
the police stations, posting and transfer of SP and above etc. were found
to be such that they can be implemented without any structural changes.

(D) Malimath Committee on Reforms in the Criminal Justice
System
Government had set up (November, 2000) a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. (Justice) V.S. Malimath, a former Chief Justice of
the Karnataka and Kerala High Courts to consider and recommend
measures for revamping the Criminal Justice System. The Malimath
Committee submitted its report in April, 2003 which contained 158
recommendations. These pertain to strengthening of training
infrastructure, forensic science laboratory and Finger Print Bureau,
enactment of new Police Act, setting up of Central Law Enforcement
agency to take care of federal crimes, separation of investigation wing
from the law and order wing in the police stations, improvement in
investigation by creating more posts, establishment of the State Security
Commission, etc.
MHA Committee to review the various recommendations and the
follow up taken:
 Hon’ble Prime Minister, while interacting with DGPs / IGPs in 2004,
appreciated the need for police reforms and declared that a Committee
would be constituted to review the status of implementation of
recommendations made by the various Commission/Committees.
Accordingly a Committee was constituted by MHA in December 2004 to
look into this aspect.
The Committee short-listed 49 recommendations from out of the
recommendations of the previous Commission/Committees on Police
Reforms as being crucial to the process of transforming the police into a
professionally competent and service oriented organization. These 49
recommendations mainly pertain to:
(I) improving professional standards of performance in urban as well
rural police stations,
(II) emphasizing the internal security role of the police,
(III) addressing the problems of recruitment, training, career progression
and service conditions of police personnel,
(IV) tackling complaints against the police with regard to non-
registration of crime, arrests, etc. and
(V) insulating police machinery from extraneous influences.
The report of the Review Committee was sent to all State
Governments/UTs Administrations to initiate action on the
recommendations concerning them and to initiate action on regular basis
on the same. The implementation of these recommendations in the States
were reviewed twice with the Chief Secretaries and DGPs of all the
States by the Union Home Secretary in September 2005 and February
2006. The Committee of Secretaries under the Cabinet Secretary also
reviewed the progress of implementation of these recommendations on
20.9.2005, 28.9.2005 and 17.2.2006 and also suggested milestones to be
achieved in a time bound manner.
 Ministry of Home Affairs also constituted a Sub-Committee of the
National Integration Council to examine the feasibility of the 49
recommendations identified by the Review Committee. The Sub-
Committee of National Integration Council has seven Chief Ministers,
three eminent persons as members apart from Union Law Minister. A
Meeting of this Committee was held on 29 th July, 2006 under the
chairmanship of Union Home Minister and it was stressed that there is an
urgent need for adopting the right perspective towards Police Reforms and
for strengthening the intelligence system, imparting special training to
police personnel and making them responsible.

Expert Committee to draft a New Model Police Act:
As one of the recommendations of Review Committee was replacement
of Police Act, 1861, the Ministry of Home Affairs set up an Expert
Committee to draft a new Model Police Act in September, 2005. The
Committee submitted a model Police Act on 30th October, 2006.

The Model Police Act emphasized the need to have a professional police
‘service’ in a democratic society, which is efficient, effective, responsive
to the needs of the people and accountable to the Rule of Law. The Act
provided for social responsibilities of the police and emphasizes that the
police would be governed by the principles of impartiality and human
rights norms, with special attention to protection of weaker sections
including minorities. The other salient features of Model Police Act
include
Functional autonomy: While recognising that the police is an agency of
the State and therefore accountable to the elected political executive, the
Committee has specifically outlined the role of Superintendence of the
State Government over the police. The Model Police Act suggested
creation of a State Police Board, Merit-based selection and appointment
of the Director General of Police, ensuring security of tenures, setting up
of Establishment Committees,
Encouraging professionalism: To ensure an efficient, responsive and
professional police service, the Model Act sought earmarking dedicated
staff for crime investigation; and distinct cadre for Civil police vis-à-vis
Armed Police,
Accountability paramount: the Act prioritised police accountability,
both for their performance and their conduct.
Improved service conditions: The Act also aimed to provide better
service conditions to the police personnel including rationalising their
working hours, one day off in each week, or compensatory benefits in
lieu. It suggested creation of a Police Welfare Bureau to take care, inter
alia, of health care, housing, and legal facilities for police personnel as
well as financial security for the next of kin of those dying in service. It
further mandates the government to provide insurance cover to all
officers, and special allowances to officers posted in special wings
commensurate with the risk involved.
Forwarding of copies of the Draft Police Act to States/UTs :
 A copy of draft Model Police Act as framed by the Committee has been
sent to States for consideration and appropriate action vide Home
Secretary d.o. letter dated 31st October, 2006.
As per available information, 15 State Governments, viz., Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Punjab,Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have formulated their
State Police Acts and 02 State Governments, viz., Gujarat and Karnataka
have amended their existing Police Acts (total 15 State Governments have
either formulated State Police Acts or amended their existing Police Acts).

Supreme Court judgment on 22.9.2006 on Police Reforms and the
follow up action:
The Supreme Court of India has passed a judgement on September 22,
2006 in Writ Petition (Civil) No.310 of 1996 – Prakash Singh and others
vs UOI and others on several issues concerning Police reforms. The
Court in the said judgement directed the Union Government and State
Governments to set up mechanisms as directed by December 31, 2006
and file affidavits of compliance by January 3, 2007. The directions
inter-alia were:
(i) Constitute a State Security Commission on any of the models
recommended by the National Human Right Commission, the Reberio
Committee or the Sorabjee Committee.
(ii) Select the Director General of Police of the State from amongst three
senior-most officers of the Department empanelled for promotion to that
rank by the Union Public Service Commission and once selected, provide
him a minimum tenure of at least two years irrespective of his date of
superannuation.
(iii) Prescribe minimum tenure of two years to the police officers on
operational duties.
(iv) Separate investigating police from law & order police, starting with
towns/ urban areas having population of ten lakhs or more, and gradually
extend to smaller towns/urban areas also,
(v) Set up a Police Establishment Board at the state level for inter alia
deciding all transfers, postings, promotions and other service related
matters of officers of and below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police, and
(vi) Constitute Police Complaints Authorities at the State and District
level for looking into complaints against police officers.
(vii) The Supreme Court also directed the Central Government to set up a
National Security Commission at the Union Level to prepare a panel for
being placed before the appropriate Appointing Authority, for selection
and placement of Chiefs of the Central Police Organisations (CPOs), who
should also be given a minimum tenure of two years, with additional
mandate to review from time to time measures to upgrade the
effectiveness of these forces, improve the service conditions of its
personnel, ensure that there is proper coordination between them and that
the forces are generally utilized for the purposes they were raised and
make recommendations in that behalf.
Out of the above seven directives, the first six were meant for the State
Governments and Union Territories while the seventh directive related
solely to the Central Government.
The matter was heard successively on different dates. On May 16, 2008,
Hon’ble Supreme Court, as regards the implementation of the various
directions made earlier in its judgement dated September 22, 2006,
directed to set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice K.T.
Thomas, former retired Judge of the Supreme Court and two other
Members. The Terms of Reference for the Committee, inter-alia, included
– to examine the affidavits filed by the different States and the Union
Territories in compliance to the Court’s directions with reference to the
ground realities; advise the Respondents wherever the implementation is
falling short of the Court’s orders, after considering the Respondents’
stated difficulties in implementation; bring to the notice of the Court any
genuine problems the Respondents may be having in view of the specific
conditions prevailing in a State or Union Territory etc.
This Committee’s term initially was directed for a period of two years.
The Committee submitted its report to Hon’ble Supreme Court and the
said report has been circulated to States/ Union Territories by the Registry
of Supreme Court on 04.10.2010.
Implementation of Supreme Court’s Judgment dated 22.9.06 by
MHA
The Government considered the matter as regards the directions
pertaining to National Security Commission. The Union Government
vide order dated 02.01.2007 set up a Committee on National Security and
Central Police Personnel Welfare. The composition of the Committee is
as under:
(i) Union Home Minister Chairman
(ii) National Security Advisor Member
(iii) Cabinet Secretary Member
(iv) Union Home Secretary Member
(v) Director, IB Member
Terms of Reference of the Committee are (i) to prepare a panel of
police officers for appointing as Head of Central Para Military Forces,
(ii) to review issues pertaining to the service conditions of the Central
police personnel and (iii) to make appropriate recommendations thereon
and also to review and make recommendation on any other matter
relevant or incidental to the above, referred to by the Government of
India. The composition of the said Committee was changed by adding
more members vide Office Memorandum dated 25.01.2007 and
13.07.2010.
The Supreme Court was not satisfied with the compliance of the direction
by Central Government and extended the time to file the affidavits by
10.04.2007 vide its order dated 11.1.2007. An application was filed by
Union Government on 12.02.2007, stating the difficulties in the
implementation of the said direction, for modifications / clarifications,
which has not yet been taken up by the Court.
Compliance of Supreme Court directions by UTs
The position varies widely in respect of UTs because of their unique
characteristics in terms of legal, administration demographic situation
specific to each Union Territory. Affidavits were filed by UTs in the
Supreme Court on or around 3.1.2007, stating difficulties like some UTs
do not have a legislature, the Administrator administers the UT under
overall control of MHA, directions of Hon’ble Court to be implemented
in consultation with and as per the directions of MHA, Soli Sorabjee
Committee is under active consideration of MHA, MHA has decided to
frame a new Police Act for the UTs as soon as possible, proposed
legislation will address the issues covered by Hon’ble Court, there is no
DGP and Administrator discharges responsibility of IGP on ex-officio
basis, posting of both the Administrator and SP is done by the MHA etc.
By its order dated 11.1.2007, the Hon’ble Court, upon consideration of
affidavits filed by Union of India, States and UTs, ordered that in so far
as directions contained in para 31(2) (selection and tenure of DGP), 31(3)
(minimum tenure of IG of Police and other officers) and 31(5) (Police
Establishment Board) of its judgment dated 22.9.2006 were concerned,
these were self-executory and that steps be taken to comply with them
forthwith and in any case, within four weeks. With regard to directions
contained in para 31(1) (State Security Commission), 31(4) (separation of
investigation) and 31 (6) (Police complaints authority) of judgment dated
22.9.2006, the Hon’ble Court granted time upto 31.3.2007.
The Ministry of Home Affairs filed another application dated 12.2.2007
in respect of UTs in the Hon’ble Court stating the difficulties in the
implementation of its directions and sought modification of orders dated
22.9.2006 and 11.1.2007. While the above application has not yet been
disposed, following steps have been taken to implement the directions
pending disposal of the application.
(a) Orders constituting a Security Commission for all UTs (except Delhi)
have been issued on 07.02.2013. It has been decided that there shall be
separate Security Commission for each of the UTs (except Delhi) with the
Union Home Secretary as Chairman. Before 07.02.2013, there was only
one Security Commission for all UTs (except Delhi). Two meetings of the
Security Commission for UTs (except Delhi) have been held on 18.1.2013
and 13.2.2013. The decision with regard to Delhi is that the Security
Commission for Delhi should be headed by the L.G., Delhi. The State
Security Commission for Government of NCT of Delhi has been
constituted and four meetings of the Commission have been held.
(b) Orders constituting Police Complaint Authorities (PCAs) in UTs have
been issued on 23rd March, 2010. In respect of Delhi, the request of Govt.
of NCT of Delhi to treat its Public Grievances Commission as the PCA
had been accepted as an interim arrangement till enactment of the Delhi
Police Act.
(c) Regarding selection methodology and minimum tenure of Chief of
Police and key functionaries such as Zonal IGs, Range DIGs, District SPs
and SHOs of UTs, the Ministry has taken a policy decision that senior
level of police functionaries would have minimum tenure of two years in
the constituents, as far as possible, subject to superannuation. UTs have
been advised through successive advisories / instructions in this regard.
The draft Delhi Police Bill, presently under consideration of the
Government provides for minimum tenure of two years, subject to their
attaining the age of superannuation for key functionaries, including the
Commissioner of Police, Joint Commissioner of Police/Additional
Commissioner of Police in charge of a Range, District DCP and SHO.
(d) Regarding separation of law and order from investigation, the
separation has to start in towns/urban areas having population of 10 lakh
or more. Only Delhi qualified under this criterion and it has been
implemented in Delhi and separate IO is appointed. The draft Delhi Police
Bill provides for creation of Crime Investigation Units in all Police
Stations for investigation of economic and heinous crimes. However, in
major Police Stations of UT of Puducherry, there is already a separation
of law and order from investigation. An enabling provision
has been made in the Punjab Police Act, 2007 as extended to Chandigarh,
regarding creation of Crime Investigation Units in police stations.
(e) Regarding setting up of a Police Establishment Board, the direction
has been complied in all UTs, keeping in view the divergent Police /
Administrative hierarchies in the various territories. However, it has been
prayed in the modification application dated 12.2.2007 filed in the
Supreme Court that Police Establishment Board may not be entrusted with
the Appellate functions as it would dilute the functional control and
authority of the supervisory police officers.
Thus in UTs, there has been a significant and substantial compliance by
the Government of India except only those issues in which appropriate
clarification and modifications have been sought in application dated
12.2.2007 before Supreme Court.
The matter last came for hearing on 16.10.2012. All the States, Union
Territories and the Union of India were directed to submit status reports
as to how far they have acted in terms of the directions which had been
given by this Court on 22nd September, 2006 by 4th December, 2012.
The Ministry of Home Affairs has filed a Status Report by way of
Affidavit in the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 26.2.2013. The matter sub-
judice and is under active consideration of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
                     SCHOOL OF LAW
               DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL STUDIES

                  UNIT 5-VICTIMOLOGY




Victims of crime- compensation to victims- under Criminal Procedure
Code-under public law remedy-need for compensation -compensation
and rehabitation-compensation as a mode of punishment- constitutional
perspective of compensation-Role of National Human Rights
Commission.


The information provided by these surveys shows that victimization is a
frequent occurrence, involving loss, injury and trauma. It shows that
police and particularly court data underestimated the extent of crime.
Crime affects the individual victims and their families. Many crimes also
cause significant financial loss to the victims. The impact of crime on the
victims and their families ranges from serious physical and psychological
injuries to mild disturbances. The Canadian Centre of Justice Statistics
states that about one third of violent crimes resulted in victims having
their day-to-day activities disrupted for a period of one day (31%), while
in 27% of incidents, the disruption lasted for two to three days (Aucoin &
Beauchamp, 2007). In 18% of cases, victims could not attend to their
routine for more than two weeks. A majority of incidents caused
emotional impact (78%). Irrespective of the type of victimization, one-
fifth of the victims felt upset and expressed confusion and or frustration
due to their victimization. Overall, victims felt less safe than non-victims.
For example, only a smaller proportion of violent crime victims (37%)
reported feeling very safe walking alone after dark than non-victims
(46%). Just less than one-fifth (18%) of women who had been victims of
violence reported feeling very safe walking alone after dark when
compared to their male counterparts.


The impact of crime is perhaps best thought of as a product of the
perceived seriousness or intensity of these effects plus their duration from
the victim’s own standpoint. Defined in this way, the term refers to an
inescapably subjective assessment and evaluation by the victim of the
overall consequences of the offence. This includes its meaning and
significance for the victim, and whether or not it has resulted in a change
of self-perception by which the victim comes to perceive himself or
herself as a victim. Thus, the ‘impact’ of a crime has a crucial bearing on
the way the victim interprets and responds to it during the second phase
of the victimization process, as distinct from whatever tangible or
intangible ‘effects’ may be associated with the primary phase.
Unfortunately, most researchers have tended to conflate these two terms
and to treat them as interchangeable, which has added to the
methodological problems mentioned above, though it might help to
account for the seemingly confused nature of many of the findings.

The UN Declaration on Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime
and Abuse of Power draws attention to the fact that crime is not just a
violation of a criminal code but also causes harm to victims, including
economic loss, emotional suffering and physical or mental injury.
The UN Handbook divides the impact of crime on victims into:
•The    physical     and     financial impact of victimization
•Psychological injury and social cost

• Secondary victimization¨ from the criminal justice system and society.


Victim and criminal justice system

India’s criminal justice system is from the British criminal justice
sysytem. There is a clear Doctrine separation of power by the Legislature,
Executive, and Judiciary. The judiciary is independent and there is a free
press. The penal philosophy in India has accepted the concepts of
prevention of crime and treatment and rehabilitation of criminals, which
we can see by many judgments of the Supreme Court and High Court of
India.

Victims have no rights under the criminal justice system, and the state
undertakes the full responsibility to prosecute and punish the offenders by
treating the victims as mere witnesses.


Constitution, Criminal Law and Procedure:

The Indian criminal justice system is governed overall by four laws:

(i) The Constitution of India

(ii) The Indian Penal Code

(iii) The Code of Criminal Procedure of India

(iv) The Indian Evidence Act
The legislative power is vested with the Union Parliament and the state
legislatures and the law-making functions are divided into the Union List,
State List and Concurrent List in the Indian Constitution. The Union
Parliament alone can make laws under the Union list and the state
legislatures alone can make laws under the State list, whereas both the
Parliament and the State Legislatures are empowered to make laws on the
subjects mentioned in the Concurrent List of the Constitution.

The Constitution of India guarantees certain fundamental rights to all
citizens. Under the Constitution, criminal jurisdiction belongs
concurrently to the central government and the governments of all the
states. At the national level, two major criminal codes, the Indian Penal
Code, 1861 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, deal with all
substantive crimes and their punishments, and the criminal procedure
respectively to be followed by the criminal justice agencies, i.e. the police,
prosecution and judiciary during the process of investigation, prosecution
and trial of an offence. These two criminal laws are applicable throughout
India and take precedence over any state legislation. All major offences
are defined in the Indian Penal Code and these apply to resident foreigners
and citizens alike. Besides the Indian Penal Code, many special laws have
also been enacted to tackle new crimes. The Indian criminal justice system
has four subsystems which include: Legislature, (Union Parliament and
State Legislatures), Law enforcement (Police), Adjudication (Courts), and
Corrections (adult and juvenile correctional institutions, Probation and
other non-institutional treatment). The legal system in India is adversarial.

Victimization
Perhaps the first theory to explain victimization was developed by
Wolfgang in his study of murders in Philadelphia. Victim precipitation
theory argues that there are victims who actually initiated the
confrontation that led to their injuries and deaths. Although this was the
result of the study of only one type of crime, the idea was first raised that
victims also might play a role in the criminal activity.
Victimization is a highly complex process encompassing a number of
possible elements. The first element (often referred to as ‘primary
victimization’) comprises whatever interaction may have taken place
between offender and ‘victim’ during the commission of the offence, plus
any after effects arising from this interaction or from the offence itself.
The second element encompasses ‘the victim’s’ reaction to the offence,
including any change in self-perception that may result from it, plus any
formal response that s/he may choose to make to it. The third element
consists of any further interactions that may take place between ‘the
victim’ and others, including the various criminal justice agencies with
whom s/he may come into contact as a result of this response. Where this
interaction has a further negative impact on the victim, it is often referred
to as ‘secondary victimization’.


Primary victimization

The ‘primary victimization’ phase of the process, it may be helpful to
begin by distinguishing between the ‘effects’ or consequences that are
known to result from crimes of different kinds and their ‘impact’ on
victims themselves. Certain crimes entail physical effects, which are
likely to involve some degree of pain and suffering, and may also entail
loss of dexterity, some degree of incapacity and/or possible temporary or
permanent disfigurement. Many crimes also have financial effects, which
may be either direct. Very often crime can result in additional costs that
might be incurred, for example, in seeking medical treatment or legal
advice, or loss of income as a result of attending to the crime and its
aftermath, or possible loss of future earning potential. Certain crimes can
also have psychological and emotional effects upon victims including
depression, anxiety and fear, all of which can adversely affect their quality
of life.
Secondary victimization

Secondary victimization refers to the victimization that occurs not as a
direct result of the criminal act but through the response of institutions
and individuals to the victim. Institutionalized secondary victimization is
most apparent within the criminal justice system. At times it may amount
to a complete denial of human rights to victims from particular cultural
groups, classes or a particular gender, through a refusal to recognize their
experience as criminal victimization. It may result from intrusive or
inappropriate conduct by police or other criminal justice personnel. More
subtly, the whole process of criminal investigation and trial may cause
secondary victimization, from investigation, through decisions on
whether or not to prosecute, the trial itself and the sentencing of the
offender, to his or her eventual release. Secondary victimization through
the process of criminal justice may occur because of difficulties in
balancing the rights of the victim against the rights of the accused or the
offender. More normally, however, it occurs because those responsible
for ordering criminal justice processes and procedures do so without
taking into account the perspective of the victim.


Re – victimization

Crime is not distributed randomly. According to a recent estimate, based
on data from the British Crime Survey, 44% of all crime is concentrated
on 4% of victims. (Farrell and Pease, 2001) The following table shows
the proportion of victims in this source who will be a victim of a similar
offence within a year of the event.


Some of the repeat victimization is due to the victim living or being
associated with the offender. Wife battering tends to happen more than
once to the same victim who continues to live with the same man. This is
also true of sexual incidents.
Some of the repeat victimization in property offences is due to the location
of the victim or their residence. Those who live close to a concentration
of potential offenders in residences that are unprotected are particularly at
risk of repeat victimization.


Repeat victimization is disillusioning to victims who report their
experience to the police and the criminal justice system because they were
not protected. Being victimized a second time increases the psychological
trauma of the event.


Self - victimization

In this category person himself commits such act which result in his own
victimization we can say up to certain extent that it can be included in
repeat victimization only as it result from wrong persons company, wrong
habit, etc.


Victimology
Diverse views exist on the focus and place of the discipline of
Victimology. While some believe that Victimology should function as an
independent area of enquiry, others view it as a subfield of Criminology.
A second issue concerns the breadth of victim related issues to be covered
in the field of Victimology. Some scholars advocate that Victimology
should limit itself to the study of victim-offender interaction. Others argue
that the needs of crime victims, functioning of the organizations and
institutions which respond to these needs, and the emerging roles and
responsibility for crime victims within the CJS are important areas of
inquiry for Victimology. A third issue is the breadth of the definition of
the term ‘victim’. One approach is to limit the concept to victims of
traditional crimes such as murder, rape, robbery, burglary etc. However,
it has also been proposed to include a broader definition of the concept by
covering groups such as prisoners, immigrants, subjects of medical
experimentation, and persons charged with crime but not proved guilty.

Evolution of Victimology in India

At present, a crime victim or a complainant is only a witness for the
prosecution. Whereas the accused has several rights, the victim has no
right to protect his or her interest during criminal proceedings.
Sometimes, even the registering of a criminal case in the police station
depends upon the mercy of the police officer: victims suffer injustice
silently and in extreme cases, take the law into their own hands and seek
revenge on the offender.


Though no separate law for victims of crime has yet been enacted in India,
the silver lining is that victim justice has been rendered through
affirmative action and orders of the apex court. Besides, many national
level Commissions and Committees have strongly advocated victims’
rights and reiterated the need for a victims’ law. Studies on crime victims
by researchers started in India only during the late 1970s. Early studies
were on victims of dacoit gangs (i.e. gangs of armed robbers) in the
Chambal valley (Singh, 1978); victims of homicide (Rajan & Krishna,
1981); and victims of motor vehicles accidents (Khan & Krishna, 1981).
Singh and Jatar (1980) studied whether compensation paid to victims of
dacoits in Chambal Valley was satisfactory or not. Since the 1980s, many
scholars have conducted studies in Victimology, which have been
published.

Theory of victimology

The concept of victim dates back to ancient cultures and civilizations,
such as the ancient Hebrews. Its original meaning was rooted in the idea
of sacrifice or scapegoat -- the execution or casting out of a person or
animal to satisfy a deity or hierarchy. Over the centuries, the word victim
came to have additional meanings. During the founding of victimology in
the 1940s, victimologists such as Mendel son, Von Hentig, and Wolfgang
tended to use textbook or dictionary definitions of victims as hapless
dupes who instigated their own victimizations. This notion of "victim
precipitation" was vigorously attacked by feminists in the 1980s, and was
replaced by the notion of victims as anyone caught up in an asymmetric
relationship or situation. "Asymmetry" means anything unbalanced,
exploitative, parasitical, oppressive, destructive, alienating, or having
inherent suffering. In this view, victimology is all about power
differentials. Today, the concept of victim includes any person who
experiences injury, loss, or hardship due to any cause. Also today, the
word victim is used rather indiscriminately; e.g., cancer victims, holocaust
victims, accident victims, victims of injustice, hurricane victims, crime
victims, and others. The thing that all these usages have in common is an
image of someone who has suffered injury and harm by forces beyond his
or her control.


From this discussion we can say that there are various laws relating to
victim and their protection. Now big question before us is its
implementation. There is a provision of compensation and protection of
victim but the question is whether this is sufficient for victim. For example
if a person is killed by other person and the person who died is the only
bread earner in his family then what is the amount of compensation is to
be paid to his family member. In one of the case Indian Supreme court in
case of death of a person order the compensation of only 1.5 lakh and that
also after 5 to 6 year of commission of crime (SR 6197/2012). Now can
we consider it as a proper order? According to UN declaration there
should be law on it and that is the reason for which India has made law
for victims. The Indian criminal justice system is mostly emphasized on
the accuse only and not victim, which we can see.

The victimization is relation between victim and offender, and
victimology is a science of study of victimization. When we see that there
is direct relation between offender and victim it is very difficult to protect
the victim from the offender and I personally think that this is the only
reason for very low rate of conviction in our country.


There are various countries in which the victim protection program is
going on and the result is very good as there is no scope of any
temporizing the victim or witness. If victim feel themselves safe then only
they can speak in courts. When victim is easily approached by the
offender it is really difficult to work even police is not taking proper note
of this issues.


When person is suffering from such mental trauma it is very difficult to
work with them and so we have to study the science behind it. And by
using the scientific method we can get the result and make some good for
the victim. According to me I don’t find the concept of victimology in
practice in general, it is only on paper in our country. If we take a serious
note of it then our criminal justice system will improve a lot and will bring
some positive change in governance of the nation.


                    Victimology and Victims’ Rights

Introduction
‘Why in history has everyone always focused on the guy with the big
stick, the hero, the activist, to the neglect of the poor slob who is at the
end of the stick, the victim, the passivist –or maybe, the poor slob (in
bandages) isn’t all that much of a passivist victim –maybe he asked for
it?’ [Hans von Hentig –The Criminal and his Victim –1948] The quote
above illustrates that, in the past, there was a lopsided focus on the
criminal event and the person acting in violation of criminal laws. For
centuries, legal philosophers and lawyers have been preoccupied with the
principles of criminal law, the criteria for criminalization, and the rights
of the defendant; while criminologists typically concentrated on the
characteristics of criminals, what caused their criminal propensity and
how to prevent crime. Their point-of-departure was always the offender,
never the person who suffered as a result of the crime. It was only fairly
recent, around the 1940s, that academics also started to take an interest in
victims of crime and their standing in criminal procedure. 'The scientific
study of crime victims is called „victimology‟, after Benjamin
Mendelsohn who coined the term in 1947. Comparable to criminology,
where the offender plays a central role, the focus of victimologists lies
with the victim and the different aspects of victimization. Victimology is:
‘he scientific study of the extent, nature, and causes of criminal
victimization, its consequences for the persons involved and the reactions
hereto by society, in particular the police and the criminal justice system
as well as voluntary workers and professional helpers.’ Causes of
Victimization One of the first aspects that scholars started to study was
the role the victim himself had played in the commission of the crime.
Instead of studying the offender in isolation, crime victimization usually
involves at least two persons, and the criminal event may be the result of
a certain dynamic between these two persons. What personal
characteristics and what types of behaviours from the side of the victim
influence the risk of falling victim to a crime? Early „victimologists‟, such
as Benjamin Mendelsohn, Hans von Hentig, Marvin Wolfgang, Stephen
Schafer and Menachem Amir, investigated which behavioural,
psychological and biological factors determined a person’s propensity to
crime victimization and how his behavior related to the degree of
culpability in the criminal event („victim precipitation‟). The result was
often a typology ranging from victims who were „completely innocent‟
to victims who were actually more blameworthy than the person who
committed the crime. Some of these primary studies had a negative,
victim-blaming connotation, suggesting that victims were largely
responsible for their own victimization. Nowadays, victimological studies
into the causes of victimization tend to focus more on the concept of
„victim facilitation‟ –which unintentional actions on the part of a person
facilitate in his victimization –rather than the concepts of „victim
precipitation‟ or „victim provocation‟, which suggest blame and
responsibility and have a negative undertone. Modern-day studies have
largely moved away from investigating the degree to which the victim can
be held responsible for his own victimization and have tried to come up
with theories that explain victimization without necessarily placing blame
upon the victim. An example of such a theory is the one on repeat
victimization as proposed by, inter alia, Ken Pease and Graham Farrell.
They proved that, contrary to general beliefs, people do not run an equal
chance of victimization, but that victims run a far greater risk of becoming
victims again. In other words, a small proportion of the general public
experiences a large proportion of all crimes. This is true for domestic
violence, but also for property crimes, such as burglary. Pease and Farrell
discovered, for instance, that a house that has been burgled before is at
greater risk to be burgled again. The fact that the burglar knows how to
get in and knows what loot will await him can explain the increased risk
of re-victimization. He even knows the best time for committing another
burglary: After approximately one month the insurance company will
have cashed out and most goods will have been replaced by brand new
items. In the mind of a burglar, the fact that the burglary succeeded the
first time, increases the chance that it will succeed a second time as well.
One of the solutions to end this victimization cycle is to concentrate on
victim oriented crime prevention. Vulnerable characteristics of the house
–such as poor lighting or lack of an alarm system –need to be tackled to
make them less attractive for burglars. Nature and Extent of Victimization
A second goal of victimologists is to measure the nature and extent of
crime victimization in the general (or a specific) population. Crime
victimization can be measured in various ways. A first source of
information could be the official crime statistics gathered by the police
and the criminal justice system. The problem with these data is that they
only represent a certain (small) percentage of all the crimes that have
occurred in reality. There is a so-called dark number: the number of
crimes that –due to underreporting or some other reason –do not come to
the attention of the police. Furthermore, official crime data seldom
contain detailed information on the victims that were harmed by the crime,
because this information is less relevant for prosecutorial purposes. A
more accurate and reliable manner to measure crime victimization is
therefore to conduct national or international crime victimization surveys
and ask a representative sample of the general population directly whether
they have been victimized. Although these surveys have their limitations
too –victims may, for instance, not be able to recall what has happened to
them –but these are less detrimental to the generalizability of the results
than official police data. A first remarkable finding from the numerous
crime victimization surveys that have been conducted since the 1960s is
that crime victimization is widespread. Research has shown that almost
everyone will, at some point during his or her life, become the victim of
theft or property damage and that almost all men will have suffered at
least one incident of criminal bodily injury. It turns out that property
crimes are more prevalent than violent crimes, with theft being the most
common property crime and simple assault the most common violent
crime. Crime victimization surveys also demonstrated that men have an
increased risk of falling victim to a violent crime in comparison to women.
Only in the case of rape and other forms of sexual violence are women
more likely to be victimized. Females were also more likely to be
victimized by an intimate partner, while violence perpetrated by a stranger
was typically targeted at male victims. Furthermore, teenagers and
adolescents run a higher risk of being victimized – which decreases
throughout adulthood –and the same goes for inhabitants of urban areas
and persons with a „risky‟ profession (police officers, taxi drivers, prison
guards, prostitutes). Other characteristics linked to a higher risk of crime
victimization are related to a person‟s behaviour. Spending more hours
outside ones‟ home, going out at night, frequenting pubs and discos,
associating with criminals or engaging in criminal activities yourself are
all risk factors that increase the likelihood of ever experiencing crime
victimization. These behavioursbear witness of a „risky lifestyle‟.
Consequences of Victimization The consequences of crime victimization
also form part of the victimological canon. These consequences can
broadly be categorized under three headings: physical injury, mental
health consequences, and economic consequences. Physical injuries can
vary from light bruises and scratches to permanent disfigurements or even
death. Economic costs derive from direct property losses, costs for
medical care, legal costs, a reduced ability to earn an income, or
immaterial damages such as costs related to pain and suffering or loss of
quality of life. Mental health consequences are, for instance, depression,
reduction in self-esteem and anxiety, while severe forms of violence can
even result in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Although crime
victimization is commonly associated with trauma and PTSD,
victimological studies have shown that most crime victims do not develop
this psychiatric condition. The chance that someone develops PTSD as a
result of a crime largely depends on the type and seriousness of the crime,
the victim‟s social context, and pre-existing psychological characteristics.
Despite the fact that it is normal for victims of severe forms of violence
to display symptoms associated with PTSD –such as re-experiencing the
traumatic event, avoiding certain places or being overly vigilant –most
people do not develop PTSD. Only when these – and other –serious
complaints last for more than one month can PTSD be diagnosed.8Most
victims, however, are surprisingly resilient and their symptoms usually
diminish without professional support. Still the impact of crime in terms
of mental and physical health issues and economic costs should not be
underestimated. The costs for crime victims are in the order of tens of
billions on an annual basis. Reactions to Victimization A final aspect that
academics are interested in is the reaction from other people and society
at large to victimization. One would suspect that, given the detrimental
effects of crime victimization, victims would meet with sympathy and
respect everywhere they go. Surprisingly, quite he opposite is true. Many
victims are blamed for what happened, their characters and appearances
are derogated, and it is often believed that they „got what they deserved‟.
The underlying mechanism causing this negative reaction to crime
victimization may be the prevalent belief in a just world. Melvin Lerner
discovered that people generally assume that good things happen to good
people and bad things to bad people.9This belief in a „universal moral
balance‟ is important for people to maintain their own well-being and
guide their actions: As long as one acts in accordance to certain moral
standards, nothing bad can happen. The victimization of innocent people,
however, threatens this „justice motive‟ and causes distress. It implies
that „bad‟ things can happen to „good‟ people too. One of the strategies
to restore the belief in a just world is to attribute blame to a person who
has suffered from a crime, to derogate this persons‟ character or to
distance oneself psychologically from this person. People‟s suffering is
rationalized on the grounds that they deserve it. The problem is that not
only „ordinary‟ people share this delusional belief in a just world, but that
criminal justice officials may (subconsciously) be guided by this principle
as well. Victim’s Justice in India At the International arena, the adoption
by the General Assembly of the United Nations at its 96th Plenary on
November 29, 1985, of the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for
Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, hereafter UN Declaration)
constituted an important recognition of the need to set norms and
minimum standards in international and national legal framework for the
rights of victims of crime. The UN Declaration recognised four major
components of the rights of victims of crime: (i) access to justice and fair
treatment; (ii) restitution (iii) compensation (iv) rehabilitation. i. Access
to justice and fair treatment – This right includes access to the mechanisms
of justice and to prompt redress, right to be informed of victim‟s rights,
right to proper assistance throughout the legal process and right to
protection of privacy and safety. ii. Restitution – including return of
property or payment for the harm or loss suffered; where public officials
or other agents have violated criminal laws, the victims should receive
restitution from the State. iii. Compensation – when compensation is not
fully available from the offender or other sources, State should provide
financial compensation at least in violent crimes, resulting in bodily injury
for which national funds should be established. iv. Assistance – victims
should receive the necessary material, medical, psychological and social
assistance through governmental, voluntary and community based means.
Police, justice, health and social service personnel should receive training
in this regard. Historically speaking the victim‟s justice in India, the
references are from the Manusmiriti to compensation being paid to the
victims of criminal offences. Even in the recent times the AngloSaxon
system of Criminal Justice was introduced in India, the victim was not
completed neglected. References to victim‟s compensation are also found
in the „Code of Hammurabi‟. It is said that it was quite common for the
early civilisation to extract payments for the victims from the offenders,
which process in not known as restitution. However, the picture began to
change with modern criminal justice in which the government assumes
responsibility for dispensing justice by bringing the offenders to book, but
it also meant that, with the appropriation of the fines to the State Coffers,
the victim was left with ineffective remedies. As a modern state emerged
and the government took an itself the responsibility of enforcing justice,
the offender gradually became in the criminal justice arena. The criminal
justice system in India is basically concerned with criminals, whether it is
their conviction, treatment, reformation or rehabilitation. The purpose of
criminal justice system appears, at present, to be confined to the simple
object of ascertaining guilt or innocence of an accused. The role of the
victim of a crime in the present criminal justice system is restricted to that
of a witness for the prosecution – even though he or she is a person who
has suffered harm – physical, mental, emotional, economical or
impairment of his/her fundamental rights. Since, the central object of legal
process is to promote and maintain public confidence in the
administration of justice, there is an urgent need for giving a well-defined
status to the victim of crime under the criminal law. His interest in getting
the offender punished cannot be ignored or completely subordinated to
the social control by the State. Neither at the stage of the framing of a
charge or passing of an order of discharge, are the views of the victim
ascertained, let alone considered. He is not to be consulted during the trial.
Even after the case ends up in a conviction, it is the State, which defends
the judgment of the trail court in appeal, if any, filed against the conviction
and sentence. It is necessary to give a central role of the victims of crime,
as otherwise, the victim will remain discontented and may develop a
tendency to take law into his own hands in order to seek revenge and pose
a threat to the maintenance of Rule of Law, essential for sustaining a
democracy. This challenge was noticed by the Supreme Court in P.
Ramchandra Rao v. State of Karnataka, when it expressed its concern for
the plight of the victims of crime who, if left without a remedy might
“resort to taking revenge by unlawful means resulting in further increase
in the crimes and criminals”. As at present, broadly speaking, there are
two systems of dispensation of criminal justice-Adversarial and
Inquisitorial. The system, followed in India, for dispensation of Criminal
Justice System, is Adversarial System of common law inherited from the
British rulers. In this system the accused is presumed to be innocent and
the burden of proving his guilt beyond reasonable doubt lies on the
prosecution. The accused also enjoys the “right of silence” and he cannot
be compelled to answer the queries. In the adversarial system truth is
supposed to emerge from the respective versions of the facts presented by
the Persecution and the defense before a neutral judge. The judge acts as
a referee and decides whether the prosecution has been able to prove the
guilt of an accused beyond a reasonable doubt. The system, per-se appears
to be fair and justified, but viewed from the perspective of the victim, it is
heavily loaded in favour of the accused and it insensitive to the rights of
the victims or their plight because generally the judge in his anxiety to
maintain his position of neutrality, fails to take initiative to find out the
truth. In order to respond to the interests of victims more effectively, it is
important to ensure that they play an active role during investigation and
trial. The problem with the existing statutory scheme is that once an
investigation starts, the role of the victim is minimal. In many instances
the police personnel proceed very slowly on investigations, thereby losing
out on the opportunity to gather relevant evidence and opening up the
possibility of corruption. Conversely, investigations involving well-
connected and influential persons as victims tend to be taken up in a
relatively expeditious manner. Even during the course of trial, the
victim‟s role is confined to that of acting as a „prosecution witness‟ since
the prosecution is entirely conducted by the State. The lawyers working
as Public Prosecutors at the district level often lack the necessary
competence and function in a manner that is not accountable to the victim
in any way. As a result trials are unduly delayed either on account of the
disinterest or conversely the heavy workload faced by the Public
Prosecutors. The Justice Malimath Committee on Criminal Justice
Reforms (2003), Second Administrative Reforms Commission in 5th
Report on “Public Order” (2007) and Law Commission of India‟s 226th
Report on “Compensation to the Victims” (2010) have recommended
various measures for victims empowerment and rehabilitation. Remedial
Measures to Victim’s Empowerment Over a period of time, the following
measures have been initiated in India for empowerment of victims of
crime and human rights violations: Legislative and Administrative
Measures i) Victims‟ Compensation in the Criminal Procedure Code,
1973 u/s 357-59 Section 357(1) concerns itself with the grant of
compensation out of the fine imposed on the offender at the time of
sentencing the convict. Sub-clause 1(a) of Section 357 empowers a
criminal court to indemnify the prosecuting agency against expenses
incurred in the prosecution by way of fine imposed on the convict. Sub-
Clause 1(b) of Section 357 entitles the court to award compensation for
any loss or injury caused by the offence to the victim but this is subject to
the condition that compensation must be recoverable by the victim in a
civil court. This condition i.e. the word “recoverable” may be construed
in two ways: 1. That the victim is entitled to sue the offender for damages
in a civil court and that the offender is liable to pay, 2. That the offender
had the capacity to pay the compensation. Section-358 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 provides for payment of compensation up to Rs.
100/- to persons groundlessly arrested. While sub-clause of Section 359
of the criminal procedure code, 1973 empowers a court to award costs in
non-cognisable cases to the complainant who is generally a victim of the
crime, from the offender, providing further that if the offender did not pay
costs as ordered, he shall suffer simple imprisonment up to 30 days. The
recent amendment in the of the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act, 2008 has provided long debated issue of victims‟ compensation
scheme. Besides victims compensation scheme the CrPC amendment Act
has also empowered the victims to engage an advocate of his choice with
the permission of the court to assess the prosecution (Section-24). This
lawyer will also be authorised to present separate arguments, examine
witnesses and produced evidence if permitted by the court. This aside, the
victim may file an appeal against an acquittal of the accused, conviction
for a lesser offence or the award of an inadequate sentence (Section-372).
These provisions have given a legitimate space to the victims in the
Criminal Justice System. In crux the following are the salient features of
the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 2008: 1) “Section 357A.
(1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central
Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose
overcompensation to the victim or his dependents who have suffered loss
or injury as a result of the crime and who require rehabilitation. 2)
Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the
District Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority, as
the case may be, shall decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded
under the scheme referred to in sub-section (1). 3) If the trial Court, at the
conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation awarded under
Section 357 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the cases end
in acquittal or discharge and the victim has to be rehabilitated, it may
make recommendation for compensation. 4) Where the offender is not
traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes
place, the victim or his dependents may make an application to the State
or the District Legal Services Authority for award of compensation. 5) On
receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section
(4) the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after due
enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the enquiry within
two months. 6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the
case may be, to alleviate the suffering of the victim, may order for
immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits to be made available free
of cost on the certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the
officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the area
concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems
fit.” Compensation to the Victims in the Special Laws a) Under the
Probation of Offenders Act,1958 According to Section 5 of Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958, a court directing the release of an offender under
Section 3 or under Section 4 of the Act may, if it thinks fit, at the same
time, a further order directing him to pay such compensation as the court
thinks reasonable for the loss or injury caused to any person due to the
commission of the offence by him. b) The Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 The Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989,
provides the monetary relief to the victims of crime ranging from Rs
25,000 to 2,00,000 depends on the nature of offence and circumstances of
the case. Generally 25 per cent of the monetary support is provided at the
time of submission of charge sheet, 75 per cent at the time of conviction
by the lower court but in case of heinous crimes as murder, the victims
are provided 75 per cent relief after the post-mortem and 25 per cent at
the time of conviction by the lower court. In case assault on the women
with intention to dishonour or outrage her modesty and exploit her
sexually, 50 per cent of the monetary relief is given at the time of medical
examination and the remaining 50 per cent of the relief is given at the end
of trial respective of the outcome thereof. However, the field reality is that
majority of cases registered under SC/ST Act are not reaching to the
logical conclusion. As the matter of fact in 70 per cent cases the accused
are not punished by the court due to procedure lapses. The recent example
is judgment delivered by Nagpur Bench Bombay High Court in CBI v
Sakru Mahgu Binjavar & Others. This judgment has received sharp
reactions from Dalit leaders as well as human right activists across the
country broadly on two aspects; i) It commutes the Trial Court‟s death
penalty for the accused to life imprisonment; ii) It refuges to accept the
killings as Caste atrocity. In view of this, how far the provisions of the
Acts in providing monetary relief to the victims of caste atrocities could
have been useful is the subject of further inquiry? Domestic Violence Act,
2005 This Act provides for more effective protection of the rights of
women guaranteed under the Constitution who are victims of violence of
any kind occurring within the family setting as domestic violence. In this
context, Sections 20 to 24 are relevant in protection of victims of domestic
violence through compensatory justice. The trial court may on an
application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing
the respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries,
including mental torture and emotional distress, caused by the acts of
domestic violence committed by that respondent. The Custodial Crimes
(Prevention, Protection and Compensation) Bill, 2006 The proposed bill
aims to prevention and protection against custodial crimes and also
provides compensation to the victims of custodial offences. The
Communal Violence Bill, 2005 The Communal Violence (Prevention,
Control and Rehabilitation of Victims) Bill, 2005 provides for (a)
prevention and control of communal violence, (b) speedy investigation
and trials, and (c) rehabilitation of victims. Currently, the National
Advisory council( NAC), Government of India has constituted a core
group of human rights activists to examine the efficacy and effective of
the bill in the context of rights based approach to the victims of communal
violence. Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010 The Prevention of Torture Bill
(passed by Lok Sabha without any debate on 6 May 2010 and Rajya Sabha
referred the Bill to a select committee on August 31, 2010), in its present
form, is being dubbed by the commentators as the “ Sanction of Torture
Bill”. The critique of the proposed bill is made on mainly on two aspects-
definition of torture and weak redressal mechanism; and lack of
compensatory provisions for the survivors of torture and their families.
Administrative Measures During last decade, the Government of India has
framed various schemes to strengthen victim‟s justice however their
implementation at grassroots level has always been questioned due to
procedural lapses. Among others, the following schemes are worth
mentioning; a) Scheme for relief and rehabilitation of victims of rape b)
Scheme for compensation to the victims of violence by left wing
extremists c) Central Schemes for Assistance to victims of terrorist and
communal violence d) Rehabilitation packages to provides relief to the
victims of 1984 riots e) Ujjawala Scheme for prevention of trafficking and
rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of trafficking for
commercial and sexual exploitation Schemes for relief and rehabilitation
of victims of rape The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in a leading decision in
case of the Domestic WorkingWomen‟s Forum v. Union of India and
others writ petition (CRL)No.362/ 93 had directed the National
Commission for Women to evolve a “scheme so as to wipe out the tears
of unfortunate victims of rape‟‟. The Supreme Court observed that having
regard to the Directive principles contained in the Article 38(1) of the
Constitution, it was necessary to set up criminal Injuries Compensation
Board, as rape victims besides the mental anguish, frequently incur
substantial financial loss and in some cases are too traumatised to continue
in employment. The Court further directed that compensation for victims
shall be awarded by the Court on conviction of the offender and by the
Criminal Injuries compensation board whether or not a conviction has
taken place. This landmark case gives the relief and rehabilitation of the
rape victims under the following ways and means; 1) A rape victim will
be entitled to get compensation up to of Rs. 2,00,000, provided she
testifies in a court of law against the accused. 2) Constitution of Criminal
Injuries Compensation Board at District/State/ National Level. 3) The
Board shall take into account the pain, suffering and shock as well as loss
of earnings due to pregnancy and the expenses of child birth if this occurs
as a result of rape. 4) Provision of budgetary requirements for the scheme,
which would be transferred to the States as Grants-in-Aid; 5) Setting up
of District Level Committees headed by District Magistrate, to consider
the claims. Central Schemes for Assistance to victims of Terrorist and
Communal Violence In India, there is no comprehensive legislation for
compensation to the victims of terrorism. However, Government of India,
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), has notified a scheme entitled
“Assistance to Victims of Terrorists and Communal Violence” which is
being implemented with effect from April 1, 2008 (detailed scheme is
annexed). The scheme provides financial assistance to the family
member(s) in the event of death or permanent incapacitation of the victim
in terrorist violence. The assistance would be given over and above ex-
gratia or any other relief from the State government or its agencies. The
salient features of the scheme are summarized below: i) An amount upto
Rs.3 lakhs would be given to the affected family, irrespective of the
number of deaths in the family in a particular incident; ii) The principal
amount would be deposited in a nationalised bank for lock-in period for 3
years and the interest on the above sum will be credited to the
beneficiaries‟ saving account on quarterly basis; iii) A district level
committee under the chairmanship of District Magistrate will identify
beneficiaries; iv) While examining eligibility claims, the District
Committee would look into the FIR, postmortem certificate etc. for
determining the rightful beneficiary/ claimant; v) The MHA after
examining the case would issue the cheque in the name of the beneficiary
and this would be sent to the District Magistrate (DM) for disbursement;
vi) In case of employment if given to any family member of a victim of
terrorist violence, the family will not be entitled to assistance under this
scheme; vii) Those permanently incapacitated, and the member of the
victims killed/ permanently incapacitated in the terrorist violence would
be give a health card by the District Health Society funded under National
Rural Health Mission, Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi, and the National Trauma
Care Project. This card will provide free medical treatment for victims
and their families. An analysis of this scheme shows that the scheme is
mainly based on welfare approach and not on rights based perspective.
The victim does not have any right to get compensation; however, the
financial assistance would depend on recommendations made by the
bureaucrats, police officials and the doctors. Further, this does not include
any component for other support systems such as counseling, assessment
of loss/damage/property, financial expenses and other out of pocket
expenses by victims and their families and also medical expenses incurred
in the private hospitals. The procedure to get the financial support is very
cumbersome and time consuming. The whole process gives lot of
discretionary powers to the bureaucrats and therefore this will result in
delay in the disbursement of the compensation the victims. The element
of corruption may also not be ruled out while awarding the compensation
for the victims. \ Ujjawala Scheme for victims of trafficking for
commercial and sexual exploitation Ujjawala is a comprehensive scheme
for the prevention of trafficking, rescue and rehabilitation of women and
child victims of trafficking for commercial sexual exploitation in India. It
was launched in 2007 by the Ministry of Women and Child Development.
It consists of certain mechanisms for the reintegration and repatriation of
victims including cross border victims.The Target Group ormain
beneficiaries of this scheme are women and child victims who have
beentrafficked for commercial sexual exploitation as well as those women
and children who are vulnerable to becoming victims of this crime. These
vulnerable sections include slum dwellers, children of sex workers,
refugees, homeless victims of natural disasters and so on. This scheme is
being implemented by various Non Governmental Organisations to
provide direct aid and benefit to victims of trafficking. Immediate relief
to victims includes the provision of food, shelter, trauma care and
counseling to the rescued victims. Later on, victims are provided skill
training, capacity building, job placement and guidance in income
generating activities to empower them and help them live independently.
Broadly, this scheme contents five components-prevention, rescuer,
rehabilitation, re-integration and repatriation to the victims of trafficking.
Payment of Compensation ordered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
respect to convicts in the prisons Advancing the philosophy of restorative
justice, the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Honorable High Court of
Gujarat (1998 7 SCC 392) has directed that the prisoners should be paid
equitable wages for the work done by them, every prisoner must be paid
wages for the work done by him and the state concern make law for setting
a part a portion of the wages earned by the prisoners to be paid as
compensation to deserving victims of the offence. This is a significant
development in providing restorative justice to the victims of crime.
Recent Development More recently, Government of India, Ministry of
Home Affairs has issued two advisories for all for all States and Union
Territories to prevent – victimisation of vulnerable sections of society
such as women, children and marginalised people etc. Broadly, the
advisories focused on the following measures to be taken into
considerations by the criminal justice functionaries in safeguarding the
human rights of the victims of crime. I) Set up exclusive „Crime against
Women/Children‟ desks in each police station. There should be no delay,
whatsoever, in registration of FIRs in all cases of crime against children.
All out efforts should be made to apprehend all the accused named in the
FIR immediately so as to generate confidence in the victims and their
family members. The administration and police should play a more
proactive role in detection and investigation of crime against children and
also ensuring that there is no under reporting. II) Cases of crime against
children should be thoroughly investigated and charge sheets against the
accused persons should be filed within three months from the date of
occurrence without compromising on the quality of investigation. Proper
supervision of such cases should be ensured from recording of FIR to the
disposal of the case. Speedy investigation should be conducted in heinous
crimes like rape, murder etc. The medical examination of rape victims
should be conducted without delay. III) Steps may be taken not only to
tackle such crimes but also to deal sensitively with the trauma ensuing the
crime. Counselling to the victim as well as to the family may be provided
by empanelling professional counsellors. Exploring the possibility of
associating NGOs working in the area of combating crime against
children and other vulnerable sections of the societies. Developing a
community monitoring system to check cases of violence, abuse and
exploitation against children and take necessary steps to curb the same;
IV) The local police must be advised to collabourate with the „Childline-
1098 Service‟ (which is an emergency service being operated by the
Childline India Foundation (CIF) all over the country catering to the needs
of children in emergency situations) and NGOs for mutual help and
assistance wherever and whenever required. A Reception Officer (of the
rank of Head Constable) must be available round the clock in every Police
Station. Equal and fair treatment must be given to every
petitioner/complainant irrespective of his/ her status, class or creed and a
proper receipt should be given for every complaint forthwith. The disposal
of the complaint should normally be ensured within two days by holding
an on the spot enquiry in the ward/ village concerned. Wherever found
appropriate, the complaint should be converted into an FIR.VI. Whenever
an FIR is registered, a signed copy of the FIR must be provided to the
complainant on the spot. The State Governments/ UT Administrations
must ensure registration of cases round the clock and deal sternly with any
dereliction of duty in this regard.VII. „Crime against Women/Children‟
desks may be set-up in every police station. Judicial Measures a) Right to
Victims‟ Compensation (Supreme Court U/A-32, High Court U/A-226)
In the scheme of the Constitution of our country, the judiciary works as a
sentinel and guardian of the Constitution and as also custodian of the
rights of the people. Article 32 and Article 226 of the Constitution have
conferred powers on the Supreme Court and High Courts to pass
appropriate orders which include to ensure the rights of the victims as
well. In the absence of statutory provision in any other law, for the first
time the Supreme Court of the country recognised right of compensation
to the victim for violation of human rights in the landmark judgment in
Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar(1983 4 SCC 141). That was case in which
the petitioner was illegally detained in Ranchi Jail for 14 years ever after
his acquittal by the court after trail. The Supreme Court while directing
releasing the petitioner awarded a total sum of 35,000/- by way of
compensation. This judgment was later followed in subsequent judgments
of the Supreme Court as well as the High Courts. Custodial violence is an
unacceptable abuse of power and an abhorrent violation of human rights
by the protectors of the law themselves. It not only violates Article 21 of
the Constitution of India which guarantees the fundamental right of life
and liberty, but also infringes upon Article 3 of Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UDHR) and Article 6 of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights, that every person has the right to life, liberty
and security and no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of life. Further,
Article 5 of UDHR and Article 7 of the Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights lay down explicitly that no one shall be subjected to torture, or
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Article 9 of
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 9 of the Covenant
emphasis that no one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or
exile. These provisions also lat down that anyone who is arrested shall be
informed of the reasons of his arrest and shall be promptly informed of
the charges against him. Article 22 of the Constitution protects the rights
of the Victimology individual in case of arrest and detention and essence
incorporates the principles of these United Nations documents. It is a
fundamental right under this Article, that the arrested person must be
produced before the nearest magistrate within twenty-four hours.In this
regard, the Supreme Court in the case of D. K. Basu v. State of West
Bengal (AIR 1997 SC 610), which dealt with the principle Ubi jus, ibi
remedium i.e., there is no wrong without a remedy. The law wills that in
every case where a man is wronged and damaged, he must have a remedy.
A mere declaration of the invalidity of an action, or the finding of
custodial violence or death in a lock-up, does not by itself provide any
meaningful remedy to a person whose fundamental right to life has been
infringed. Much more needs to be done. While there is no express
provision in the Constitution of India for grant of compensation for
violation of the fundamental right to life, the Supreme Court has judicially
evolved a right to compensation in cases of established unconstitutional
deprivation of personal liberty or life. The Court observed that the claim
in public law for compensation for unconstitutional deprivation of the
fundamental right to life and liberty, the protection of which is guaranteed
under the Constitution, is a claim based on strict liability and is in addition
to the claim available in private law for damages for torturous acts of
public servants. Public law proceedings serve a purpose different from
private law proceedings. Award of compensation for established
infringement of the indivisible rights guaranteed under Article 21 is a
remedy available in public law, since the purpose of public law is not only
to civilize public power but also to assure the citizens that they live under
a legal system where in their rights and interests shall be protected and
preserved. The grant of compensation in proceedings under Article 32 or
Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the established violation of the
fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21, is an exercise of the
courts under the public wrong on the State which failed in the discharge
of its public duty to protect the fundamental rights of the citizen. The
quantum of compensation will, of course, depend upon the particular facts
and circumstances of each case. The relief to redress the wrong for the
established invasion of the fundamental rights of the citizen, under the
public law jurisdiction is, thus, in addition to the traditional remedies and
not in derogation of them. However, the liability of the State for damages
for violation of the Constitutional rights to life, liberty and dignity of the
individual has been recognised and established as a part of the public law
regime. In decision of the Apex Court , in particular, in cases of Francis
Coralie Mullin v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi( 1981 1 SCC
608) and Nilabati Behera v State of Orissa, (1993 2 SCC 746)the
constitutional and juristic foundations of this liability of the State have
been formally and finally laid down. Even the claim of sovereign
immunity arising out of the State discharging sovereign functions is held
to be no defense at all against the acts of violation of the constitutionally
guaranteed Foundational Human Rights (Annual Report of National
Human Rights Commission, 1999- 2000). Compensation ( Interim and
Final Relief) Awarded by Human Rights Commission (u/s-18 of PHRA,
1993) The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993( as amended in 2006)
provides an additional forum to address violation of human rights through
National/State Theories and Perspectives in Criminal Justice Human
Rights Commissions and Human Rights Courts across the country. Upon
receiving the complaint, and after enquiry, human rights commissions
may recommend to the government any or all of the following: a) register
a criminal case against the guilty persons; b) pay immediate compensation
to the victim or to the victim‟s family; c) take disciplinary action against
the guilty persons; d) stop a particular act if it is violating human rights;
e) properly perform its duty and protect those whose human rights are
being violated; and f) take preventive measures so that human rights
violations do not take place in future. Human rights commissions may
award an immediate compensation to victims or their families. It is paid
so that money can be made available to them for rehabilitation, without
delay. It does not affect the right to claim further compensation in court
by filing a civil case against the offender. It is therefore termed „interim
relief‟ by human rights commissions. Though there is no hard and fast
rule, typically complaints regarding serious violations of human rights
such as death in custody, torture, rape, illegal detention, kidnapping,
destruction of private property, insults to personal dignity, and negligence
by police, security forces or government agencies qualify for payment of
immediate compensation. This recommendation to pay immediate
compensation is made either to the government under whose jurisdiction
the violation has taken place or the government that controls the
department responsible for the violation. Sometimes after paying
immediate compensation, the government concerned recovers the amount
from guilty officials. Immediate compensation amounts vary from case to
case depending upon the circumstances and from commission to
commission. During the last 13 years, the Commission has recommended
for payment of interim relief to the extent of Rs. 10,44,97,634/- to be paid
in 716 cases, recommended disciplinary action in 223 cases and
prosecution in 74 cases against the public servants who were prima facie
found responsible for their acts of omission and commission resulting in
violation of Human Rights of the people. Added to this, the Commission
has also recommended a total of Rs. 23,24, 25,000/ - to be paid to the next
of the kin of 1245 deceased in the matter of Punjab Mass Cremation case.
The enormous increase in the number of complaints indicates the
awareness of Human Rights among the people and the confidence people
have in the Commission. However receiving of more and more complaints
of violation of human rights may not be a happy situation (Journal of The
National Human Rights Commission, India, Vol-5, 2005-2006, pp.141-
42). Right to Victims’ Rehabilitation: In a landmark case – Custodial
Torture of Rakesh Kumar Vij by Uttar Pradesh Police (NHRC Case No.
12982/96-97), the NHRC asked the UP Government to constitute a
Medical Board to assess the extent of physical disability suffered by the
victim due to torture by UP Police. The Medical Board, gave a report to
the Commission, stating that the victim did not suffer from any gross
structural damage, on which the victim raised doubts and communicated
to the Commission. In view of grave apprehensions of miscarriage of
justice, the Commission got the victims examined by the Delhi Trauma
and Rehabilitation Centre, which gave an entirely different report and
assessment. Then, the Commission thus directed the UP Government to
pay Shri Rakesh Vij Rs. 10 lakhs by way of immediate interim relief. The
Government was also directed to arrange for the complete medical
treatment of victim. The expenses of the treatment as well as the traveling
expenses of victim along with one attendant, from his native place to the
place of medical treatment at AIIMS, New Delhi or PGI, Lucknow, would
also be borne by the State Government. This way the Commission has
recognised the right to rehabilitation of victims in holistic manner.
Besides establishments of NHRC and SHRCs at National and State level,
under Section 30 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, the State
Governments may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court, by notification specify for each district a Human
Rights Court to try the offences arising out of the violation of Human
Rights. The NHRC time and again has stated that in order to give a better
focus to this laudable provision and to provide justice at the district level
itself in case of human rights violations, the section needs amendment.
Further the lack of clarity as to what offences, precisely, can be clarified
as human rights offences, has been the biggest impediment in the effective
functioning of human rights courts, which have been set up by some of
the states. The NHRC urged the Central Government through its annual
reports for amendment Section 30 of the Protection of Human Rights
Act,1993. It is rather unfortunate that the Central and State Governments
have so far failed to resolve issues that are creating impediments in the
setting up of fully functioning human rights courts. In order to provide
access to justice for victims of human rights violations including victims
of crime at the local level (District level) the human rights courts could be
an effective and speedy justice mechanism, however due to lack of clarity
of offences to dealt by these courts and procedure to followed, this
mechanism is under utilisation. References Srivastava, S.P. (1997) :
Theoretical and Policy Perspectives in Victimology- An agenda for the
development of Victimology in India, Police Research and Development
Journal: JulySeptember, pp.8-9). Chockalingam, K. (2007): Vitimology
and Victim Justice-Human Rights perspectives in C. Raj Kumar & K.
Chokalingam, Human Rights Justice and Constitutional empowerment ,
New Delhi : Oxford University Press at p.437-461. Report of Reforms of
Criminal Justice System (2003) Government of India, Ministry of Home
Affairs. 12) BPR&D(2005) : A note on Compensation to the victims of
crime, New Delhi BPR&D. Handbook “Strengthening judicial
cooperation to protect victims of crime” Specific Criminal Justice
Program of the European Union, (2012-2013).


VICTIMOLOGY

INTRODUCTION

The word ‘Victimology’ was coined in the year of 1947 by a French
Lawyer, Benjamin Mendelssohn, by deriving from a Latin word ‘victima’
which translate into “victim” and a Greek word’ ‘logos’ which means a
system of knowledge, the direction of teaching, science and a discipline.

The development of Victimology as discipline in academic field is a
phenomenon of approximately six decades. In 1948, a German
Criminologist, Han Von Hentig made the first overall exploration of the
role of victim in crime. The discovery of victim inaugurated a new trend
in criminology with increased accent on exploring the doer-sufferer’
relationship. This recognition of the sociological significance of victim
had immediate academic repercussions. Victimology acquired
international interest and became the subject of solid scientific inquiry.
An important breakthrough occurred when discussions in several
international victimological symposiums pleaded for the extension of the
concept of “victim” beyond its traditional confines. The plea, in effect,
was towards widening the concept of victim including within its purview
the victims of different varieties.
This view derived ample support from studies which discovered new
categories of victims, e.g. victims of abuse of economic, political and
public power, victims of organised/and corporate crime, victims of
environmental offences, victims of consumer frauds, victims of
development induced crime as well as victims of natural and men made
disasters etc. The studies further highlighted the fact that the event of
victimisation is unevenly distributed: some persons, groups or
communities are more vulnerable to

Theories and Perspectives
in Criminal Justice
victimisation, for example, women, children, elderly, and the poor and
the powerless. They are victimised at a significantly higher rate because
of their relatively weak position.

Who is a Victim?
The term victim is lacking descriptive precision. It implies more than the
mere existence of an injured party, in that innocence or blamelessness is
suggested as well as a moral claim to a compassionate response from
others. The term victim is defined in Oxford English Dictionary as:
“victim is a person who is put to death or subjected to misfortune by
another; one who suffers severely in body or property through cruel or
oppressive treatment: one who is destined to suffer under some oppressive
or destructive agency: one who perishes or suffers in health etc., from
some enterprise or pursuit voluntarily undertaken.”

As per Collins English Dictionary, the term’ victim’ means a ‘person or
thing that suffers harm, death, etc. from another or from some adverse
act, circumstance, etc.’
According to New Webster’s Dictionary defines the word ‘victim’
means “a person destroyed, sacrificed, or injured by another, or by some
condition or agency; one who is cheated or duped; a living being
sacrificed to some deity, or in the performance of a religious rite”.
The U.N. Declaration on Justice to Victims of Crimes and Victims of
Abuse of Power has related the term victim to two distinct categories,
namely victims of crimes and victims of abuse of power. “Victims” means
persons who, individually or collectively, have suffered harm, including
physical or mental injury, emotional suffering, economic loss or
substantial impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or
omissions that are in violation of criminal laws operative within
Member States, including those laws proscribing criminal abuse of power.


In the context of criminal justice system the term victim is defined in
Black’s Law Dictionary as:-“The person who is the object of a crime or
tort, as the victim of a robbery is the person robbed”. The Code of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008 (5 of 2009) (notified by
Govt of India on December 31, 2009 except Para 5, 6, 21) Section 2
defines the word “victim means a person who has suffered any loss of
injury caused by reason of the act or omission for which the accused
person has been charged and the expression “victim” includes with
his/her guardian or legal heir.

Victimology is the scientific study of victimisation, including the
relationships Victimology between victims and offenders, the interactions
between victims and the criminal justice system – that is, the police and
courts, and corrections officials – and the connections between victims
and other social groups and institutions, such as the media, businesses,
and social movements. Victimology is however not restricted to the study
of victims of crime alone but may cater to other forms of human rights
violations that are not necessarily crime.

SCOPE OF VICTIMOLOGY
The Victimology is a branch of Criminology. The scope of Victimology
is to understand how victims have been or might be harmed or abused and
how the victims can be empowered, assisted and rehabilitated. In the past,
victimology was centered primarily on criminological aspects such as
offenders and victims of crime, however, in the recent years, the focus of
Victimology is moved from traditional approach to radical approach
which explains that how the State and its systems serve to criminalise and
consequently victimise some groups and not others. Essentially, this
prospective seriously challenges domination of positivism on criminology
and Victimology.

During last few decades, by studying the experience of victimisation
feminist scholars sought to demonstrate how the law and state institutions
including justice systems see and treat women and girls from the
perspective of men gaze, continually repositioning and measuring them in
relation to men. The emphasis within radical feminist on women’s
oppression and control through their sexuality has had its greatest impact
on criminology through the avenue of “victim studies”.The radical
families gave more emphasis for the terms ‘survivor’ rather than victim
since the term implies a more positive and active role for women in their
routine lives. This has highlighted that ‘safe haven’ of the home as a place
where much criminal behaviour occurred and is perpetuated by men
towards women.

This has brought a paradigm shift in explaining factors behind crimes
against women such as rape, domestic violence, and child abuse etc.
Thus, feminism has played a key role in the emergence of Victimology.
Broadly, scope of Victimology can be delineated in the following three
perceptive:
1) Conservative Perspective: The Victimology discipline confines the
scope within conservative tendency to the study of street crimes. A basic
postulate of conservative ideology that is readily applicable for their
actions and decisions including mistakes such as momentary lapses due
to carelessness and provocative acts that incite violent responses. It
means, that within Victimology, there is an opinion that the individual
should strive to take personal responsibility for preventing, avoiding,
resisting and reconverting from criminal act and for defending
themselves, their families and homes.
Conservatives within Victimology and victim’s rights movements see
the criminal justice system as the guarantor of retributive justice-
satisfying victims within the knowledge that offenders are being
punished for their crime. By they do not vouch for programmes to repay
victims for their losses or to deliver services etc. which goes into the
gamut of compensatory jurisprudence and victim assistance
programmes.

Theories and Perspectives in Criminal Justice

2) Liberal Perspective: sees the scope of the field beyond street crimes
to include criminal harm inflicted on persons by delinquents. A basic
theme within the liberal thought is the constitutional guarantee of equal
protection under the law. All kinds of victims from all walks of life are
thus entitled to fair treatment. The crux of the liberal victimological
thinking is to ensure that the “safety net” provisions of the welfare state
to cover any existing gaps in government’s benefit programmes are
utilised to compensate loses to the victims due to misfortune including
crime. To reinstate the victim in the “previous position” adequate
services must be provided which inter alia includes, state compensation
funds, government subsidised crime insurance and rape rehabilitation
centers etc. In selected cases, restitution and rehabilitation are deemed
more appropriate ways of resolving conflicts than the arrest, prosecution
and conviction of accused persons.

3) Radical-Critical Perspective: within Victimology argues that the
field should not be limited simply to the study of the causalities of
criminal activity. The inquiry must be extended to cover additional
sources of suffering and harm inflicted by industrial polluters, owners
and managers of hazardous workplace, brutal police force,
discriminatory institutions and other agents of power and privilege. In
such instances, the victims may not be individuals but whole groups of
people such as scheduled caste, “ factory workers”, “minority groups”,
“consumers” , or “ neighbourhood” residents” or impersonal entities
such “small companies”. The key question which becomes important for
radical victimologist is that “which suffering people get designated as
victims, and which do not and why?” The answer is important, since it
determines whether or not public and private resources will be mobilised
to help them out and end their mistreatment. The radical victimologist
places the blame for such needless suffering squarely on the “the
system” the social structure, the ways in which society is organised
and the operation of the social institutions. The radical-critical
victimologist perceives the criminal justice system as a part of the
problem because its safeguards the interest of powerful groups in society
much more than it attends to the interests of the causalities of
competition and conflict. Thus, emphasis on the State to ensure that
institutional wrongdoing be avoided at all cost is more among radicalist.

Victimology In Indian Context
The concern for victims in Indian society has its root in the history too.
The victims did not have to face many difficulties in the past. There was
an inbuilt mechanism for restitution and community support for them.
We had a tradition of atonement and restitution. Those who attend for
the wrong were forgiven.
The king had the right to determination the compensation. The laws of
Manu provided for reparation “to the victim and payment of fine” to the
King. When mosses ordained ‘Thou shall not take money from the
murderer, he surely put to death’, crime came to be regarded as an offence
principally against king’s peace and only incidentally against the
individuals’ wronged.” The victims were left to fend themselves. It
appears that with the advent of British Rule in India, the laws of Manu
were over taken by the dictas of Moses. The state started to prosecution
of the offenders. Resultantly, the victims treated as a tool to support
the system, to identify and punish the offender.

In Indian context, the first empirical study regarding, “Victims of Dacoit
Gangsin Chambal Valley”, was conducted by D.R. Singh in 1978.
Thereafter, Bureau of Police Research and Development has published a
report on ‘Compensation to the Victims of Crime’ in 1979. This report and
some other studies, undertaken by the Institute of Criminology and
Forensic Science, (now known as LNJN NICFS), New Delhi in early
1980s have started victimological orientation in the criminal justice
research in the country. During 1990s, International donor organisations
and the civil society organisations have highlighted victimisation
process in the context of development. Thus, the research studies on
Victimology in India have started gaining ground in the 1990s. Recently,
a survey of Criminological studies has documented various studies
undertaking in the field of Victimology in India.

11.6 NATURE AND FORMS OF VICTIMISATION
Like any other developing country, in India too, the concept and extent of
victimisation is very huge. In contemporary discourse , the victims not
only includes the victims of conventional crimes; they include victims of
social oppression (the so called untouchables who are victims of caste
atrocities), victims of gender based atrocities (crime against women and
children), victims of economic exploitations (bounded labour, child
labour and human trafficking etc), victims of abuse of power (illegal
detentions, torture, custodial deaths in police and judicial custody and
police encounters etc), victims of human rights violations (including
human rights violations by non-state actors (Naxalite, private armies such
as Ranvir Sena in Bihar etc), Victims of development induced Crime.
Victims of Organised and Corporate Crimes, victims of natural and men
made disasters etc. Broadly, the nature of victimisation may be divided
into the following three levels;

Theories and Perspectives in Criminal Justice
1) Primary Victimisation: Primary victimisation comes from being a
victimof crime itself. For example physical, psychological and financial
damage caused through victimisation.
2) Secondary Victimisation: it stems from the reaction of the victims
from social milieu. This includes suffering from stigmatisation, social
isolation, ostracisation and degrading questioning etc.
3) Tertiary Victimisation: it means the assumption and internalisation
of the role of victim through repeated primary and secondary
victimisation. The repeated confrontation of the victims with the offence
and the offenders in the context of police, prosecution and court
examination as well as questioning in the context of in the main
proceeding in some cases through numerous court instances can further
secondary and tertiary victimisation.

IMPACT OF VICTIMISATION
During last two decades researchers in social sciences have focused on
issues such as social exclusion, impact of globalisation and liberalisation
on crime, caste and ethnic conflict and development induced crime which
has highlighted new patterns of victimisation. We are witness to growth
of crimes not merely in quantity but more so in quality. The threats posed
by present –day dimensions of crimes and particularly their
sophistication, to personal and public security are matters of serious
concern. Crimes are presently taken as business ventures, operated in
syndicate styles and with’ profit’ as the motive, practically emulating the
current economic development in this one respect Organised Crimes as
they are called have been transcended borders to constitute Organised
Transnational Crimes.

Victimisation Surveys undertaking by UN indicate that the growth of
crime and the indirect costs as a result of these largely in terms of the level
of general insecurity of the citizen, constituting the indirect kind. Based
on empirical and interview –based approach, a cross-section of urban
population of 50 countries principally, the first round of study showed that
more than half the urban populations world-wise have been victimized by
a crime at least once during the period 1990-94. If development is the
process of building societies that work, crime acts as a kind of ‘anti-
development’ destroying the trust relations on which society is based.
Crime destroys social capital and devises precious human resources
overseas. Fear of crime restricts mobility, which interferes with social and
economic interactions, as well as education, access to health care, and
other development services.
While the direct impact of crime on poor victims is great, the indirect
effects of Victimology crime have a far wider reach. Victimisation or fear
of victimisation can cause people to withdraw from social interaction in
order to limit their exposure. This can interfere with commercial,
recreational, and educational activities. Crime negatively impacts quality
of life, and can drive skilled labour overseas.
Development experts agree that one of the key elements needed for
economic development is a skilled workforce, and thus have encouraged
developing countries to invest in education. This investment is largely
lost, however, when the best and the brightest chose to emigrate. Several
countries in this region are among those listed by the World Bank as
suffering from some of the highest rates of skilled emigration in the world.

VICTIM’S JUSTICE IN INDIA

At the International arena, the adoption by the General Assembly of the
United Nations at its 96th Plenary on November 29, 1985, of the
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and
Abuse of Power, hereafter UN Declaration) constituted an important
recognition of the need to set norms and minimum standards in
international and national legal framework for the rights of victims of
crime. The UN Declaration recognised four major components of
the rights of victims of crime: (i) access to justice and fair treatment; (ii)
restitution (iii) compensation (iv) rehabilitation.
i) Access to justice and fair treatment – This right includes access to
the mechanisms of justice and to prompt redress, right to be informed of
victim’s rights, right to proper assistance throughout the legal process
and right to protection of privacy and safety.
ii) Restitution – including return of property or payment for the harm or
loss suffered; where public officials or other agents have violated
criminal laws, the victims should receive restitution from the State.
iii) Compensation – when compensation is not fully available from the
offender or other sources, State should provide financial compensation
at least in violent crimes, resulting in bodily injury for which national
funds should be
established.
iv) Assistance – victims should receive the necessary material, medical,
psychological and social assistance through governmental, voluntary and
community based means. Police, justice, health and social service
personnel should receive training in this regard.

Historically speaking the victim’s justice in India, the references are from
the Manusmiriti to compensation being paid to the victims of criminal
offences. Even in the recent times the Anglo-Saxon system of Criminal
Justice was introduced in India, the victim was not completed neglected.
References to victim’s compensation are also found in the ‘Code of
Hammurabi’. It is said that it was quite common for the early civilisation
to extract payments for the victims from the offenders, which process in
not known as restitution. However, the picture began to change with
modern criminal justice in which the government assumes responsibility
for dispensing justice.
Theories and Perspectives in Criminal Justice

Victim was left with ineffective remedies. As a modern state emerged and
the government took an itself the responsibility of enforcing justice, the
offender gradually became in the criminal justice arena. The criminal
justice system in India is basically concerned with criminals, whether
it is their conviction, treatment, reformation or rehabilitation. The purpose
of criminal justice system appears, at present, to be confined to the simple
object of ascertaining guilt or innocence of an accused. The role of the
victim of a crime in the present criminal justice system is restricted to that
of a witness for the prosecution – even though he or she is a person who
has suffered harm – physical, mental, emotional, economical or
impairment of his/her fundamental rights. Since,
the central object of legal process is to promote and maintain public
confidence in the administration of justice, there is an urgent need for
giving a well-defined status to the victim of crime under the criminal law.
His interest in getting the offender punished cannot be ignored or
completely subordinated to the social control by the State. Neither at the
stage of the framing of a charge or passing of an order of discharge, are
the views of the victim ascertained, let alone considered. He is not to be
consulted during the trial. Even after the case ends up in a conviction, it
is the State, which defends the judgment of the trail court in appeal, if any,
filed against the conviction and sentence.

It is necessary to give a central role of the victims of crime, as otherwise,
the victim will remain discontented and may develop a tendency to take
law into his own hands in order to seek revenge and pose a threat to the
maintenance of Rule of Law, essential for sustaining a democracy. This
challenge was noticed by the Supreme Court in P. Ramchandra Rao v.
State of Karnataka, when it expressed its concern for the plight of the
victims of crime who, if left without a remedy might “resort to taking
revenge by unlawful means resulting in further increase in the crimes and
criminals”. As at present, broadly speaking, there are two systems
of dispensation of criminal justice-Adversarial and Inquisitorial. The
system, followed in India, for dispensation of Criminal Justice System, is
Adversarial System of common law inherited from the British rulers. In
this system the accused is presumed to be innocent and the burden of
proving his guilt beyond reasonable doubt lies on the prosecution. The
accused also enjoys the “right of silence” and he cannot be compelled to
answer the queries. In the adversarial system truth is supposed to emerge
from the respective versions of the facts presented by the Persecution and
the defense before a neutral judge. The judge acts as a referee and decides
whether the prosecution has been able to prove the guilt of an accused
beyond a reasonable doubt. The system, per-se appears to be fair and
justified, but viewed from the perspective of the victim, it is heavily
loaded in favour of the accused and it insensitive to the rights of the
victims or their plight becausegenerally the judge in his anxiety to
maintain his position of neutrality, fails to take initiative to find out the
truth.
In order to respond to the interests of victims more effectively, it is
important to ensure that they play an active role during investigation and
trial. The problem with the existing statutory scheme is that once an
investigation starts, the role of the victim is minimal. In many instances
the police personnel proceed very slowly on investigations, thereby losing
out on the opportunity to gather relevant evidence and opening up the
possibility of corruption. Conversely, investigations involving
well-connected and influential persons as victims tend to be taken up in a
relatively expeditious manner. Even during the course of trial, the victim’s
role is confined to that of acting as a ‘prosecution witness’ since the
prosecution is entirely Victimology conducted by the State. The lawyers
working as Public Prosecutors at the district level often lack the necessary
competence and function in a manner that is not
accountable to the victim in any way. As a result trials are unduly delayed
either on account of the disinterest or conversely the heavy workload
faced by the Public Prosecutors. The Justice Malimath Committee on
Criminal Justice Reforms (2003), Second Administrative Reforms
Commission in 5th Report on “Public Order” (2007) and Law
Commission of India’s 226th Report on “Compensation to the Victims”
(2010) have recommended various measures for victims empowerment
and rehabilitation.

 REMEDIAL MEASURES TO VICTIM’S
EMPOWERMENT
Over a period of time, the following measures have been initiated in
India for
empowerment of victims of crime and human rights violations:
a) Legislative and Administrative Measures
b) Judicial Measures
c) Human Rights Measures
Legislative and Administrative Measures
i) Victims’ Compensation in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 u/s
357-59
Section 357(1) concerns itself with the grant of compensation out of the
fine imposed on the offender at the time of sentencing the convict. Sub-
clause 1(a) of Section 357 empowers a criminal court to indemnify the
prosecuting agency against expenses incurred in the prosecution by way
of fine imposed on the convict. Sub-Clause 1(b) of Section 357 entitles
the court to award compensation for any loss or injury caused by the
offence to the victim but this is subject to the condition that compensation
must be recoverable by the victim in a civil court.
This condition i.e. the word “recoverable” may be construed in two ways:
1) That the victim is entitled to sue the offender for damages in a civil
court and that the offender is liable to pay,
2) That the offender had the capacity to pay the compensation.
Section-358 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 provides for payment
of compensation up to Rs. 100/- to persons groundlessly arrested. While
sub-clause of Section 359 of the criminal procedure code, 1973 empowers
a court to award costs in non-cognisable cases to the complainant who is
generally a victim of the crime, from the offender, providing further that
if the offender did not pay costs as ordered, he shall suffer simple
imprisonment up to 30 days. The recent amendment in the of the Criminal
Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 2008 has provided long debated issue
of victims’ compensation scheme. Besides victims compensation scheme
the CrPC amendment Act has also empowered the victims to engage an
advocate of his choice with the permission of the court to assess the
prosecution (Section-24). This lawyer will also be authorised to present
separate arguments, examine conviction for a lesser offence or the award
of an inadequate sentence (Section witnesses and produced evidence if
permitted by the court. This aside, the victim may file an appeal against
an acquittal of the accused, -372). These provisions have given a
legitimate space to the victims in the Criminal Justice System.
In crux the following are the salient features of the Criminal Procedure
Code (Amendment) Act, 2008:
1) “Section 357A. (1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the
Central Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the
purpose overcompensation to the victim or his dependents who have
suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require
rehabilitation.
2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation,
the District Legal Service Authority or the State Legal Service Authority,
as the case may be, shall decide the quantum of compensation to be
awarded under the scheme referred to in sub-section (1).
3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the
compensation awarded under Section 357 is not adequate for such
rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge and the
victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for
compensation.
4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is
identified, and where no trial takes place, the victim or his dependents
may make an application to the State or the District Legal Services
Authority for award of compensation.
5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-
section (4) the State or the District Legal Services Authority shall, after
due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the enquiry
within two months.
6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be,
to alleviate the suffering of the victim, may order for immediate first-aid
facility or medical benefits to be made available free of cost on the
certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the officer in charge
of the police station or a Magistrate of the area concerned, or any other
interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.”

ii) Compensation to the Victims in the Special Laws
a) Under the Probation of Offenders Act,1958
According to Section 5 of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, a court
directing the release of an offender under Section 3 or under Section 4 of
the Act may, if it thinks fit, at the same time, a further order directing him
to pay such compensation as the court thinks reasonable for the loss or
injury caused to any person due to the commission of the offence by him.
b) The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities)
Act, 1989
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989, provides the monetary relief to the victims of crime ranging
from Rs 25,000 to 2,00,000 depends on the nature of offence and
circumstances of the case. Generally 25 per cent of the monetary support
is provided at the time of submission of charge sheet, 75 per cent at the
time of conviction by the lower court but in case of heinous crimes as
murder, the victims are provided 75 per cent relief after the post-mortem
and 25 per cent at the time of conviction by the lower court. In case
assault on the women with intention to dishonour or outrage her modesty
and exploit her sexually, 50 per cent of the monetary relief is given at the
time of medical examination and the remaining 50 per cent of the relief is
given at the end of trial respective of the outcome thereof. However, the
field reality is that majority of cases registered under SC/ST Act are not
reaching to the logical conclusion.

As the matter of fact in 70 per cent cases the accused are not punished
by the court due to procedure lapses. The recent example is judgment
delivered by Nagpur Bench Bombay High Court in CBI v SakruMahgu
Binjavar & Others. This judgment has received sharp reactions from
Dalit leaders as well as human right activists across the country broadly
on two aspects;
i) It commutes the Trial Court’s death penalty for the accused to life
imprisonment;
ii) It refuges to accept the killings as Caste atrocity.
In view of this, how far the provisions of the Acts in providing monetary
relief to the victims of caste atrocities could have been useful is the
subject of further inquiry?


c) Domestic Violence Act, 2005

This Act provides for more effective protection of the rights of women
guaranteed under the Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind
occurring within the family setting as domestic violence. In this context,
Sections 20 to 24 are relevant in protection of victims of domestic
violence through compensatory justice. The trial court may on an
application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing
the respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries,
including mental torture and emotional distress, caused by the acts of
domestic violence committed by that respondent.
d) The Custodial Crimes (Prevention, Protection and
Compensation) Bill, 2006
The proposed bill aims to prevention and protection against custodial
crimes and also provides compensation to the victims of custodial
offences.
e) The Communal Violence Bill, 2005
The Communal Violence (Prevention, Control and Rehabilitation of
Victims) Bill, 2005 provides for (a) prevention and control of communal
violence, (b) speedy investigation and trials, and (c) rehabilitation of
victims. Currently, the
National Advisory council ( NAC), Government of India has constituted
a core group of human rights activists to examine the efficacy and
effective of the bill in the context of rights based approach to the victims
of communal violence.
f) Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010
The Prevention of Torture Bill (passed by Lok Sabha without any debate
on 6 May 2010 and Rajya Sabha referred the Bill to a select committee on
August 31, 2010), in its present form, is being dubbed by the
commentators as the “ Sanction of Torture Bill”. The critique of the
proposed bill is made on mainly on two aspects-definition of torture and
weak redressal mechanism; and lack of compensatory provisions for the
survivors of torture and their families.
g) Administrative Measures
During last decade, the Government of India has framed various
schemes to strengthen victim’s justice however their implementation at
grassroots level has always been questioned due to procedural lapses.
Among others, the following schemes are worth mentioning;
a) Scheme for relief and rehabilitation of victims of rape
b) Scheme for compensation to the victims of violence by left wing
extremists
c) Central Schemes for Assistance to victims of terrorist and communal
violence
d) Rehabilitation packages to provides relief to the victims of 1984 riots
e) Ujjawala Scheme for prevention of trafficking and rescue,
rehabilitation and re-integration of victims of trafficking for commercial
and sexual exploitation

Schemes for relief and rehabilitation of victims of rape
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in a leading decision in case of the Domestic
WorkingWomen’s Forum v. Union of India and others writ petition
(CRL)No.362 had directed the National Commission for Women to
evolve a “scheme so as to wipe out the tears of unfortunate victims of
rape’’. The Supreme Court observed that having regard to the Directive
principles contained in the Article 38(1) of Constitution, it was necessary
to set up criminal Injuries Compensation Board, as rape victims besides
the mental anguish, frequently incur substantial financial loss and in some
cases are too traumatised to continue in employment. The Court further
directed that compensation for victims shall be awarded by the Court on
conviction of the offender and by the Criminal Injuries compensation
board whether or not a conviction has taken place.

This landmark case gives the relief and rehabilitation of the rape victims
under the following ways and means;
1) A rape victim will be entitled to get compensation up to of Rs. 2,00,000,
provided she testifies in a court of law against the accused.
2) Constitution of Criminal Injuries Compensation Board at District/State/
National Level.
3) The Board shall take into account the pain, suffering and shock as well
as loss of earnings due to pregnancy and the expenses of child birth if this
occurs as a result of rape.
4) Provision of budgetary requirements for the scheme, which would be
transferred to the States as Grants-in-Aid;
5) Setting up of District Level Committees headed by District Magistrate,
to consider the claims.
Payment of Compensation ordered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in respect to convicts in the prisons
Advancing the philosophy of restorative justice, the Supreme Court in
State of Gujarat v. Honorable High Court of Gujarat (1998 7 SCC 392)
has directed that the prisoners should be paid equitable wages for the work
done by them, every prisoner must be paid wages for the work done by
him and the state concern make law for setting a part a portion of the
wages earned by the prisoners to be paid as compensation to deserving
victims of the offence. This is a significant development in providing
restorative justice to the victims of crime.
Recent Development
More recently, Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs has issued
two advisories for all for all States and Union Territories to prevent –
victimisation of vulnerable sections of society such as women, children
and marginalised people etc. Broadly, the advisories focused on the
following measures to be taken into considerations by the criminal justice
functionaries in safeguarding the human rights of the victims of crime.

I) Set up exclusive ‘Crime against Women/Children’ desks in each police
station. There should be no delay, whatsoever, in registration of FIRs in
all cases of crime against children. All out efforts should be made to
apprehend all the accused named in the FIR immediately so as to generate
confidence in the victims and their family members. The administration
and police should play a more proactive role in detection and investigation
of crime against children and also ensuring that there is no under
reporting.
II) Cases of crime against children should be thoroughly investigated and
charge sheets against the accused persons should be filed within three
months from the date of occurrence without compromising on the quality
of investigation. Proper supervision of such cases should be ensured from
recording of FIR to the disposal of the case. Speedy investigation should
be conducted in heinous crimes like rape, murder etc. The medical
examination of rape victims should be conducted without delay.
III) Steps may be taken not only to tackle such crimes but also to deal
sensitively with the trauma ensuing the crime. Counselling to the victim
as well as to the family may be provided by empanelling professional
counsellors. Exploring the possibility of associating NGOs working in
the area of combating crime against children and other vulnerable
sections of the societies. Developing a community monitoring system to
check cases of violence, abuse and exploitation against children and take
necessary steps to curb the same;
In the scheme of the Constitution of our country, the judiciary works as a
sentinel and guardian of the Constitution and as also custodian of the
rights of the people. Article 32 and Article 226 of the Constitution have
conferred powers on the Supreme Court and High Courts to pass
appropriate orders which include to ensure the rights of the victims as
well. In the absence of statutory provision in any other law, for the first
time the Supreme Court of the country recognised right of compensation
to the victim for violation of human rights in the landmark
judgment in Rudal Shah v. State of Bihar(1983 4 SCC 141). That was case
in which the petitioner was illegally detained in Ranchi Jail for 14 years
ever after his acquittal by the court after trail. The Supreme Court while
directing releasing the petitioner awarded a total sum of 35,000/- by way
of compensation. This judgment was later followed in subsequent
judgments of the Supreme Court as well as the High Courts.
Custodial violence is an unacceptable abuse of power and an abhorrent
violation of human rights by the protectors of the law themselves. It not
only violates Article 21 of the Constitution of India which guarantees the
fundamental right of life and liberty, but also infringes upon Article 3 of
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and Article 6 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, that every person has
the right to life, liberty and security and no one shall be arbitrarily
deprived of life. Further, Article 5 of UDHR and Article 7 of the Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights lay down explicitly that no one
shall be subjected to torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment. Article 9 of Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
Article 9 of the Covenant emphasis that no one shall be subjected to
arbitrary arrest, detention or exile. These provisions also lat down that
anyone who is arrested shall be informed of the reasons of his arrest and
shall be promptly informed of the charges against him. Article 22 of the
Constitution protects the rights of the individual in case of arrest and
detention and essence incorporates the principles of these United Nations
documents. It is a fundamental right under this Article,
that the arrested person must be produced before the nearest magistrate
within twenty-four hours.In this regard, the Supreme Court in the case of

D. K. Basu v. State of West Bengal (AIR 1997 SC 610), which dealt with
the principle Ubi jus, ibi remedium i.e., there is no wrong without a
remedy. The law wills that in every case where a man is wronged and
damaged, he must have a remedy.
A mere declaration of the invalidity of an action, or the finding of
custodial violence or death in a lock-up, does not by itself provide any
meaningful remedy to a person whose fundamental right to life has been
infringed. Much more needs to be done. While there is no express
provision in the Constitution of India for grant of compensation for
violation of the fundamental right to life, the Supreme Court has judicially
evolved a right to compensation in cases of established
unconstitutional deprivation of personal liberty or life. The Court
observed that the claim in public law for compensation for
unconstitutional deprivation of the fundamental right to life and liberty,
the protection of which is guaranteed under the Constitution, is a claim
based on strict liability and is in addition to the claim available in private
law for damages for torturous acts of public servants. Public law
proceedings serve a purpose different from private law proceedings.
Award of compensation for established infringement of the indivisible
rights guaranteed under Article 21 is a remedy available in public law,
since the purpose of public law is not only to civilize public power but
also to assure the citizens that they live under a legal system where in their
rights and interests shall be protected and preserved. The grant of
compensation in proceedings under Article 32 or Article 226 of the
Constitution of India for the established violation of the fundamental
rights guaranteed under Article 21, is an exercise of the courts under
the public wrong on the State which failed in the discharge of its public
duty to protect the fundamental rights of the citizen.
The quantum of compensation will, of course, depend upon the particular
facts and circumstances of each case. The relief to redress the wrong for
the established invasion of the fundamental rights of the citizen, under the
public law jurisdiction is, thus, in addition to the traditional remedies and
not in derogation of them.
However, the liability of the State for damages for violation of the
Constitutional rights to life, liberty and dignity of the individual has been
recognised and established as a part of the public law regime. In decision
of the Apex Court , in particular, in cases of Francis Coralie Mullin v.
Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi( 1981 1 SCC 608) and Nilabati
Behera v State of Orissa, (1993 2 SCC 746) the constitutional and juristic
foundations of this liability of the State have been formally and finally
laid down. Even the claim of sovereign immunity arising
out of the State discharging sovereign functions is held to be no defense
at all against the acts of violation of the constitutionally guaranteed
Foundational Human Rights ( Annual Report of National Human Rights
Commission, 1999- 2000).


Compensation ( Interim and Final Relief) Awarded by Human
Rights Commission (u/s-18 of PHRA, 1993)

The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993( as amended in 2006) provides
an additional forum to address violation of human rights through
National/State Human Rights Commissions and Human Rights Courts
across the country. Upon receiving the complaint, and after enquiry,
human rights commissions may recommend to the government any or all
of the following:
a) register a criminal case against the guilty persons;
b) pay immediate compensation to the victim or to the victim’s family;
c) take disciplinary action against the guilty persons;
d) stop a particular act if it is violating human rights;
e) properly perform its duty and protect those whose human rights are
being violated; and
f) take preventive measures so that human rights violations do not take
place in future.
Human rights commissions may award an immediate compensation to
victims or their families. It is paid so that money can be made available to
them for rehabilitation, without delay. It does not affect the right to claim
further compensation in court by filing a civil case against the offender. It
is therefore termed ‘interim relief’ by human rights commissions. Though
there is no hard and fast rule, typically complaints regarding serious
violations of human rights such as death in custody, torture, rape, illegal
detention, kidnapping, destruction of private property, insults to personal
dignity, and negligence by police, security forces or government agencies
qualify for payment of immediate compensation.

This recommendation to pay immediate compensation is made either to
the government under whose jurisdiction the violation has taken place or
the government that controls the department responsible for the violation.
Sometimes after paying immediate compensation, the government
concerned recovers the amount from guilty officials. Immediate
compensation amounts vary from case to case depending upon the
circumstances and from commission to commission.
During the last 13 years, the Commission has recommended for payment
of interim relief to the extent of Rs. 10,44,97,634/- to be paid in 716 cases,
recommended disciplinary action in 223 cases and prosecution in 74 cases
against the public servants who were prima facie found responsible for
their acts of omission and commission resulting in violation of Human
Rights of the people. Added to this, the Commission has also
recommended a total of Rs. 23,24, 25,000/- to be paid to the next of the
kin of 1245 deceased in the matter of Punjab Mass
Cremation case. The enormous increase in the number of complaints
indicates the awareness of Human Rights among the people and the
confidence people have in the Commission. However receiving of more
and more complaints of violation of human rights may not be a happy
situation.
a) Right to Victims’ Rehabilitation:
In a landmark case – Custodial Torture of Rakesh Kumar Vij by Uttar
Pradesh Police (NHRC Case No. 12982/96-97), the NHRC asked the UP
Government to constitute a Medical Board to assess the extent of physical
disability suffered by the victim due to torture by UP Police. The Medical
Board, gave a report to the Commission, stating that the victim did not
suffer from any gross structural damage, on which the victim raised
doubts and communicated to the Commission.
In view of grave apprehensions of miscarriage of justice, the Commission
go to the victims examined by the Delhi Trauma and
Rehabilitation Centre, which gave an entirely different report and
assessment. Then, the Commission thus directed the UP Government to
pay Shri Rakesh Vij Rs. 10 lakhs by way of immediate interim relief. The
Government was also directed to arrange for the complete medical
treatment of victim. The expenses of the treatment as well as the traveling
expenses of victim along with one attendant, from his native place to the
place of medical treatment at AIIMS, New Delhi or PGI, Lucknow, would
also be borne by the State Government. This way the Commission has
recognised the right to rehabilitation of victims in holistic manner.

Besides establishments of NHRC and SHRCs at National and State level,
under Section 30 of the Protection of Human Rights Act, the State
Governments may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court, by notification specify for each district a Human
Rights Court to try the offences arising out of the violation of Human
Rights. The NHRC time and again has stated that in order to give a better
focus to this laudable provision and to provide justice at the district level
itself in case of human rights violations, the sectionneeds amendment.
Further the lack of clarity as to what offences, precisely, can be clarified
as human rights offences, has been the biggest impediment in the effective
functioning of human rights courts, which have been set up by some of
the states. The NHRC urged the Central Government through its annual
reports for amendment Section 30 of the Protection of Human Rights
Act,1993. It is rather unfortunate that the Central and State Governments
have so far failed to resolve issues that are creating impediments in the
setting up of fully functioning
human rights courts. In order to provide access to justice for victims of
human rights violations including victims of crime at the local level
(District level) the human rights courts could be an effective and speedy
justice mechanism, however due to lack of clarity of offences to dealt by
these courts and procedure to followed, this mechanism is under
utilization.

                   **** End of Course Material****
