The Ofcial Journal of NALSA
Volume XVII • Issue 3 & 4
• July 2016 & October 2016

Editorial Committee
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Adarsh Kumar Goel
Judge, Supreme Court of India

Chairman

Hon’ble Ms. Justice Gita Mittal
Acting Chief Justice,
Delhi High Court

Member

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna
Judge, Delhi High Court

Member

Mr. P. S. Narasimha
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India

Member

Mr. Alok Agarwal
Member Secretary, NALSA

Member

NYAYA DEEP

The Official Journal of NALSA
Vol. XVII ● Issue 3 & 4 ● July 2016 & October 2016

National Legal Services Authority
12/11, Jamnagar House, Shahjahan Road, New Delhi-110011
Phones : 011-23386176, 23382778 Fax : 23382121Website:
www.nalsa.gov.in

Disclaimer: The views expressed in the articles published in
this Journal are those of the respective authors and do not
reflect the views of the Editorial Committee or of the National
Legal Services Authority.

Printed at : SMAT FORMS
3588, G.T. Road, Old Subzi Mandi, Delhi-110007
Tel. : 0112385373, 9810530802

Editorial
It gives me great pleasure to write this editorial for the new issue of
Nyaya Deep. By the time the newly constituted Editorial Committee met,
time for publishing the next issue of the journal had lapsed. Therefore,
the Committee resolved to release a joint issue of the Journal for July 2016
and October, 2016. Interestingly, this issue is a repository of conventional
nuances prevalent in the Indian Legal system. The learned authors have
deliberated on a variety of socio-legal issues in the light of the prevailing
law and have offered valuable suggestions.
In this globalised world, reform is much in vogue with cultures of
different continents cutting across each other and paving way for intricate
challenges in the administration of justice. The safety of juveniles in India
has become one of the biggest concerns. Recently, the Court dealt with
pregnancy of a minor girl as a consequence of rape. It is in such situations
that one may observe the legal contraventions as a hurdle in the process
of justice to juveniles.
It is sad to find frequent crimes against helpless victims. The
demand is not merely to punish the guilty but also to heal the wounds
of the distressed. Mere award of compensation in such cases is no solace.
Immediate counselling and psychological help to the victims is also
important.
Although the attention of all the institutions under the justice
delivery system has been oriented towards the rights of the accused,
be it fundamental, human or legal rights, least is met towards the
grave problem of illegal arrests that occur due to personal vengeance
of sometimes official authorities or any person. Article 21 categorically
denounces violation of the procedure established by law. Thus, violation
of procedure as established by law in cases of illegal arrests amounts to
nothing but travesty of justice. Strong and effective oversight mechanism
at all levels is the need of the hour.
Besides these, the issues related to senior citizens still run dry in
the absence of enforcement of any legal right. The definition of legal
protection should connote both economic and social empowerment of the
senior citizens. Remedying neglect of the senior citizens is certainly an
important component of social justice.

Areas like succession law also demand a relook at certain practices
and doctrines such as the Slayer’s rule.
Another social challenge that is witnessing reforms in its legal
contours is the policy of reservation to the backward classes in India.
Supreme Court of India has held in several judgments that our Constitution
is an organic document and its interpretation must be a reflection of the
changing society. The policies of reservation however, have been tainted
with political considerations and, therefore, have met with criticisms
and demand a review. Paradigm shift is required to advance meaningful
equality without loss of quality.
These social issues have an immediate bearing on the relationship
shared between the concept of Dharma and Justice in India.
If we set the lens at the culture of commercial transactions in India, the
increase in Arbitration has also surfaced stimulations in the jurisprudence
of arbitration law in India. The continuous effort of the Courts and the
legislature to rebut such challenges for adequate administration of justice
is certainly remarkable. Much remains to be done to streamline the
procedures on the subject.
I hope that deliberations over such fundamental socio-legal reforms
and challenges will ignite readers with the novel perspectives on the
understanding of law and social change and enhance their theoretical
knowledge on the concerned topic.

(Adarsh Kumar Goel)
Judge, Supreme Court of India

Index
VOLUME-XVIII- ISSUE-3, JULY 2016,
&
ISSUE-4-OCTOBER, 2016
Articles:

Page No.

Juveniles- In need of Legal Aid
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.K.Agrawal

...

01

...

7

Concept of Dharma and Justice: A Study in
relation to law and Administration of Justice
Prof (Dr) Mukund Sarda

Reservation Quota must be for all who deserves,
should not be based upon Caste & Religion- Critical Analysis ...
Dr. Arvind Chakraborty
Mr. Debaditya Das

14

Welfare of Senior Citizens- Needs to Social Justice
Dr. Sailaja Petikam

...

33

The Alternative Dispute Resolution System
Mr. M.B.Birader

...

40

...

48

...

56

An Analysis of the Slayer’s Rule in America and India:
A proposal to Amend the Hindu Succession Act
Ms. Nuzhath Khanam M

...

62

Federal Court under Government of India Act,
1935 vis-à-vis present Supreme Court of India
Ms. Sharlin Puppal

...

71

News from States
(April, 2016 to June, 2016)

...

85

News From States
(July, 2016 to September, 2016)

...

202

Statistical Information

...

311

Validity and Legality of “Arrests” and Consequences
of Illegal Arrest: A Study
Prof. (Dr.) Mukund Sarda
Victims of Crimes and Trial of Offences
Dr. Gurneet Singh

—Justice S.K. Agarwal

Juveniles-In need of Legal Aid
Children are supreme assets to a country and are responsible for
building its future. Therefore, it is the responsibility of everyone to
ensure that they are able to live safely and with dignity. They being the
greatest gift to humanity, they are potential useful human resource for the
progress of the country. Children are innocent, vulnerable and dependent.
Abandoning children and excluding good foundation of life for them is a
crime against humanity. Millions of children live under specially difficult
circumstances – as orphans, displaced persons, as victims of war and other
man-made disasters.
Gabrial Mistral, Nobel Laureate said, “we are guilty of many errors and
faults, but our worst crime is abandoning the children, neglecting the foundation
of life”.
“Humanity as the stars in its future and that future is too important to be lost
under the burden of juvenile folly and ignorant superstitiously.” - Isaac Asimov.
One of the greatest achievement of progressive democracies in the last
century is to have recognized the rightful place of the child in the societal
fabric. Both in the international forum as well as domestic policies, positive
action for the child’s welfare is evidenced by way of various United
Nations Conventions, State Legislations and Judicial Interpretations.
While adopting the declaration of Rights of the Child on 20th November,
1959, the General Assembly of the United Nations laid down 10 principles
designed to enable children, irrespective race, colour, sex, language,
religion or origin, to develop physically, mentally morally, spiritually and
socially in a healthy and normal manner and in conditions of freedom
and dignity. This was followed-up by the adoption of the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice,
commonly known as the “Beijing Rules”, on 29th November, 1985. As a
member country, India enacted the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, but after
the adoption of the convention of the Rights of the Child by the United

1 / NYAYA DEEP

Nations in 1987, the said Act was replaced by the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act,
2000’). More recently, introducing concepts from the Hague Convention
on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Inter-Country
Adoption, 1993, making further amendments and repealing the Act, 2000,
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children), Act, 2015 was brought
into force.
The Act, 2015 was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to
juveniles in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection,
by providing for proper care, protection and treatment by catering to their
development needs, and by adopting a child-friendly approach in the
adjudication and disposition of matters in the best interest of children and
for their ultimate rehabilitation through various institutions established
under this enactment. This Act of 2015 has been framed to protect to the
rights of juvenile delinquent.
The Juvenile Justice system has been established with a view to take
juvenile delinquents out of the jurisdiction of criminal courts and to protect
them from technicalities of criminal procedures. Efforts have been made to
co-ordinate various agencies to make the judicial system more accessible to
the community. Emphasis has been made to create a relationship between
the judicial system and the members of the community which could help
the juvenile court in its decision making process.
Article 39(e) of the Indian Constitution indicates State as the guardian
of the health and strength of the tender-aged children to see that they are
not abused or forced to enter avocations unsuitable to them, compelled
by economic necessities. Therefore, they are to be provided with all
necessary facilities and atmosphere to grow into responsibility and useful
citizens of the country. For the full and harmonious development of his
or her personality, a child should grow up in a family environment, in an
atmosphere of happiness, love and understanding.
The juvenile Justice Policy in India is structured around the
constitutional mandate prescribed in the language of Articles 15(3), 39(e)
& 39(f), 45 and 47. The Constitution of India under Article 39A provides
that, “The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide
free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to
2 / NYAYA DEEP

ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen
by reason of economic or other disabilities”. This provision has been
complied with by inserting Rule 14 under the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules,
2007) that “Every juvenile is entitled to free legal aid”.
It is the constitutional right of every citizen under Article 22 of the
Constitution of India to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice
(Article 22(1) read with Rule 3-1 (d)(iii)). One of the fundamental principles
to be followed in the administration of juvenile justice is ensuring legal aid
at State expenses. It is a duty of Legal Services Authority that free legal
service is made available to every juvenile in conflict with law and work
towards speedy disposal of cases. Every juvenile, who has to file or defend
a case, is entitled to free legal services under Legal Services Authority
Act, 1987 (Section 12(1)(c) read with Rule 14(2)). The term ‘free legal aid’
includes not only legal assistance but moral, social and learning assistance
to juvenile in conflict with the law so that the child can plan for and live
dignified life in future.
The Rules, 2007 provides that the Juvenile Justice Board (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Board’) had to ensure that any juvenile in conflict with
law does not undergo ill-treatment by the police, lawyers or probation
officers. The child must also be allowed to take part and be heard during
the inquiry proceedings (Rule 13(2)(C). Many provisions have been
made for juveniles under “Act, 2000” and “Rules, 2007”. The legal officer
in the District Child Protection Unit and the State Legal Aid Services
Authority shall extend free legal services to all the juveniles (Rule 14(3)).
The Juvenile Justice Board shall ensure free legal aid to all juveniles
through State Legal Aid Services Authority or recognized Voluntary Legal
Services Organizations or the University Legal Services Clinics (Rule 3-(1)
(d)(iii) read with Section 14(2)). The Officer-in-charge under Rule 86(2)
(4) bears duty to co-ordinate with the legal officer in the District Child
Protection Unit or District/ State Legal Services Authority to ensure that
every juvenile is legally represented and provided free legal aid and other
necessary support. In the event of shortfall in the State Legal Aid Services
support, the “Board” shall be responsible for seeking legal services from
recognized voluntary Legal Services Organizations or the University
Legal Services Clinics (Rule 14(4)).
The Law relating to juvenile delinquents lay down elaborate provisions
3 / NYAYA DEEP

for the protection of the rights of the delinquents and provides them with
adequate opportunities for their rehabilitation. It is still the responsibility
of those involved in the legal profession to ensure that the law is complied
with and that the juveniles in conflict with the law are not deprived from
receiving free legal aid. To this respect, the role of the advocates and the
Legal Service Authority is of paramount importance. They can provide pro
bono legal assistance and advocacy to such children in need in addition to
their usual client services.
In the case of Sheela Barse v. Union of India, (1986) 3 SCC 596: AIR
1986 SC 1773, the Hon’ble Supreme Court issued direction to the State
Legal Aid Boards and other legal aid organizations to arrange for the visit
of two advocates to custodial institutions once every week for the purpose
of providing legal assistance to children below the age of sixteen years
who are confined in the observation homes.
In the United States, lawyers are specialized in law schools into this
aspect of criminal justice approach. In England, it is the attorney who
approaches the juvenile court with substantive information in hand.
In India, the juvenile justice system provides measures to chalk out the
rehabilitative programmes. Therefore, its approach towards delinquent
juvenile is of rehabilitative nature rather than punitive. Legal Services
Authorities and Advocates can achieve this with the help of NGOs, the
societies and other related institutions. The lawyers should not go into the
technicalities of law while dealing with juvenile cases. The practitioner
should bring all those relevant facts before the Juvenile Court, which may
be useful for treatment of rehabilitation. The Practitioner, who is having
special knowledge, may make substantial contribution for defence to the
child. The concerned Legal Services Authority and the Advocates should
take care not to discuss to much details about the legal aspect of a particular
case, rather they should encourage the juvenile concerned to understand
that the actions are against his morality and detrimental to the society as
a whole. The child must also be allowed to take part and be heard during
the inquiry proceedings (Rule 13(2)). The Legal Services Authorities and
Advocates must work towards ensuring that such juveniles are not made
victims of overly harsh criminal procedures. As such, it is important to
ensure that their rights are protected. The Advocates can provide them
the information about their rights and guiding them towards a healthy,
honest future. Advocates, through the means of Public Interest Litigation
and the Legal Aid Services can also represent the case of such delinquents.
4 / NYAYA DEEP

They can work towards sensitizing the community to the needs of such
children.
In my view, globalization, liberalization, and privatization must have
element of humanization so that the human right violations including the
violations of the rights of children, if not eliminated, can be minimized.
The United Nations in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948
has proclaimed that childhood is entitled to special care and assistance[Art
25(2)].
The improvement of the juvenile justice system is a gradual process
which requires intensive and continued follow-up as will as long term
commitment.
In conjunction with the 2006 Amendment to the Act, 2000, the Act,
2015 also mandates constitution of a “Board” in every district (Section 4 of
the Act) and Child Welfare Committee within two months from the date
of notification (Section 27 of the Act). Hon’ble Supreme Court directed
immediate constitution of J.J.B.(Juvenile Justice Board), C.W.C. (Child
Welfare Committee) and S.J.P.U. (Special Juvenile Police Unit) by all States
as required under the Act (Bachpan Bachao Andolan Vs. Union of India,
(2010)12 SCC 180).
This Board comprises of three members (1) Principal Magistrate, (2)
Social Worker, and (3) Women Social Worker (Section 4(2) read with Rule
5). The philosophy behind the presence of two social workers in the J.J.B.
is that its proceedings should not be conducted in a legalistic manner,
such as in a trial before a criminal court.
But it is unfortunate that the authorities, constituting those Boards,
appear to have lost sight of the eligibility criteria for persons, who
constitute such Boards, inasmuch as Section 4(3) of the Act read with Rule
5(3) states that the Principal Magistrate should have special knowledge
or training child’ psychology or child’s welfare and that the members of
the Board shall be those, who have been involved in health, education or
welfare activities pertaining to children for, at least seven years. In my
opinion, on the basis of my personal experience as Principal Magistrate
also, the Principal Magistrate must be in the rank of Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate ACJM having at least five years experience as Judicial
Magistrate.
5 / NYAYA DEEP

State Legal Services Authority (SLSA) in consultation with concerned
High Court must take the burden on its shoulder and should keep vigilant
eye for protecting the rights of juveniles and ensure the compliance of
mandates provided in the “Rules, 2007” for imparting training and
orientation to the Principal Magistrates and members of the Board in
child psychology, child welfare, child rights, national and international
standards for juvenile justice.
It is vital for the SLSA to involve in the Juvenile Justice system so as
to build an effective partnership with civil societies, NGOs having the
capacity to promote community based life-skills programmes, group
counselling, community work opportunities and open Custody Group
Homes for children into conflict with law.
SLSA must develop a self-charactive monitoring mechanism and
reporting system for JJB and SJPU. It is an in house mechanism to
strengthen the implementation of the various beneficial provisions and to
monitor the function of JJB and SJPU by higher authorities so as to bring
reformation within the system and overcome problem areas.
SLSA must make arrangement in respect of juvenile which is above
the age of 16 years and has committed a serious offence to be kept under
protective custody at a place of safety other than Special Home.
I hope that the same will make an effective contribution to the cause
of improving the standards of justice delivery for children in our country.

******

6 / NYAYA DEEP

—Prof. (Dr.) Mukund Sarda*

Concept of Dharma and Justice: A Study
in relation to law and Administration
of Justice
Conduct is the basis of ‘Dharma’ and non-violence in its essence.1
Inspite of the fact, that there is no exact equivalence in any other language
for the concept ‘Dharma’ it literally means that ‘which it ‘sustains’ or
‘upholds’. Dharma does not relate to thought process of an individual
but what he really does matter. As observed by Dr. N.V. Paranjape,2 “the
fundamental principle underlying ‘dharma’ is uniformity or regularity
of order, which is universally accepted. Law proper has been a part and
parcel of ancient Sanatan Dharma and been nurshered by it, since ages. It is
the soul of all religions. It is ever-present and never ending…… Law being
a part of Dharma and there was no disharmony and discard between law
and Dharma and both constituted a single integrated whole”. According
to Mayne,3 “Indian law has the oldest pedigree of any known system of
Jurisprudence and even now it shows no signs of decrepicture. At this
day, it governs races of men, extending from Kashmir to Caprecomorin,
who agree in nothing else except their submission to it”.

Rule of Law
One of the outstanding features of ‘Dharma’ is the supremacy of law.
In Naykopanishad,4 “the importance of law has been highlighted as, ‘king
of kings and nothing is mightier than law”. Thus, the supremacy of law
has been upheld from the oldest times.5 In Kautilya’s Arthasastra6 it is
lucidly stated: “Dharmasastras mention the king as the fountain of justice
and he was regarded by the subjects as their protector….. The happiness of
*

Principal & Dean, Bharatiya Vidya Peeth University, New Law College, Pune.

1
2
3

Manusmrithi Chapter I Verse 108.
Dr. N.V.Paranjape, ‘Studies in Jurisprudence and legal theory’ 6th Edition P.91.
Mayne, ‘Hindu Law and Usage’ Preface (1st Edition) P.1. See also M.S.Pandit “Outlines
of Ancient Hindu Jurisprudence” 1989, Chapter I P.1.
Ancient Hindu Scripture.
Ibid.
Sen P.N. “General principles of Hindu Jurisprudence” – P.376.

4
5
6

7 / NYAYA DEEP

the king lay in the happiness and welfare of his subjects and no distinction
was made based on caste or creed and embraced truth in all aspects of
life”. This is similar to the law laid down by the Supreme Court,7 which
states thus:- “No one in this country is above law and governance is not
of men but of the rule of law, which permits no one to claim to be above
law”. This aspect of the supremacy of law has been preserved in the Indian
Constitution by the doctrine of judicial review.8

Dharma and Social Cohesion
Another aspect of Dharma can be stated to contain an important
principle of social cohesion. As elucidated in Shirur Mutt case,9 the word
Dharma denotes upholding, supporting, nourshing that which upholds
nourishes or supports the stability of the society, maintaining social order
and general well being and progress of mankind, whatever conduces to the
fulfilment of these objects is Dharma and ultimately Sarva Dharma Sama
bhuva’. Dharma thus constitutes an essential principle of social cohesion
and it comes very closer to Duguit’s principle of social solidarity10. Dharma
becomes the real ‘sovereign’ and not the ruler or the king, as the Dharma
sastras stipulate that king is bound by Dharma sastras and accountable to
it and the king who violates Dharma sastras becomes unfit to rule. This
aspect is now witnessed in the resignations of Ministers in various States
when they were found to have acted in violation of the Constitution or the
laws. Several scams and allegations against the Government have led to
the Chief Minister going out of power11. This is comparable to the incident
of Mahabharatha, where the king became unfit to rule for violating a vital
principle of Dharma sastras and being replaced by a handicapped ruler.

Dharma and Principles of Welfare
Ancient Indian Jurists can be considered to be the very founders of
Indian ancient Jurisprudence and their contribution is still remembered
on account of their rationality and humanistic approach to law,12 and
on account of these factors they evolved sound principles of reason
7
8
9
10
11
12

I.M.Singh Vs. Borolulu Singh 1994 AIR 505.
D.C.Wadhwa Vs. State of Bihar 1987 AIR 579.
1954 AIR 282.
M.S.Pandit, ‘Outlines of Hindu Jurisprudence, 1989 P.3.
G.Nageswa Rao Vs. APSRTC 1959 AIR 1376. The subsequent development in this case
has led to the resignation of then Chief Minister, Mr. Neelam Sanjeeva Reddy.
See for details Sir Fransis Mac Naughten’s observations quoted in Sen, P.N. “General
principles of Hindu Jurisprudence’ P.376.

8 / NYAYA DEEP

and human welfare and thereby excelled many other legal system of
the World. Inspite of the fact that law constituted a part of Dharma,
law became identical to Dharma and according to Jaimini in his purva
mimamsa considered Dharma thus:- “Dharma is founded on revelation
which is conducive to the welfare of the people and the society. Dharma
is that which is ordained by Vedas. The welfare component in Dharma
brings very closer to the Bentham’s theory of utility which lays down that
‘law should promote the maximum happiness of the maximum number
of people”.13

Contents of Dharma
Dharma is that which is followed by those learned in the Vedas and
what is approved by conscience of the virtuous men who are free from
hatred and inordinate affection.14 Dharma is capable of being divided into
four indices and they can be stated thus:i)

Sruti i.e., Vedas

ii) Smrithi
iii) Sadaachara
iv) that which is pleasing to one’s conscience
In this, Sadachara relates to the conduct of virtuous men and this aspect
of dharma corresponds to law, while the contents have the unique mixture
of religion, morality and law. However, law is different from Sadachara
which is all pervasive and applies to the entire universe. However, the
conduct of righteous men which sustains in a particular society may
correspond to law, to be adjudged by the law in force.
Though Sadachara is not equated to law but resembles the law of the
modern times, in view of the fact that law varies according to place, time
and values customs and other physical conditions, for ex., the law relating
to Hindu Joint family may be founded only in India and not in other parts
of the World. Hence, uniform applicability of law throughout the World
is not possible, though the conduct of virtuous men may be applicable all
over the World.

13
14

See Bentham’s, ‘Theory of Legislation’ P.1.
Manu Samhita Chapter II Verse 1.

9 / NYAYA DEEP

Morality and Law
It is necessary to note the fundamental distinction between law and
morality. As Gandhiji observed, “every law must contain irreducible
principles of morality and law divorced totally from morals ceases to
secure the respect of the people”. It can be observed that the laws are
enacted not because they are good or desirable or necessary to be enacted.
A law may be made by the party in power because of political reasons
and to serve certain ends which are not basically morals. For example the
voluntary disclosure of income conferring immunity from prosecution
may not be moral but the object achieved in getting black money declared
and tax to be collected thereon may be viewed reasonable. The ruling in
Bearer Bonds Case,15 the immunity extended to tax evaders in order to
unearth black money may be viewed reasonable and not on moral grounds.
Similar view is taken in the voluntary disclosure of Income Scheme, 1972
in upholding its validity on grounds of ‘reasonableness’.
Sadachara aspect of dharma is morality. It stresses on good conduct,
avoidance of improper motives or undesirable behavior. Men’s inner
and outer existence and feeling generated from such an existence have a
considerable bearing in distinguishing law and morals. While the inner
existence is regulated by religious percepts and doctrines, the outer is
governed and controlled by legal rules. In all these the acts of the individual
and the motive for them have great relevancy. For example, to give food
to the needy and starving people is good but doing it for robbing them
or depriving them of their belongings makes it as undesirable conduct,
which is opposed to morals. Taking an article found in order to restore
it to the owner is good but appropriate the same for one’s personal use is
undesirable and opposed to morals. Many examples may be quoted from
day to day happenings in society.
Law becomes necessary to regulate the conduct of the individual interse and the society. It can safely be stated that secular character of religion
is connected with morality and rule of law and the Smritikars classified
the entire rules into three categories16 namely:i) Achara (rules of daily routine)
ii) Vyarhara (rules, decrees or commands of the king)
15
16

1981 AIR 138
Pandit M.S. “Outlines of Ancient Hindu Jurisprudence” (1989) P. 2 & 3.

10 / NYAYA DEEP

iii) Prayaschita (penance)
In this only Vyavhara contains the legal rules of human conduct and
thus Law of Dharma sastras closely resembled the law of reason or natural
law avoiding the conflicts between spiritual and temporal powers and
bring out the accurate distinction between law and morals.
Law deals with only such principles of morality which is enforceable
through law and to that extent, it forms part of the present legal system
unlike in the ancient period. For example consumption of liquor is bad
and morally undesirable, unless it is prohibited by law, it is not to be
enforceable as a binding rule of conduct and punishable.
The ultimate aim of morals in the life of a person is to secure salvation
or moksha, while law helps him to lead a life consistent with human dignity
and self-respect and attain the highest level of excellence like Mahatma
Gandhi and other distinguished personalities. Salmond asserted, “The
law is the common meeting point of law and ethics”.

Dharma and preservation of unity and social order
Unity, social order and maintenance of peace have been the concerns
from ancient period till the present day. The various restrictions on
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution are based on the unity
and integrity, public order and other similar grounds. Morality is also a
permissible ground but it does not cover the entire field of morals but
confined to the prevailing standards of morality legally recognized. In the
ancient society, Varna Vyvastha dealing with division of labour aimed at
“preservation of unity and social order”.17 However, in the present days,
the divine origin of law has been turned into man-made one and has
become a source of exploitation rather than an instrument to secure evenhanded justice to the people.

Dharma and Duty
Dharma stands for duty or kartavya and thus duty can be classified
as follows:-18
i) Raj Dharma (duty of the king)
ii) Grahastha (duty of the family)
17
18

Dr. N.V.Paranjape “Studies in Jurisprudence and legal theory” 6th Edition P.98.
Gandhi quoted by Justice K.B.Panda “Sanatan Dharma and Law” 1977 P.23.

11 / NYAYA DEEP

iii) Naridharma (duty of women)
However, with the concept of Dharma passing through several
transitions over the years, it has now been looked at basically as privileges,
duties and obligation of a man, his standard of conduct as a member of the
society.19 There has been an increasing stress on “duty” rather than right
in the administration of justice. The conduct according to Dharma meant
performance of duty towards others and the society in the interests of the
community as a whole.20 This view is shared by a modern jurist21 when he
observed: “The only right which any man can possess is the right to do his
duty”. Salmond considered the rights and duties are co-relative but many
others22 stressed that the essence of law is duty.
Another view relates to stating that law and truth are the same.23
However, it is pertinent to note that in the administration of justice,
the duty of the police while investigation or the courts as adjudicators
are called upon to find out the truth, through all types of admissible
evidence. Even, when the witness is examined in the court, he is required
to take oath in the name of God…..to speak the truth and nothing but
truth. This is evidence positive of relying on God to discover the truth.
In the interpretation of law, the function of law is specifically mentioned
as the ‘essence social security of men and the existing social institution
by avoiding conflicts and confrontations between individuals.24 Thus,
everyone is kept within the limits, in relationship with others as well as to
the society. This rule of interpretation is equally available in the present
system of administration of justice.

Dharma and Absolute Justice
Gandhiji considered ‘God as unchanging living law’ and from the
point of view of religion, it requires obedience to the law of God. Salmond
considered absolute justice as ‘justice in deed and in truth’. In the present
day scheme of administration of justice is, “justice according to law”.
The present law suffers from several defects and deficiencies so that even
obtaining justice according to law in some cases has been an exercise in
futility”.
19
20
21
22
23
24

See for details Dr. P.V.Kane, “History of Dharma Sastras” Vol. I (2nd Ed.) P.344.
Sen. P.N. “General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence” P.375.
See Duguit and the Principles of Social Solidarity.
Forex in Hans Kelson, and Angnste Compte.
Briharanyak Upanishad Chapter IV Verse 4.
Radhabinod Paul, “The History of Hindu Law” 1958 P.194.

12 / NYAYA DEEP

There has been constant appeal to the ‘higher law’ than the man-made
laws in order to secure absolute justice. This is possible to attain only by
observance of natural law or divine law or law of God.

Blackstone observed thus:“The natural law being co-existent with material and emanating
from God himself is superior to all other laws. It is binding over all the
Countries at all times and no man made law will be valid, if it is contrary
to the law of nature”25
The natural law makes an ever-ending search for absolute justice. In
this context, it is pertinent to quote Dr. Friedmann26, “the theory of natural
law is a tale of search of mankind for absolute justice and its failure”. This
statement can be illustrated by Indian decisions from Gopalan27 to Menaka
Gandhi28 and then the Tulsiram Patel.29 The principles of equity, justice
and good conscience are nothing but emanating from the principles of
natural law which already finds a place in the legal system in India but has
been greatly influenced by the interpretative power of the courts.

Conclusion
Only by adherence to Dharma and vital principles of morals and
Sadachara as practised in the early periods, we can make attempts to
raise justice to the standards of “absolute justice”. There must be constant
review of principles of morality which should find greater place in the
judicial system.
In the making of laws, the need to incorporate the principles of morals
to promote social welfare and to promote the “maximum happiness of the
maximum number of the people” deserves utmost consideration.
******

25
26
27
28
29

Blackstone “commentaries” introduction P.39.
Friedmann “Legal Theory” P.43 to 45.
AIR 1950 SC P.27
AIR 1978 SC P.597.
AIR 1985 SC P.1416.

13 / NYAYA DEEP

-Dr. Arvind Chakraborty*
-Debaditya Das**

Reservation Quota must be for all who
deserve, should not be based upon Caste
& Religion Critical Analysis
Reservation must be confined to a minority of seats.1
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar

Introduction
The right to equality is one of the six rights that have been granted
to us. Indian Constitution guarantees equality before the law and equal
protection of the law. It has been interpreted as a prohibition against
unreasonable classification. Equality between women and men in the
Constitution are to be found in the Part III of the Constitution.
In particulars Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Part III of the Constitution
which guarantees right to equality. Article 325 of the Constitution of India,
which guarantees that all shall have the right to vote irrespective of sex,
Part IV of the Constitution, the Directive principles of State policy which
are Fundamental guidelines for governance, although not enforceable in
a Court of law. In addition, some Constitutional amendments also refer to
women, It shall be the duty of every citizen of India to renounce practices
derogatory to the dignity of women. The 73rd Constitutional Amendment
also provides for the reservation of one-third seats in all tiers of local
government for women.2
The Indian Constitution came in to force on 26th January 1950 and the
main question before the Court was whether sub-classification or microclassification of Scheduled Casts for the purpose of reservation is violative
of Article 14 of the Constitution or not ? The State of Andhra Pradesh by an
Ordinance the A. P. S. C. (Rationalization of Reservation) Ordinance, 2000
which became an Act subsequently, divided the 57 castes enumerated in
*

Dr. Arvind Chakraborty, Principal-in-charge, Haldia law College

**

B. A. LL. B. (H), 4th Semester, LL. M., Haldia Law College.

1
2

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in a Constitutent Assembly.
Article 243(D) (1) Constitution of India.

14 / NYAYA DEEP

the Presidential list into four groups based on their inter-se backwardness
and fixed separate quotas in reservation for each of these groups. Thus,
the 15 per cent reservation for backward classes in the State in educational
institutions and services of the State under Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the
Constitution for Scheduled Castes were apportioned amongst the four
groups in the following manner, i.e., Group A – 1 per cent, Group B – 7
per cent, Group C – 6 per cent, and Group D – 1 per cent. The Supreme
Court held that such sub-classification is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution.

Historical Development
Caste Based Reservation in India Started in 2nd Century BC. In Manusmriti -the law book of Brahmins all the laws were based on Caste and no
Merit was ever considered. It divided people into High and Low Castes
on the basis of their birth and not on the basis of Merit. Wealth, Political
power, Spiritual leadership, Education, Ownership of Land, Trade and all
lucrative aspects were reserved purely to the higher castes.
The correct term used for reservation in the Indian Constitution is
Representation. Those who have benefited from reservation and are
enjoying the fruits of reservation must first of all understand the true
meaning of reservation. It is not given to anyone in his individual capacity.
It is given to individual as a representative of the underprivileged
community. The beneficiaries of reservations are in turn expected to help
their communities to come up. Reservation is a democratic principle to
provide representation to the castes hitherto remained unrepresented in
the governance of the country. Justice Reddy observed “While we agree
that competitive skill is relevant in higher posts, we do not think it is
necessary to be apologetic about reservation in posts, higher or lower, so
long as the minimum requirements are satisfied. “On the other hand, we
have to be apologetic that there still exists a need for reservation.
The systems of reservation of India is a form of positive discrimination.
It follows from the concept of equality of opportunity as enshrined in the
Constitution of India. Reservation is the result of laws, guidelines, and
administrative action by the different levels of governments in India, and
includes reserved or exclusive access to seats in the different legislatures,
to government jobs, and to enrolment in higher educational institutions.
There are some differences between how it is enabled by the central Union
Government and by individual States and Union Territories.
15 / NYAYA DEEP

The basis of reservation is the perceived existence of some sort of
historical or contemporary social and educational disadvantage. The
primary objective of the present-day Indian reservation system is to
enhance the social and educational status of underprivileged communities
and thus improve their lives.

Before Independence
Quota systems favouring certain castes and other communities existed
before independence in several areas of British India. Demands for various
forms of positive discrimination had been made, for example, in 1882 and
1891. Shahu, the Maharaja of the princely state of Kolhapur, introduced
reservation in favour of non-Brahminand backward classes, much of
which came into force in 1902. He provided free education to everyone
and opened several hostels to make it easier for them to receive it. He also
tried to ensure that people thus educated were suitably employed, and he
appealed both for a class-free India and the abolition of untouchability. His
1902 measures created 50 per cent reservation for backward communities.
The British Raj introduced elements of reservation in the Government
of India Act of 1909 and there were many other measures put in place
prior to independence. A significant one emerged from the Round Table
Conference of June 1932, when the Prime Minister of Britain, Ramsay
Macdonald, proposed the Communal Award, according to which separate
representation was to be provided for Muslims, Sikhs, Indian Christians,
Anglo-Indians, and Europeans. The depressed classes were assigned
a number of seats to be filled by election from constituencies in which
only they could vote, although they could also vote in other seats. The
proposal was controversial: Mahatma Gandhi fasted in protest against
it but many among the depressed classes, including their leader, B. R.
Ambedkar, favoured it. After negotiations, Gandhi reached an agreement
with Ambedkar to have a single Hindu electorate, with Dalits having
seats reserved within it. Electorates for other religions, such as Islam and
Sikhism, remained separate. This became known as the Poona Pact.

After Independence
After the independence of India in 1947 there were some major
changes in favour of the Scheduled Tribes (ST), Scheduled Castes (SC) and
Other Backward Classes (OBC).
16 / NYAYA DEEP

A common form of caste discrimination in India has been the practice
of untouchability. SCs were the primary targets of the practice, which was
outlawed by the new Constitution of India.
In 1954, the Ministry of Education suggested that 20 per cent of places
should be reserved for the SCs and STs in educational institutions with
a provision to relax minimum qualifying marks for admission by 5 per
cent wherever required. In 1982, it was specified that 15 per cent and 7.5
per cent of vacancies in public sector and government-aided educational
institutes should be reserved for the SC and ST candidates, respectively.
A significant change began in 1978 when the Mandal Commission
was established to assess the situation of the socially- and educationallybackward classes. The commission did not have exact population figures
for the OBCs and so used data from the 1931 census, thus estimating
the group’s population at 52 per cent. In 1980 the commission’s report
recommended that a reserved quota for OBCs of 27 per cent should apply
in respect of services and public sector bodies operated by the Union
Government. It called for a similar change to admissions to institutes
of higher education, except where states already had more generous
requirements. It was not until the 1990s that the recommendations were
implemented in Union Government jobs.
The Supreme Court of India ruled in 1992 that reservations could not
exceed 50 per cent, anything above which it judged would violate equal
access as guaranteed by the Constitution. It thus put a cap on reservations.
However, there are state laws that exceed this 50 per cent limit and these
are under litigation in the Supreme Court. For example, in the State
of Tamil Nadu the caste-based reservation stands at 69 per cent and applies
to about 87 per cent of the population.

Constitutional Perspective
Article 14 expressly provides the State shall not deny to any person
equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the
territory of India.
Article 15(1) specifically bars the State from discriminating against
any citizen of India on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of
birth, or any of them.
17 / NYAYA DEEP

Article 15(2) prohibits subjection of a citizen to any disability, liability,
restriction or condition on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place
of birth with regard to –
a.

access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of
entertainment, or,

b. the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public
resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated
to the use of general public.
Under Article 15(3), the State is not prevented from making any special
provision for women and children.
Article 15(4) or Article 29(2) does not prevent the State from
making any special provisions for the advancement of any socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes.
Going by the past experience of exploitation and oppression of the
lower castes, the framers of the Constitution felt that unless special
provisions were made for the protection of the rights of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes to secure fair representation
in public employment in proportion to their population, it would never be
possible for them to catch up and compete successfully for securing public
employment. Therefore, to secure fair representation of Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes in services and posts under
the State, special provisions of reservation under Articles 16(4), 16(4-A),
16(4-B), 46 and 335 of the Constitution were made.
Article 16(4) expressly provides for the reservation of appointments or
posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of
State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State. Article
16(4) reads as under: “Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of
any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not
adequately represented in the services under the State.”
Article 16(4-A) says that nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion with
18 / NYAYA DEEP

consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services
under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented
in the services under the State.
Article 16(4-A) was inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh
Amendment) Act, 1995 to overcome the decision of the Supreme Court in
Indira Sawhney Vs. Union of India3 that no reservation in promotions could
be made under clause (4).
Clause (4-B) in Article 16 was included by the Constitution (Eightyfirst Amendment) Act 2000 with a view to enabling the State to consider
any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in
that year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under
clause (4) or clause (4-A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in
any succeeding year or years. The clause has further provided that such
class of vacancies shall not be considered together with the vacancies of
the year in which they are being filled up for determining the ceiling of
fifty per cent reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.
Article 46 expressly provides that the Directive Principles of State
Policy also enjoin the State to promote with special care the educational
and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people and, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and, to protect
them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

RESERVATION IN INDIA
Reservations In Elected Bodies
In parliament, caste and tribe based reservations are provided to make
it more representative. Today, out of 543 seats in India’s parliament, 84
(15.47%) are reserved for SC/ Dalits and 47 (8.66%)for ST/Tribes. Allocation
of seats for Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the Lok Sabha are made on the
basis of proportion of Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the State concerned
to that of the total population. A similar percentage of exclusive seats has
been provided for members of designated castes and tribes in each state
legislature. Local self-governments have caste, tribe and gender based
reservation system in place.
3

AIR 1993 SC 477 at page 537

19 / NYAYA DEEP

Reservations In Employment
A fixed percentage of India’s government and public sector jobs are
made exclusive for categories of people largely based on their caste or
tribe.
The 1992 Supreme Court ruling in the Indra Sawhney case said that
reservations in job promotions are “unconstitutional” but allowed its
continuation for five years.
In 1995, the 77th amendment to the Constitution was made to
amend Article 16 before the five-year period expired to continue with
reservations for SC/STs in promotions. It was further modified through
the 85th amendment to give the benefit of consequential seniority to SC/
ST candidates promoted by reservation.
The 81st amendment was made to the Constitution to permit the
government to treat the backlog of reserved vacancies as a separate and
distinct group, to which the ceiling of 50 per cent did not apply. The 82nd
amendment inserted a provision in Article 335 to enable states to give
concessions to SC/ST candidates in promotion.
The validity of all the above four amendments was challenged in the
Supreme Court through various petitions clubbed together in M. Nagaraj
& Others Vs. Union of India & Others4, mainly on the ground that these
altered the Basic Structure of the Constitution. In 2006, the Supreme Court
upheld the amendments but stipulated that the concerned state will have
to show, in each case, the existence of “compelling reasons” - which
include “backwardness”, “inadequacy of representation” and overall
“administrative efficiency - before making provisions for reservation. The
court further held that these provisions are merely enabling provisions. If
a state government wishes to make provisions for reservation to SC/STs in
promotion, the state has to collect quantifiable data showing backwardness
of the class and inadequacy of representation of that class. In 2007, the
Government of Uttar Pradesh introduced reservation in job promotions.
However, citing the Supreme Court decision, the policy was ruled to be
unconstitutional by the Allahabad High Court in 2011. The decision was
challenged in the Supreme Court, which upheld it in 2012 by rejecting the
government’s argument because it failed to furnish sufficient valid data to
justify the move to promote employees on a caste basis.
4

(2006) 8 SCC 212

20 / NYAYA DEEP

Reservations In Education
In India most of the scholarships or student aid is available only
to—SCs, STs, BCs, OBCs, women, Muslims, and other minorities. Only
about 0.7% of scholarships or student aid in India is based on merit. The
University Grants Commission (UGC) provides financial assistance to
universities for the establishment of Special Cells for SC/STs. The cells
help universities implement the reservation policy in student admission
and staff recruitment processes for teaching and non-teaching jobs.
They also help the SC/ST categories integrate with the university
community and help remove the difficulties SC/ST individuals may
have experienced. New rules implementation of UPA Government does
not provide scholarship scheme and reservation quota of students and
employees of colleges under central University and State University
approved by the UGC.

Mandal Commission – Arguments
Against Reservations
A decade after the Mandal Commission gave its report, V.P. Singh, the
Prime Minister at the time, tried to implement its recommendations in
1989. The criticism was sharp and colleges across the country held massive
protests against it. Soon after, Rajiv Goswami, student of Delhi University,
committed self-immolation in protest of the government’s actions. His
act further sparked a series of self-immolations by other college students
and led to a formidable movement against job reservations for Backward
Castes in India. First student to die due to self immolation was Surinder
Singh Chauhan on Sep 24, 1990.

Arguments Against Reservations




Allocating quotas on the basis of caste is a form of racial
discrimination, and contrary to the right to equality. Although the
exact relation between caste and race is far from well established.
As a consequence of legislating to provide reservations for
Christians and Muslim, religious minorities in all government
education institutions will be introduced which is contrary to
the ideas of secularism, and is a form of anti-discrimination on
thebasis of religion.
21 / NYAYA DEEP














Most often, only economically sound people (and rather rich) from
the so-called lower castes will make use of most of the reserved
seats, thus counteracting the spirit of reservations. Political parties
know reservations are no way to improve the lot of the poor and
the backward. They support them because of self-interest of the
“creamy layer”, who use the reservations to further their own
family interests, and as a political flag of ‘achievement’ during
election campaigns. In fact, several studies show that the OBC
class is quite comparable with the general caste in terms of annual
per capita consumption expenditure, and the top strata of OBC is
ahead in a host of consumption areas.
The quality of these elite institutes may go down, because merit is
severely being compromised by reserving seats for certain castebased communities.
There are no efforts made to give proper primary education to
truly deprived classes so there is no need to reserve seats for
higher studies. The government schools in India have absolutely
no comparison to the public schools in the developed countries,
and only about 65% of the Indian population is literate. The critics
argue that “reservation” only in higher institutions and jobs,
without improving primary and secondary education, cannot
solve this problem.
The government is dividing people on the basis of castes for
political advantages.
The caste system is kept alive through these measures. Instead
of coming up with alternative innovative ideas which make sure
equal representation at the same time making the caste system
irrelevant, the decision is only fortifying the caste system.
The autonomy of the educational institutes are lost. Not everyone
from the so-called upper classes are rich, and not all from so
called lower classes are poor. The reservation policy of the Indian
Congress will create a huge unrest in the Indian society.
Providing quotas on the basis of caste and not on the basis of merit
will deter the determination of many educated and deserving
students of India. Multinational companies will be deterred by
this action of the government, and foreign investment in India
may dry down, hurting the growth of the Indian economy.
Doubtless, urgent actions to improve the lot of the majority,
which has not benefited from development — not achieved after
55 years of reservations for scheduled castes — are essential. But
this must not hazard improving the economy’s competitiveness in
a very competitive world. There are already talks of reservations
in the private sector. If even after providing so many facilities
22 / NYAYA DEEP

to reserved categories during education, if there is no adequate
representation of those people in the work force, there must be
some problems with the education system.

Critics of the Mandal Commission
Mandal Commission argued that it is unfair to accord people special
privileges on the basis of caste, even in order to redress traditional caste
discrimination. They argue that those that deserve the seat through merit
will be at a disadvantage. They reflect on the repercussions of unqualified
candidates assuming critical positions in society (doctors, engineers, etc.).
As the debate on OBC reservations spreads, a few interesting facts which
raise pertinent question are already apparent. To begin with, do we have
a clear idea what proportion of our population is OBC? According to the
Mandal Commission (1980) it is 52 percent. According to 2001 Indian
Census, out of India’s population of 1,028,737,436 the Scheduled Castes
comprise 166,635,700 and Scheduled Tribes 84,326,240, that is 16.2% and
8.2% respectively. There is no data on OBCs in the census. However,
according to National Sample Survey’s 1999-2000 round around 36 per
cent of the country’s population is defined as belonging to the Other
Backward Classes (OBC). The proportion falls to 32 per cent on excluding
Muslim OBCs. A survey conducted in 1998 by National Family Health
Statistics (NFHS) puts the proportion of non-Muslim OBCs as 29.8 per
cent. The NSSO data also shows that already 23.5 per cent of college
seats are occupied by OBCs. That’s just 8.6 per cent short of their share of
population according to the same survey. Other arguments include that
entrenching the separate legal status of OBCs and SC/STs will perpetuate
caste differentiation and encourage competition among communities at
the expense of national unity. They believe that only a small new elite of
educated Dalits, Adivasis, and OBCs benefit from reservations, and that
such measures do nothing to lift the mass of people out of backwardness
and poverty.

Arguments Offered in Support of Reservations


People who support reservations keenly invite all the antireservationists to lead the life of a backward class citizen and
live within the means that they have for themselves. It is their
contention that in a experimental set-up like this the differences
in achievement / performance would disappear or reduce down
to experimental errors/random error. Underlying idea being that
23 / NYAYA DEEP











everyone is born equal but into an unequal circumstances. And
when the circumstances have been a result of a social system then
the system either needs to be abandoned or reformed.
Reservations are a political necessity in India because vast
influential sections of voting population see reservations as
beneficial to themselves. All governments have supported
maintaining and/or increasing reservations. Reservations are legal
and binding. As shown by Gujjar agitations (Rajasthan, 2007–
2008), increasing reservations is also essential for peacekeeping
in India.
Although Reservation schemes do undermine the quality of
education but still affirmative Action schemes are in place in
many countries including USA, South Africa, Malaysia, Brazil etc.
It was researched in Harvard University that Affirmative Action
program are beneficial to the under-privileged. The studies said
that Blacks who enter elite institutions with lower test scores
and grades than those of whites achieve notable success after
graduation. They earn advanced degrees at rates identical to those
of their white classmates. They are even slightly more likely than
whites from the same institutions to obtain professional degrees
in law, business and medicine. They become more active than
their white classmates in civic and community activities.
Affirmative Action has helped many - if not everyone from underprivileged and / or under-represented communities to grow and
occupy top positions in the world’s leading industries. (See the
Section on Tamil Nadu) Reservation in education is not the final
solution, it is just one of the many solutions. Reservations is a
means to increase representation of hitherto under-represented
caste groups and thereby improve diversity on campus.
Although Reservation schemes do undermine the quality of
education but still they are needed to provide social justice to
the most marginalized and underprivileged is our duty and their
human right. Reservation will really help these marginalized
people to lead successful lives, thus eliminating caste-based
discrimination which is still widely prevalent in India especially in
the rural areas. (over 60% of Indian population stays in Villages).
But meritrocracy is meaningless without equality. First all people
must be brought to the same level, whether it elevates a section or
delevels another, regardless of merit. Only after that merit becomes
meaningful. Privileged people have never known to go backward
due to reservations or lack of “meritrocracy”. Reservations have
only slowed down the process of the ‘forward’ becoming richer
and backward becoming poorer.
24 / NYAYA DEEP









The government of India, is bound and empowered by the
constitution of the country to secure for all citizens equality in
social, economic and political sphere.
Reservations will go a long way in capacity building with regard
to the human resource of the country. In the long run, it has
tremendous economic benefits as it will raise the productivity of
the majority of the potential workforce of the country.
In a perfectly functioning society the institutions and various walks
of life must represent the many sections roughly in proportion to
their share in population. In India it is clearly not the case and
hence the need for reservations.
India does not have the economic or institutional capacity for
undertaking a grassroots based solution to the problem, so
reservations remain the only practical solution for social antidiscrimination.

Judicial Response
Devadasan Vs. Union of India5
The Government reserved 17% seats to the S.C. and S.T. If in that
year S.C. and S.T. candidates are not available, the seats reserved shall be
carried forward to the subsequent years. Supreme Court held that carry
forward rule was unconstitutional and struck down.

State of Kerala Vs. Thomas6
State Government of Kerala issued a Government Order, announcing
that there would be departmental tests for promotion from lower division
clerks to upper division clerks. In the same Government Order, S. C. and
S. T. passed the departmental examination without any test. Thomus
challenged it.

Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India7
Indra Sawhney Vs. Union of India, known as the Mandal Commission
case, is a very significant pronouncement of the Supreme Court on the
question of reservation of posts for backward classes. The Court has dealt
with this question in a very exhaustive manner. The Mandal Commission
was appointed by the Government of India in terms of Article 340 of
5
6
7

AIR 1964 SC 179
AIR 1976 SC 490
AIR 1993 SC 477 at page 537

25 / NYAYA DEEP

the Constitution in 1979 to investigate the conditions of socially and
educationally backward classes. One of the major recommendations
made by the Commission was that, besides the Schedule Castes (SCs)
and Schedule Tribes (STs), FOR OTHER Backward Classes (OBCs) which
constitute nearly 52% component of the population, 27% government
jobs be reserved so that the total reservation for all, SCs, STs, and OBCs,
amount to 50%. No action was taken on the basis of the Mandal Report
for long after it was submitted except that it was discussed in the house of
Parliament twice, once in 1982 and again in 1983.
On August 13, 1990, the V. P. Singh Government at the centre issued an
office memorandum accepting the Mandal Commission recommendation
and announcing 27% reservation for the socially and educationally
backward classes in vacancies in civil posts and services under the
Government of India. The Court examined the scope and extent of Article
16(4) in detail and clarified various aspects on which there were difference
of opinion in various earlier judgments.
The majority opinion of the Supreme Court on various aspects of
reservation provided in Article 16(4) may be summarized as follows :1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Backward Class of citizen in Article 16(4) can be identified on the
basis of caste and not only on economic basis.
Article 16(4) is not an exception to Article 16(1). It is an instance of
classification. Reservation can be made under Article 16(1).
Backward Classes in Article 16(4) are not similar to as socially and
educationally backward in Article 15(4).
Creamy layer must be excluded from Backward Classes.
Article 16(4) permits classification of backward classes into
backward and more backward classes.
A backward class of citizens cannot be identified only and
exclusively with reference to economic criteria.
Reservation shall not exceed 50 per cent.
Reservation can be made by ‘Executive Order’.

Dr. Priti Srivastava Vs. State of Madhya Prades8
In a land mark judgment in Dr. Priti Srivastava Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh,
a five judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court by 4:1 majority has
8

AIR 1999 SC 2894

26 / NYAYA DEEP

held that merit alone can be the criterion for selecting students to the super
speciality courses in medical and engineering. ‘At the level of admission
to super speciality courses, no special provisions are permissible” the
Court declared. The petitioners have challenged the Uttar Pradesh Post
Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for SC`s and ST`s and Other
Backward Classes) Act and a Madhya Pradesh Government order that had
lowered the minimum qualifying marks for admission to super speciality
medical courses in favour of the reserved category candidates. The Court
said “the special opportunity which is provided by reservation cannot
however, be made available to those who are substantially below the
levels prescribed for the general category candidates” and further added,
“It will not be possible for such candidates to fully benefit from the very
limited and specialized post graduate training opportunities which are
desired to produce high caliber well trained professionals for the benefit
of the public”.
The five judge Bench comprising of Chif Justice A. S. Anand, Justice S.
B. Mazumdar, Justice Sujata B. Manoher, Justice Venkataswami and Justice
V. N. Khare set aside the U. P. Act and the Madhya Pradesh Government
order as unconstitutional and violative of Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
The Bench, however, made it clear that the students, who have already
taken admission into the course will not be affected.
The Supreme Court said “Admissions to the highest available medical
course in the country at the super speciality levels, where even the facilities
for training are limited must be given on the basis of competitive merit.
The object of Article 15(4) is to advance the equality principle by proving
for protective discrimination in favour of the weaker sections.
T. M. A. Pai Foundation Vs. State of Karnataka9, Islamic Academy Vs.
State of Karnataka10, and P. A. Inamdar Vs. State of Maharashtra11
In T. M. Pai Foundation and P. A. Inamdar cases it has been held that
the State cannot make reservation of seats in admissions in privately run
educational institutions. There the admissions can be done on the basis of
common admission test conduced by the State or these institutions and on
the basis of merit.
9
10
11

AIR 2003 SC 355
AIR 2003 SC 3724
AIR 2005 SC 3226

27 / NYAYA DEEP

In Islamic Academy case the Court held that the State can fix quota for
admissions to these educational institutions but it cannot fix fee and also
admissions can be done on the basis of common admission test and on the
basis of merit.
In P. A. Inamdar, however, the Court has overruled the Islamic Academy
ruling to the effect that the “State could fix the quota for admissions to
private professional educational institutions”. This Amendment enables
the State to make provision for reservation for the reservation of Backward
and S. C. & S. T. Classes in admission to private educational institutions.

A. P. B. C. Sangh Vs. Jharkhand State Vaishya Federation12
In A. P. B. C. Sangh Vs. Jharkhand State Vaishya Federation, the
appellants challenged the validity of the State Government amalgamating
‘Extremely Backward Class’ and ‘Backward Class’ into one group for
the purpose of reservation in professional and educational institutions
as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The State of Jharkhand had
given 73% reservation for appointments in Government services adopting
Bihar Act. There were four categories eligible for reservations – SC`s 14%,
ST`s 32%, Extremely Backward Classes 18%, Backward Classes 09%, Total
73%. This process of reservation was challenged before the High Court.
The High Court ordered the reduction of reservation to 50%.
The State Government complied with the order of the High Court but
did not give any direction in respect to the amalgamation of categories. In
appeal the Supreme Court held that the decision of the State Government
to amalgamate the two classes, i.e., Extremely Backward Classes and
Backward Classes is unreasonable as two different classes are treated
similarly which is in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.

Ashok Kumar Thakur Vs. Union of India13
The Supreme Court held that the 93rd Constitution Amendment Act of
2006 provided 27% reservation in admission to O.B.C. candidates in higher
educational institution like I.I.T.`s and I.I.M.`s is constitutional. The Court
left open the question of reservation to these category of citizens in private
educational institutions. The Amendment provided that without touching
the present strength of general category of students, O.B.C. candidates can
12
13

AIR 2006 SC 2814
AIR 2008 SCW 2899

28 / NYAYA DEEP

be give reservation. The Court held that benefit of reservation cannot be
made available to creamy layer candidates. The Court held that reservation
must be reviewed in after every five years. The creamy layer requirement
will not apply to either S. C.`s or S. T.`s.
They will be given reservation every year. It may be remember that
in the Mandal commission case, the Supreme Court held that there can
be no reservation to the other backward classes in higher educational
institutions and post graduate level in the universities. But due to vote
bank policy this rule of Mandal Commission has been given burial by 93 rd.
Amendment Act 2005 of the constitution. The famous of the constitution
intend the quota to continue in perpetuity.

Premjit Singh Vs. State of Punjab14
In Premjit Singh Vs. State of Punjab, the petitioner was elected as Panch
for reservation seat of Schedule Caste (women). The petitioner challenged
the election. The Court, however upheld her election. The Court said
that if the seat of Sarpanch of a village is reserved for Scheduled Caste
then both men and women belonging to Scheduled Castes category can
contest the election for the said post because the eligibility is only being
a Scheduled Caste Panch and not the nature of the constituency they
represent as Panches.

Suggestions
{{ Article 15(4) and 16(4) are not crystal clear. Legislatures have to
think deeply with those Articles.
{{ Judiciary should take active role for reservation of seats in any
educational institution and also for job.
{{ To form an agency where the complaint should be heard with
special care of natural justice.
{{ To examine the existing laws in the country and to recommend
moderations to such laws if required.
{{ To review the politics laid-down by the Government and to
recommend moderations if needed.
{{ To listen to complaints regarding any types of violation and file
reports to the appropriate authorities for further action.
14

AIR 2009 P&H 7

29 / NYAYA DEEP

{{ To find out the inequalities and discriminations.
{{ Government should enhance the mass consciousness.

Recommendations
We honour the honourable judgment of the Supreme Court. But we
also think that reservation system should be totally abolished in our
Constitution because it is totally against “Equality before Law (Article
14)”. It is just a vote bank politics and it is an eye-wash to the weaker
section.
According to Article 14 of the Constitution of India, ‘the State shall not
deny to any person equality before law or equal protection of laws within
the territory of India.’
When we go through the fundamental rights, we first know about
equality before law (Article 14) which is guaranteed by our Indian
Constitution. So what is equality and where is equality? Reservation
system always violates equality.
Finally, we also think that any person should be selected in any
educational institution or any government job or any other places as per
his or her merit.

Conclusion
“In a landmark verdict, the Supreme Court on 11th March 2016,
ruled that scheduled caste and scheduled tribe members cannot claim
quota as a right in government job promotions, saying states were not
constitutionally obliged to give preferential treatment to any community
in promotion. A bench of Justices Dipak Misra and Prafulla C Pant said
the government was not bound by any constitutional provision to frame a
policy for reservation in promotion and the court could not order making
reservation in promotion mandatory.
Referring to Articles 16(4), 16(4-A) and 16(4-B) of the Constitution
mandating socially affirmative action to help disadvantaged groups,
the court said states were not bound to make reservation for SCs/STs in
promotion. It said the provisions allowed the government to exercise
discretion and provide for reservation only after collecting quantifiable data
showing backwardness of a class and inadequacy of their representation
30 / NYAYA DEEP

in public employment.
Article 16(4-A) provides that nothing shall prevent the state from
making any provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with
consequential seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services
in favour of SCs and STs which, in the opinion of the state, were not
adequately represented.
The bench refused to direct Uttar Pradesh government to carry out an
exercise to find the representation of SCs/STs in government jobs to frame
a policy for reservation in promotion. “The state is not bound to make
reservation for SCs and STs in matter of promotions. Therefore, there is
no duty. In such a situation, to issue a mandamus to collect data would
tantamount to asking the authorities whether there is ample data to frame
a rule or regulation. This will be in a way, entering into the domain of
legislation,” the bench said.
The Constitution granted discretionary power to the government to
frame law for reservation in promotion and the government could not be
forced to bring regulation on the issue, the bench said. “The courts do not
formulate any policy, and therefore remain away from making anything
that would amount to legislation, rules and regulation or policy relating
to reservation. The courts can test the validity of the same when they
are challenged. The court cannot direct for making legislation or for that
matter any kind of subordinate legislation,” the bench said while rejecting
a PIL seeking a direction to the UP government to grant reservation in
promotion.”17
Present Reservation, quota system do not deliver social justice, it only
enables political parties to gain political mileage. Economically weak
families do not get protection while there are Rich, Billionaires under
protected categories. Reservation quota must be for all who deserves,
should not be based upon caste & religion.

31 / NYAYA DEEP

REFERENCES








Pandey, Dr. J. N., Constitutional Law of India, Central Law
Publications, Allahabad, 49th . Edition 2012, Page No. 117, 131 –
176.
Jain, M. P., Indian Constitutional Law, LexisNexis, Haryana, 5th .
Edition 2013, Page No. 987 – 1067.
Bandyopadhyay, Rathin., Women Rights Human Rights, R.
CAMBRAY & CO. PVT. LTD., Kolkata, 1st Edition 2010, Page No.
109, 238 – 245.
Bakshi, P. M., The Constitutional Law of India,, Universal Law
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, 3rd Edition 1996, Page No. 15 – 25.
Singh, M. P., The Constitution of India, Delhil Law House, Delhi,
4th Edition 2015, Page No. 57 – 70.

******

32 / NYAYA DEEP

—Dr. Sailaja Petikam*

Welfare of Senior Citizens- Need for
Social Justice
Abstract
The population of the elderly persons has been increasing over the
years. In India also, about 8% of the total population is above 60 years.
The figure is likely to cross 18% by 2025. Senior citizens face number of
problems. Mainly economic problems due to loss of employment, income
deficiency and economic insecurity. Another major problem is physical
and physiological issues that include health and medical problems,
nutritional deficiency, and the problem of adequate housing etc. In order
to protect the rights of senior citizens and old parents the Government
of India provides special provisions to seniors citizens in number of
legislations viz. Art’s. 41 and 46 of Constitution of India, 1950 and for
maintenance under Sec.125 of Cr.P.C., 1973, and Sec.20 of Hindu Adoption
and Maintenance Act, 1956 to Hindus and other uncodified personal laws.
However, recently the Government of India enacted a separate legislation
namely “The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act,
2007” to provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and
welfare of parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognized under
the Constitution and to establish special Tribunals for enforcement of
the provisions of this Act. This paper shall be analyzing the provisions
of this Act, with a view to create awareness among of older persons on
their rights and also to children’s on their obligations because of the
degeneration of joint family system dislocation of familiar bonds and loss
of respect for the aged person exist in the present society. If such type
of protective discrimination is allowed to senior citizens, then only social
development in India can be achieved by attaining social justice through
fuller participation of the disadvantaged sections including senior citizens.

*

Dr.P.Sailaja, B.Sc., LL.M., Ph.D in Law, Lecturer in Law, MRVRGR Law College, Vizinagaram, and also scholar of Prof (Dr) A. Rajendra Prasad, Vice Chancellor, A.N.U. Guntur, A.P., A.P., Email ids: sailaja.petikam@gmail.com, sp.sailaja@yahoo.com, Mobile #
08500673169, 09441512542 and 08179247839.

33 / NYAYA DEEP

KEY WORDS: Senior Citizen, Old Parents, Protection, Welfare, Rights,
Constitution and Legislation.

Full Paper
Introduction:
Ageing is a natural process, which inevitably occurs in human life
cycle. The population of the elderly persons has been increasing over
the years. As per the UNESCO estimates, the number of the aged (60+) is
likely to 590 million in 2005. The figure will be double by 2025. By 2025,
the world will have more elderly than young people and cross two billion
mark by 2050. In India also, the population of elder persons has increased
from nearly 2 crores in 1951 to 7.2 crores in 2001. In other words about 8%
of the total population is above 60 years. The figure is likely to cross 18%
by 2025.

Need of Palliative Care to Senior Citizen:
Senior citizens face a number of problems. Mainly they face economic
problem due to loss of employment, income deficiency and economic
insecurity. Another major problem is physical and physiological problems
include health and medical problems, nutritional deficiency, and the
problem of adequate housing etc. The moral duty to maintain parents
is recognized by all people. In 1992, the UN General Assembly adopted
the proclamation to observe the year 1999 as the International Year of the
Older Persons. The U.N. General Assembly has declared “1st October” as
the International Day of the Older Persons. The U.N. General Assembly
on December 16, 1991 adopted 18 principles which are organized into five
clusters, namely- independence, participation, care, self-fulfillment and
dignity of the older parents.

Constitutional Protection:
Constitution of India, 1950 is also providing some provisions for the
protection of old aged persons. Article 41 of the Constitution stated that
the State shall, within the limits of economic capacity and development,
make effective provisions for securing the right to work, to education
and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and
disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want. Article 46 of the
Constitution is also states that, the State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people…
and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
34 / NYAYA DEEP

These provisions are inserted in the Part-IV of the Constitution i.e. Directive
Principles of State Policy, which are not enforceable by any court of law.
However, the State should have a positive obligation on DPSP as they
should make an Acts in order to protect the rights of the elderly persons.

Legislative Protections:
The moral duty to maintain parents is recognized by all people.
However, so far as law is concerned, the position and extent of such
liability varies from community to community. Amongst the Hindus,
the obligation of sons to maintain their aged parents, who were not
able to maintain themselves out of their own earning and property, was
recognized. The statutory provision for maintenance of parents was
recognized under section 20 of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act,
1956. This Act is the first personal law statute in India, which imposes an
obligation on the Children to maintain parents. The obligation to maintain
parents is not confined to sons only, and daughters also have an equal
duty towards parents. It is important to note that only those parents who
are financially unable to maintain themselves from any source, are entitled
to seek maintenance under this Act. Children have a duty to maintain
their aged parents even under the Muslim law. A son, who though poor,
is earning something, is bound to support his father who earns nothing.
Under Hanafi law, parents and grandparents can claim maintenance
from their children and grandchildren who have the means, even if they
are able to earn their livelihood. Both sons and daughters have a duty to
maintain their parents under the Muslim law. The obligation, however, is
dependent on their means to do so. The Christians and Parsis no personal
laws provide for the maintenance to the parents. Parents who wish to
seek maintenance have to apply under provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

Maintenance under the Code of Criminal Procedure:
According to section 125 of Cr.P.C., 1973, the maintenance to the parents
is concerned, if any person having sufficient means and neglects or refuses
to maintain his father or mother, who are unable to maintain themselves,
then Magistrate of first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal,
order such person to make monthly allowance for the maintenance of his
father or mother, at such monthly rate as such Magistrate thinks fit, and
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time
direct. If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply
with the order, any such Magistrate may, for every breach of the order ,
issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for
35 / NYAYA DEEP

levying fines, and may sentence such person, for the whole, or any part of
each month’s allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance
and expenses of proceeding, as the case be, remaining unpaid after the
execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one month or until payment if sooner made. Provided that no warrant
shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section
unless application is made to the court to levy such amount within a
period of one year from the date on which it became due.
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007:
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act,
2007 provides more effective provisions for the maintenance (includes
provisions for food, clothing, residence and medical attendance and
treatment) and welfare (means provisions for food, health care, recreation
centre’s and other amenities) of parents and senior citizens. In this concern
the children includes son, daughter, grandson and granddaughter but
does not include minor.1

Maintenance:
Part II of the Act clearly stated the duty of the children to provide
maintenance to the parents and senior citizens. Here parent means father
or mother whether biological, adoptive or step father or step mother,
as the case may be, whether or not the father or the mother is a senior
citizen (attained the age of sixty years or above) who is unable to maintain
themselves from his own earning or property owned by him. A childless
senior citizen also can claim maintenance from his relative. Relative means
any legal heir of childless senior citizen who is not a minor, and having
sufficient means, and is in possession of or would inherit his property
after his death.2 Provided, that where more than one relative is entitled to
inherit the property of a senior citizen, the maintenance shall be payable by
such relative in the proportion in which they would inherit his property.3
As per section of the Act,4 any parent or senior citizen or if he is incapable
of making an application for maintenance, then any person is authorised
by him or Tribunal may suo moto take cognizance of the maintenance
application against the children or relative in any District – (a) where he
resides or last resided or (b) where children or relative resides.5
The State Government, by Notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute for each sub-division one or more Tribunals as may be specified
in the Notification for the purpose of adjudicating and decide the order for
maintenance application filed by the parent or senior citizen.6 The Tribunal
36 / NYAYA DEEP

before hearing an application made by the parent or senior citizen refers
the same to conciliation officer and such conciliation officer shall submit
his findings within one month and if amicable settlement has been arrived
at, the Tribunal shall pass an order to that effect.7 If children or relative,
as the case may be, neglect or refuse to maintain himself, the Tribunal
may, order such children or relatives to make a monthly allowance at such
monthly rate for the maintenance of such senior citizen, as the Tribunal
may deem fit and to pay the same to such senior citizen as the Tribunal
may, from time to time, direct. The maximum maintenance allowance
which may be ordered by such Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed
by the State Government which shall not exceed ten thousand rupees per
month. A maintenance order made under this Act shall have the same
force and effect as an order passed under section 125 of Cr.P.C., 1973 order
for maintenance of wives, children and parents, and shall be executed in
the manner prescribed for execution of such order by the Code. Any senior
citizen or a parent, as the case may be, aggrieved by an order of any senior
citizen or a parent, as the case may be, aggrieved by an order of a Tribunal
may, within sixty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the
Appellate Tribunal. The order of the Appellate Tribunal shall be final.8
Whoever, having the care or protection of senior citizen leaves, such
senior citizen in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such
senior citizen, shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three months or fine which may extend to
five thousand rupees or with both.9

Old Age Homes:
The State Government may establish and maintain such number of
oldage homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased
manner, beginning with at least one in each district to accommodate in
such homes a minimum of one hundred fifty senior citizens who are
indigent.10 The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management
of oldage homes, including the standards and various types of services to
be provided by them which are necessary for medical care and means of
entertainment to the inhabitants of such homes.

Medical support to Senior Citizen:
The State Government in order to medical support to senior citizens,
shall ensure that (i)

the Government hospitals or hospitals funded fully or partially by
37 / NYAYA DEEP

the Government shall provide beds for all senior citizens as far as
possible;
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens;
(iii) facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative
diseases is expanded for senior citizens;
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing is
expanded;
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every District
Hospital duly headed by a Medical Officer with experience in
geriatric care.11

Protection of Life and Property of Senior Citizen:

Where any senior citizen who, after the commencement of this Act,
has by way of gift or otherwise, transformed his property, subject to the
condition that the transferee shall provide the basic amenities and basic
physical needs to the transferor and such transferee refuses or fails to
provide such amenities and physical needs, the said transfer of property
shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or coercion or under undue
influence and shall at the option of the transferor be declared void by the
Tribunal.
Where any senior citizen has a right to receive maintenance out of an
estate and such estate or part , thereof is transferred, the right to receive
maintenance may be enforced against the transferee if the transferee
has notice of the right, or if the transfer is gratuitous; but not against the
transferee for consideration and without notice of right.12
Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable. An
offence under this Act shall be tried summarily by a Magistrate.13

Governmental Protection:
Government of India provides some reliefs to senior citizens by
various schemes apart from the provisions of Maintenance and Welfare
of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 namely (a) travelling concessions
to seniors, pensions are provided to senior citizens if they are unable to
maintain themselves, etc.,.

38 / NYAYA DEEP

Conclusion:
It may be conclude by saying that the degeneration of joint family
system dislocates the familiar bonds and tarnishes respect of the aged
person. The family in modern times should be thought to be a secure place
for aged parents. Eventhough, the State Government, take all measures
for publicity, awareness, etc. for welfare of senior citizens under the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 in order
to create awareness of rights of parents and senior citizens and obligations
of children’s / legal heirs, major number of the parents conscious would
not allow them to make complaints against their children, because they
would not transfer causing problems to their children and always wish
that the their life should be prosperous even though they are not in a
safe position. However, some of the problems of the elder persons are
unsolved through the legislation. Thus, there is an urgent need to protect
them with utmost good care because of the toothless laws encouraging
quacks in society.

(Endnotes)
1 Section 2(a) of The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
2 Section 2(g) of The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
3 Section 4 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
4 Section 5 (1) of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
5 Section 6(1) of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
6 Section 7 (1) of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
7 Section 6(6) of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
8 Section 16 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
9 Sec.24 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
10 According to Explanation of Sec. 19 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007, “Indigent” means any senior citizen who is not having
sufficient means, as determined by the State Government, from time to time, to maintain
himself.
11 Sec.20 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
12 Sec.23 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007
13 Sec.25 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007

******

39 / NYAYA DEEP

—M.B.Birader

The Alternative Dispute Resoultion
System
Introduction:
The eminent lawyer Shri.Nani Palkhiwala once while describing the
pathetic condition of litigation in the country observed, “ The law may or
not be an Ass but in india it is a snail, it moves at a pace which would
be regarded as unduly slow in the community of snails. A lawsuit once
started is the nearest thing to eternal life ever seen on this earth”
In all walks of life, it is usual to come across disputes, more so in
business dealings. The term “ dispute” inherently suggest differences
or quarrel between two or more persons, families, communities, groups
and institutions. When there is a difference or quarrel between two or
more individual or associations consequently it becomes necessary to
find out a way or forum for resolution of differences. Such a forum need
not necessarily be a law court or tribunal. In olden days informal system
of Arbitration existed in the form of Panchayats. The Father of Nation
Mahatma Gandhi was also a staunch believer of arbitral process for
resolving the problems in our predominenantly rural society at afforadable
costs via Panchayat Raj. In course of time as the society advanced, it sought
the intervention and help of law courts or tribunals through codifed laws
to adjudicates differences or disputes. Consequents, law courts/tribunal
of different hierarchy came into existence. Arbitration is a consensual
process by which the parties to a disputes submit their differences to one
or more impartial persons for a final and binding decision. It is less formal
than the regular court proceedings and hearings are conducted in private.
The Hon”ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Food Corporation of
india Vs Joginderpal reported in AIR 1981 SC 2075 has observed that the
law of arbitration must be simple, less technical and more responsive to
the actual reality of situation and also responsive cannons of justice and
fair play. The object of arbitration is the resolution of the dispute in the
entirety, which implies the enforcement of the award as well.
*

Retd. Judge, Legal Adviser and Sole Arbitrator Kalaburagi.(Karnataka).

40 / NYAYA DEEP

Arbitration started as a delegalization reform to resolve conflict
with mutual love and trust. Even late Shri.Nani Palkhiwala remarked
succinctly,” If I were appointed as a dictator of this country, in the short
span of my appointment and assassination, I would promulgate a law
making all commercial disputes compulsorily referable to arbitration”
Since independence many new enactments have been passed both by
Central and State Governments. It is a known fact that since independence
literacy rate has gone up considerably and the State of Kerala has achieved
distinction by 100% literacy . As legal and social awareness developed
among the citizens, litigation has also gone up in multiple proportion. It
is a matter of common knowledge, among the concerned, that each court
is burdened with case dockets of disproportionate volume. The courts are
reeling under the pressure of pendency of cases. It may even take several
years, if not decade, to clear the pendency of cases. There is a saying that”
Justice delayed is Justice denied” and judiciary alone cannot be blamed for
that fact of the matter of delay and denial of justice on time.
In the current internet days, due to constraints of time and huge
pendency of cases it has become difficult for the litigants to wait for justice
rather unreasonable time. Now , at this juncture, arises the necessity and
significance of alternative dispute resolution or redressel system. As the
name itself suggests that it is not a traditional or conventional law courts
or tribunal dispute resolution system.
Now let me look into the aspect of what are the ADR Modes. The ADR
system or mechanism comprises various techniques or modes such as
Arbitration, Negotiation, Mediation, Conciliation and Lok Adalat. Now
I confine to the technique or mode of arbitration as one of the modes of
ADR mechanism.

Arbitration- As an ADR mechanism:The concept of Arbitration is nothing new to our country and dispute
resolution system as well. Infact it is not an exaggeration that india is
birth place of concept of arbitration. The only difference, if any, was there
in the nomenclature. It was known as Panchayat (council of elders) in
olden days. In the good old days, Council of elders of the locality used
to hear the disputants and then apply the uncodified law and equitable
principles based on morality and sense of justice, if not of law, such as
41 / NYAYA DEEP

good conscience, impartiality, fairplay and uninfluenced independent
decision in the matter.
The Preamble to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 reads as
follows.
“An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic
arbitration, international commercial Arbitration and enforcement of
arbitral awards as also to define the law relating to Conciliation and for
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto”
The role of Arbitration to settle disputes as an alternative method
to the state controlled court system is, today, becoming more and more
important and critics are now wondering at the growing popularity of the
arbitration. Its essence is the speed with which a dispute can be settled.
Unlike in other systems, here, the parties choose a third party to be known
as an arbitrator and he must act as an impartial person to resolve the
dispute The parties to the dispute may choose such person as the arbitrator
who has khowledge and expertise in the areas in controversy.
“Arbitration Agreement “ is defined U/s 7 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 as an agreement by the parties to submit to
arbitration, all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may
arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether
contractual or not.
The true meaning and scope of Arbitration agreement was recently
considered by the Supreme Court in “ K.K. Modi Vs K.N. Modi “ In the
above case, two warring factions of a family entered in to a Memorandum
of Understanding in terms of which the shares and assets of various
companies were required to be valued in the manner specified in the
agreement. Disputes thereafter arose with respect to the implementation
of arbitration agreement , on which the Chairman, IFCI constituted an
expert committee that submitted its report to the Hon”ble Supreme Court
of India, which on considering the question what constitutes in arbitration
agreement , observed that among the attributes that must be present for an
agreement to be considered as an Arbitration Agreement are.
(a) That the Arbitration agreement must contemplate that the decision
of the Tribunal will be binding on the parties to the agreement.
(b) That the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal to the decide the rights of the
42 / NYAYA DEEP

parties must derive either from the consent of the parties or from
the order of the Court or from Statutes, the terms of which make it
clear that the process is to be an arbitration.
(c) That the agreement must contemplate that substantive rights of
the parties will be determined by the agreed Tribunal.
(d) That the Tribunal will determine the rights of the parties in an
impartial and judicial manner with the Tribunal owing an equal
obligation of fairness to both sides.
(e) That the agreement of parties to refer their disputes to the decision
of the Tribunal must be intended to the enforceable in law
(f) That the agreement must contemplate that the Tribunal will make
a decision upon a dispute which is already formulated at the time
when a reference is made to the Tribunal.
Arbitration is the supreme method for resolving and adjudicating
commercial disputes. Time is of essence in business transactions. In the
present scenario of liberalization and globalization, business community
cannot afford to lose time in prolonged litigation and, therefore, prefer to
resolve disputes by arbitration. The main objects or merits of arbitration
are speed, economy, convenience, simplicity of procedures, secrecy and
encouragement of healthy and friendly relationships between the parties.
Moreover, the basic principles of arbitration are almost universally
acceptable for the simple reason that the practice of business is much the
same. In fact, arbitration is the creation of business community itself all
over the world.
The term Arbitration is used in several senses. It may refer either
to a judicial process or to a non-judicial process. A judicial process is
concerned with the asertainment, declaration and enforcement of rights
and liabilities as they exist, in accordance with some recognised system of
law. An industrial arbitration may well have for its function to ascertain
and declare, but not to enforce, what in the arbitrator’s opinion ought to
be the respective rights and liabilities of the parties, and such a function
is non-judicial.
Arbitration is a process in which a neutral third party or parties render
a decision based on the merits of the case. The parties to the arbitration
have some control over the design of the arbitration process. In the Indian
context the scope of the rules for the arbitration process are set out broadly
by the provisions of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 and in the
areas uncovered by the statute the parties are free to desigh an arbitration
43 / NYAYA DEEP

process appropriate and relevant to their disputes. There is more flexibility
in the arbitration process than in the traditional courts system as the parties
can facilitate the creation of an arbitral process relevant to their disputes.
Once the process is decided upon and within the parameters of the statute,
the Arbitrator assumes full control of the process. The advantages of the
arbitration process are considerable saving in time and money compared
to a trial, the limited possibility for challenging the award which again
contributes towards lower cost and finality of outcome, and greater
participation by the parties than is the case in the courts/tribunal system.
The arbitration is more in vogue in western countries. Howere it is now
gaining field though late in our country. Even domestic and international
commercial disputes are being referred to arbitration for resolution.
If properly used, arbitration is an amicable and relatively informal
method of resolving disputes. Howere , arbitration is not like conciliation
or mediation. Its aim is not to persuade the parties to come to a settlement of
the dispute between them. The aim of arbitration, like that of proceedings
in court, is to produce a final and binding decision, and this decision,
expressed in the form of an award, is capable of being enforced through
courts of law, both nationally and internationally, if the losing party is
not prepared to carry it out voluntarily. Unlike conciliation or mediation,
arbitration requires the support of national systems of law if it is to work
effectively.
Generally, all disputes, which can be decided by a Civil Court,
involving legal rights can be referred to arbitration. Thus, disputes about
property, money or about the amount of damages payable for breach of
contract, etc, can be referred to arbitration. Howere , according to the
general practice, the following matters can not be referred to arbitration;
a) Matrimonial matters like restitution of conjugal rights or divorce.
b) Matters relating to guardianship of a minor or other person
under disability
c) Testamentary matters, such as questions relating to validity of
will etc
d) Insolvency matters
e) Criminal proceedings
f) Questions relating to charity or charitable trusts/ institutions
g) Matters falling under the purview of the MRTP Act.
h) Dissolution or winding up of companies.
44 / NYAYA DEEP

i)

Matters relating to execution of decrees, etc.

It may further be noted that Sec.19(1) of the 1996 Act excludes
application of provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Howere, Sec.43 of the Indian Limitation Act,
1963 applies to arbitral proceedings under the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 wherein Sec.119 (b) of the Act prescribes a period of 30 days for
setting aside an award or getting an award remitted for recognition from
the date of service of the notice of filing of the award and further, Sec 5 of
the Act permits an extension of that limitation in suitable cases.
The popluar kinds of arbitration in practice are as under.
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)

Domestic Arbitration
International Arbitration
Foreign Arbitration
Ad hoc Arbitration
Institutional Arbitration
Specifialised Arbitration
Statutory Arbitration

Conclusion:
Time has come to think to provide a forum for the poor and needy
people who approach the Law Courts to redress their grievance speedily,
Considering the delay in resolving the disputes Abraham Lincoln once
said.
“Discourage litigation. Persuade your neighbours to compromise
whenever you can point out to them how the nominal winner is often a
real loser, in fees, expenses, and waste of time”
Howere far these reforms will serve to lighten the workload of the
courts and cut short the length and expenses of the litigation only time can
tell us. But it is clear that these changes are a must in case management,
fat track procedures and stringent limitations on costs if the legal system
should survive. The use of ADR in courts Abroad is now well established.
It is feature of Court Procedure in many jurisdictions that there is an
obligation upon the judge to raise the possibility of settlement with both
parties at various stages of litigation. In Germany the obligation extends
to the judge notifying the parties on a preliminary basis as to the views he
has formed on the likely out-come of the case and the basis upon which it
45 / NYAYA DEEP

could be settled. In U.S.A and Australia there is a whole panoply of A.D.R
methods attached to the courts.
The eminent lawyer Nani palkhiwala sarcastically remarked “ if
longevity of litigation is made an item in the Olympics, no doubt the Gold
Medal will come to India”
Preamable to the Constitution of India begins with:
“We the people of India, having solemnly resolved to constitute India
into a sovereign socialist secular democratic republic and to secure to all
its citizens justice, social, economic and political”
Howere, our legal system is today struggling to do just that. It is now
an open secret that this resolve’ to secure justice is becoming illusory,
Not only the litigation is time consuming and cumbersome, but is also
very costly. Our society is getting increasingly complex. It is needless
to emphasis that justice is very much essential for peaceful living in
complexities of civil society. And peace cannot be achieved without
justice. The society cannot progress and prosper without justice. Hence,
justice is the utmost need for the survival, sustenance and growth of
society. And such a justice can be achieved, in my humble opinion, very
well by arbitration as a mode of Alternative Dispute Resolution.Thus
Alternative Dispute Resolution will therefore emerge not merely as a
structural alternative but as a substantive and refined paradigm of dispute
resolution. Alternative Dispute Resolution strategies which facilitate the
development of consensual solution by the disputing parties are therefore
considered a viable alternative. Alternative Dispute Resolution methods
such as mediation, negotiation and arbitration along with many substratergies are increasily being employed world over in wide range of
conflict situations, ranging from family and marital disputes to more
complex disputes of a public dimension such as environmental disputes,
inter-state or inter-national boundary and water disputes, As of date,
there have been several Internet service providers for online resolution of
disputes by parties, which they can pursue irrespective of geographical
location. Furthur the concept of Online Disputes Resolution (ODR) in
some places also referred as electronic Alternative Disputes Resolution (e
ADR) is in vogue. In the traditional justice dispensing system of India,
Courts do not resolve disputes. But decide and adjudicate on disputes. The
fundamental difference between the approach of a court and arbitrator/
46 / NYAYA DEEP

conciliator lies in deciding a dispute, versus resolving a dispute.Resolving
a dispute by mutually agreeable solutions between the disputants by
Alternative Disputes Resolution in general and arbitration in particular
is a peace initiating process and promotes peace, friendly and healthy
relationship than deciding a dispute by traditional courts.

Courtesy:
01

02

Journal of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
Volume 53, No 6, December 2004,
Alternative Disputes Resolution.
Nyaya Deep,
The Official Journal of NALSA, New Delhi,
Volume VIII, Issue 2, April 2007.
******

47 / NYAYA DEEP

—Prof (Dr) Mukund Sarda*

Validity and Legality of “Arrests” and
Consequences of Illegal Arrest: A Study
The recent Law Commission of India recommendation1 to amend Sec
41 of the Criminal Procedure Code, mandating the reasons for the arrest
should be recorded by the Investigating Officer, before the arrest in the
case dairy a well as in the daily diary register, ‘is in accord with recent
decision of the Supreme Court2 and is one of the major principle laid
down among several other guidelines relating to the power of arrest. Sec
41 of the Criminal Procedure Code3 enumerates nine categories of cases in
which a Police may arrest a person without a warrant as well as without
an order from a Magistrate.4 Sec 41 of the code is a depositary of general
powers of the Police Officer to arrest. However, the power conferred is
subject to other special statutes to which Cr PC is made applicable in
addition to limitations placed by the Cr PC itself.5
Despite that the law is clearly stated and clear-cut procedure laid
down in the exercise of the powers to arrest, cases have arisen where the
Police Officers have misused the powers for ulterior purposes in flagrant
violation of law, exposing the persons to harassment, physical and
mental pain. Cases have also arisen, where the Police Officers exercised
the powers to arrest under the dictates of persons in power for achieving
purposes which can be termed illegal or malafide, as seen in the case of
Bhim Singh,6 where a sitting Member of Legislative Assembly(MLA) was
arrested only to prevent him from attending the Assembly Session. Even
though a Police Officer making a wrong arrest under a bonafide mistake
is protected7 and illegality of arrest is no way affects the trial, there have
been many cases of illegal arrests in contravention of the procedures laid
*

Principal & Dean, Bharati Vidyapeeth University, New Law College, Pune

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

See Deccan Chronicle dated 13/6/2017 Page 6.
Dr.Rini Johar & another Vs. State of M.P. and others, 2016 Cr LJ P.3156.
‘Criminal Procedure Code’ hereinafter referred to as Cr PC throughout this study.
See for details Sec 41 of Cr PC.
Avinash Madhukar Mukhedkar Vs. State of Maharashtra, (1983) Cr LJ 1833 (Bom).
Bhim Singh v. State of J&K AIR 1986 SC P.494.
Ibid

48 / NYAYA DEEP

down and for malafide purposes for which such arrests are made. Art 22
(1) of the Constitution of India provides safeguards to a person arrested,
such as right to be informed of the grounds of arrest, right not to be
detained beyond 24 hours without the authority of the Magistrate, right to
consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. The detention
becomes unlawful, if the grounds furnished are not proper and sufficient
or if the grounds are not furnished at all.8 In a recent case9the court dealt
with a case where no reason for arrest was mentioned in the case diary,
information of arrest was not furnished to the relatives or friends of the
person arrested, the seizure memo searching the houses of the accused
was carried out without following the procedure of arrest and the case
being of a criminal nature and the Police Officers have made a maladroit
effort to give a criminal colour, which caused the dignity of the accused
persons (who were medical practitioners) to be seriously jeopardized,
humiliation, trauma and pain as well as ‘harassment’, the court directed
the State to proceed with erring officials besides awarding compensation
to the victims of the arrest power.
In Joginder Kumar’s case,10 the Supreme Court while dealing with
misuse of arrest power laid down as follows:i)

No arrest can be made just, because it is lawful for the Police Office
to do so;

ii) The existence of the power to arrest is one thing and the justification
for the exercise of power is quite another;
iii) No arrest should be made without a reasonable satisfaction
reached after some investigation as to the genuineness and
bonafides of a complaint and a reasonable belief both as to the
person’s complicity and even so as to the need to effect arrest;
iv) Denying a person of his liberty is a serious matter;
v) Human rights violation pre and after arrest has been aptly
stated, “The horizon of Human rights is expanding. At the same
time the crime rate is also increasing. Of late, this court has been
receiving complaint about violation of human rights, because of
indiscrimination arrests.
The attempts to give a criminal colour to a civil case are made to justify
8
9
10

In Madhu Limaye’s case AIR 1969 SC P.1014
See Note 2.
Joginder Kumar v. State of UP 1994 AIR 1349.

49 / NYAYA DEEP

the exercise of power of arrest and this is a serious violation of a person’s
liberty and it is apt to quote the ruling of Hon’ble Mr.Justice V.K.Iyer in
Jolly George Vargheese’s case11 to the effect that “No one shall imprisoned
on the ground of inability to fulfil a contractual obligation”. In the context
of several incidents where a civil case is given the colour of a criminal
nature, it is desirable to amend Sec 41 to provide that, “no civil case can be
made the subject-matter of a criminal offence unless an independent cause
of a criminal nature arising therefrom and a malafide attempt to make it as
a criminal case shall be made punishable by law.”
In a series of cases,12 the Supreme Court laid down procedural
requirements, which are to be complied with in cases of arrest and they
may summarized thus:-

11
12

i)

The Police personnel carrying out the arrest and handling of
interrogation of the arrestee shall bear accurate, visible and clear
identification and name tag with their designations;

ii)

The particulars of all such Police personnel who handle
interrogation of the arrestee must be recorded in a register;

iii)

The Police Officer carrying out the arrest shall prepare a memo
of arrest at the time of arrest and such memo shall be attested by
atleast one witness, who may either be a member of the family of
the arrestee or a responsible person of the locality from where the
arrest is made. It shall be counter-signed by the arrestee and shall
contain the time and date of arrest;

iv)

A person who has been arrested or detained and is being held in
custody in a police station or interrogation centre or other lockup, shall be entitled to have one friend or relative or other person
known to him or having interest in his welfare being informed, as
soon as practicable, that he has been arrested and is being detained
at the particular place, unless the attesting witness of the memo of
arrest is himself such a friend or a relative of the arrestee;

v)

The time, place of arrest and venue of custody of an arrestee
must be notified by the police, where the next friend or relative
of the arrestee lives outside the district or town through the legal
aid organization of the District and the Police Station of the area

AIR 1980 SC P.470.
D.K.Basu Vs. State of WB AIR 1997 SC P.610; Joginder Kumar AIR 1994 SC P.1349;
Nilabati Behera Vs. State of Orissa AIR 1993 SC P.1960; State of MP Vs. Shyam Sunder
Trivedi 1995 AIR SCW P.2793.

50 / NYAYA DEEP

concerned telegraphically within a period of 8 to 12 hours after
the arrest;
vi)

The person arrested must be made aware of his right to have
someone informed of his arrest or detention, as soon as, he is put
under arrest or detained;

vii) An entry must be made in the diary at the place of detention
regarding the arrest of the person, which shall also disclose the
name of the next friend of the person, who has been informed of
the arrest and the names and particulars of the police officials in
whose custody the arrestee is;
viii) The arrestee should, where he so requests, be also be examined at
the time of his arrest and major and minor injuries, if any present
on his/her body must be recorded at the time. The ‘inspection
Memo’ must be signed both by the arrestee and the Police Officer
affecting the arrest and its copy provided to the arrestee;
ix)

The arrestee should be subjected to medical examination by a
trained doctor every 48 hours during his detention in custody by a
doctor or the panel of approved doctors appointed by the Director,
Health Services of the State or Union Territory concerned. Director
of Health Services should prepare such a panel for all the Tehsils
and districts as well;

x)

Copies of all the documents including the memo of arrest referred
to above, should be sent to the Illaque magistrate for his record;

xi) The arrestee may be permitted to meet his lawyer during
investigation, though not throughout the investigation;
xii) A police control room should be provided at all Districts and
State headquarters, where information regarding the arrest and
the place of custody of the arrestee, shall be communicated by the
officer causing the arrest with (12) hours of affecting the arrest and
at the police control room, it should be displayed on a conspicuous
notice board.
The concept of ‘arrest’ and its implications have been pointed out by
the Supreme Court13 thus:i)

Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and casts scars forever.
Law makers know it and also the police;

13

See for details Arvind Kumar’s case AIR 2014 SC P.2756.

51 / NYAYA DEEP

ii)

It is highly considered as a tool of harassment, oppression and
surely not considered a friend of public;

iii)

There is a need for caution in exercising the drastic power of arrest;

iv)

Power of arrest greatly contribute to its arrogance, so also the
failure of the magistracy to check it;

v)

The power of arrest is one of the lucrative source of public
corruption;

vi)

The attitude to arrest first and then proceed with the rest is
despicable;

vii) It has become a handy tool to the police officers, who lack
sensitivity or act with oblique motive;
viii) Analying Sec 41 of the Code, that certain offences punishable upto
a term of 7 years or not less than 7 years cannot be arrested only.
a) On the satisfaction that such person has committed the offence
but also be further satisfied that such arrest is necessary to
prevent such person from committing any further offence or
for proper investigation of the case or to prevent the accused
from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or
tampering with such evidence in any manner or prevent such
person from making any inducement, threat or promise to a
witness so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
court or the police officer or unless such accused is arrested, his
presence in the court whenever required cannot be ensured.
b) The police officer should consider before arresting the person
the following aspects:i)

Whether it is absolutely necessary to exercise the power
of arrest;

ii) What purposes or object would be served by the arrest;
iii) If the arrest is necessary, the statutory provisions including
the guidelines prescribed by the Supreme Court should be
followed.
The Supreme Court14 considered the impact of Sec 41A,15 has to be
kept in view. This provision newly introduced makes it clear that where
the arrest of a person is not required under Sec 41 A of the Code, the police
officer is required to issue notice directing the accused to appear before
him at a specified place and time. It is made obligatory for the accused
14
15

Ibid.
Introduced by Sec 6 of Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act 2008.

52 / NYAYA DEEP

to so appear and if he complies with the notice, he shall not be arrested,
unless for reasons to be recorded, the police officer shall be of the opinion
that such person’s arrest is necessary for preventing the commission of
any further offence or the arrest is necessary for the following purposes16:i)

for the proper investigation of the case;

ii) to prevent the accused from causing the evidence of the offence to
disappear;
iii) tampering with the evidence in any manner;
iv) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to a witness so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the court or the police officer;
v) unless the accused is arrested his presence in the court whenever
required cannot be ensured.
Dignity of the accused person shall not be seriously jeopardized by
either not following the procedure laid down in Sec 41-A or the violation
of the procedure in making the arrest and seizure, the manner in which it
was done by the police officer cannot be justified.
‘Dignity’ as held by the Supreme Court17 can be stated thus:i)

It is the quintessential quality of a personality and of a highly
cherished value;

ii) Liberty of the person is curtailed in violation of law;
iii) When the liberty of the person is curtailed in an unlawful manner,
the victim is likely to feel more anguished, agonized, shaken,
perturbed, disillusioned and emotionally torn. It is an assault
on his/her identity which is sacrosanct under the Constitution of
India;
iv) It does not require wisdom of a seer to visualize that for some
invisible reason, an attempt has been made to corrode the
procedural safeguards which are meant to sustain the sanguinity
of liberty;
v) The investigating agency, as it seems has put its sense of
accountability to law on the ventilator and its visibility is clear as
the cloudless noon day and
vi) It would not be erroneous to say that the enthusiastic investigating
16
17

Ibid.
Charu Khurana Vs. Union of India AIR 2015 SC P.839.

53 / NYAYA DEEP

agency had totally forgotten the democratic principle of high
cherished value which clearly states that all power given to the
authorities/ruler are in the nature of trust and they are accountable
for the discharge of duties of a trustee as in a democracy, power is
derived from the people and for the benefit, who are beneficiaries
of the exercise of power.
Harassment caused to the accused, while in custody which puts them
in trauma and pain is crucial, in determining the quantum of compensation
to be given to them and the concept of ‘harassment has been lucidly
explained in Mehmad Nayyar Azam’18 as one which has relevance to
mental annoyance and a troubling of the spirit, which includes torment or
vexation or mental or psychological harassment. The accused in custody
can be put under tremendous psychological pressure by cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment.
In society governed by law, law protects the dignity of a citizen19 and
prevents him from all kinds of harassment.20
When the rights of a person under Art 21 are dashed against and
pushed back by the members of city walls, there has to be rebound and
when the rebound takes place, Art 21 of the Constitution springs up to
action as a protector.21
In the recent case,22 the Supreme Court besides expounding the law
relating to arrest, has taken every effort to explain the consequences of
illegal arrest, which offends the dignity of the person as well the resultant
harassment and factors which weigh in determining the compensation for
the injury caused to the persons. This can be summarized thus:i)

Violation of Art 21, the accused persons were compelled to face
humiliation;

ii) Guidelines issued by the Supreme Court in D.K.Basu’s case have
been violated and the accused persons were treated with the
attitude of insensibility;
iii) When the investigating officers flout the law with brazen proclivity,
18
19
20
21
22

AIR 2012 SC P.2573 Para 23.
See Note 17.
See Note 18.
Ibid.
See Note 2

54 / NYAYA DEEP

the public law remedy23 comes into play;
iv) Persons who are put to humiliation and suffering are entitled to
compensation as a redeeming feature;
v) It is open to State to proceed against erring officials;
vi) All attempts to make a civil case to give the colour of a criminal
case24 for malafide purposes shall be a cognizable offence
punishable by law.
vii) When the allegations made in the FIR or the evidence collected
during investigation do not satisfy the ingredients of an offence the
superior courts would not encourage harassment of a person in a
criminal case for nothing and the High Court have the undoubted
power under Section 482 of the Code to quash the proceedings25.
I) In conclusion, the urgent need to implement the recommendations
of Law Commission of India to amend Sec 41 of the code26 in terms of
the Supreme Court’s decision in Dr Rini Johar’s case27 cannot be overemphasized. It needs to be done on a war footing and case be in the
following terms:“All arrests shall mandate the reasons for arrest should be recorded by
the police officers concerned, before the arrest is made, in the case diary
as well as in the daily diary register maintained at the police stations and
shall be produced in the court, whenever required”
All attempts to give the colour of a criminal case, purely of a civil
nature for malafide reasons by a police officer shall be a “cognizable
offence” punishable by law.
II) The guidelines given by the Supreme Court shall be suitably
incorporated in Sec 41, so that they become a part of Statutory law to
reconcile the balancing right of the accused with the power of the State in
affecting the arrest.
******

23
24
25
26
27

See for details see Nilawati Behara AIR 1993 SCP 1960; Sule Singh Vs. State of Haryana
AIR 2006 SC P.117 and Hardeep Singh Vs. State of MP AIR 2012 SC P.1751.
See also Devendra Vs. State of UP (2009) 7 SCC P.495.
See Note 2 Para 28 and also Bhajarang Lal’s case AIR 1992 SC P.604.
See Note 1.
See Note 2.

55 / NYAYA DEEP

—Dr. Gurneet Singh*

Victims of Crimes and Trial of Offences
Introduction
Section 225-237 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 deal with the
procedure in trials before a Court of Session. This procedure is practically
the same as that prescribed for the trial of warrant-cases by a Magistrate
with needed variations. At the first hearing the Public Prosecutor will
open the case and the judge, after going through the record and hearing
the submissions of the accused, if any will consider whether there are
sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. Otherwise he shall
frame a charge which shall be read out and explained to the accused and
his plea will be recorded. If he pleads guilty, the judge may convict him.
Otherwise a date will be fixed for hearing of evidence of prosecution.
The accused will have the right to cross-examine witnesses. Witnesses
may be recalled for cross examination. If after hearing the evidence and
examining the accused and hearing the arguments, the judge considers
that there is no evidence to support the prosecution, he shall acquit the
accused. Otherwise the accused shall be called upon to enter on his
defence and adduce his evidence for which there will be an adjournment.
After the completion of the defence evidence, the prosecution and the
defence will be heard and the court will deliver judgment. If the judgment
is one of conviction, the accused will be given an opportunity to make his
representation, if any, on the punishment proposed to be awarded and
such representation shall be taken into consideration before imposing the
sentence. The right of representation is provided to the accused with a
view that the accused may have some grounds to urge for giving him
consideration in regard to the sentence of which the court is not so aware
during the trial.
Section 238-250 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 deal with the
trial of warrant cases by Magistrates, Sections 251-259 deals with trial
of summons cases by Magistrates. Then, Sections 260-265 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 deal with summary trials.
*

Assistant Professor of Law, Rajiv Gandhi National University of Law, Punjab.

56 / NYAYA DEEP

In Dhanaj Singh v. State of Punjab1 the Supreme Court has laid down that
in the case of a defective investigation the court has to be circumspect in
evaluating the evidence. But it would not be right in acquitting an accused
person solely on the ground or on account of the defective investigation.
To do so would tantamount to playing into the hands of the investigating
officer if the investigation is designedly defective.
Similarlyin Paras Yadav v. State of Bihar2 it was held that if the lapse
or omission is committed by the investigating agency or because of
negligence the prosecution evidence is required to be examined dehors
such omissions to find out whether the said evidence is reliable or not,
the contaminated conduct of officials should not stand in the way of
evaluating the evidence by the courts, otherwise the designed mischief
would be perpetuated and justice would be denied to the complainant
party.
In U.P.S.C. v. S. Papiah3 the Apex Court is of the view that a closure
report by the Prosecution cannot be accepted by the court without
hearing the informant. The court further expressed that there can be no
doubt that when, on a consideration of the report made by the officer-incharge of a police station under Section 2(i) of Section 173, the Magistrate
is not inclined to take cognizance of the offence and issue process, the
informant must be given an opportunity of being heard so that he can
make his submissions to persuade the Magistrate to take cognizance of
the offence and issue process. So in a case where the Magistrate to whom
the report is forwarded under Sub-Section (2) (i) of Section 173 decides not
to take cognizance of the offence and to drop the proceeding or takes the
view that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against some of the
persons mentioned in the First Information Report, the Magistrate must
give notice to the informant and provide him an opportunity to be heard
at the time of the consideration of this report.
In S.B. Shahane and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Another4 the
Supreme Court observed that the role of public prosecutors in ensuring
a fair trial is of paramount importance. Public prosecutor represents the
prosecution side in the court. It is his duty that he brings truth before
the court. As an officer of the court he should take proper care to get
1
2
3
4

AIR 2008 SC 441.
AIR 1999 SC 644, (1999) 2 SCC 126.
(1997) 7 SCC 614. Also see Abhinandan Jha and Ors. v. Dinesh Mishra,AIR 1968 SC 117.
1995 Supp. (3) SCC 37.

57 / NYAYA DEEP

justice for the victims. But in practice it is usually seen that prosecutors
come under pressure particularly from political class and derelicts from
his duty.Few are involved in corrupt practices. These all things should
be redressed in the interest of justice. Public prosecutors in India are
not trained enough as to how to handle the victims that minimize their
harassment. This is a glaring demerit of our criminal justice system.It was
observed by the Supreme Court that such Assistant Public Prosecutors
could not be allowed to continue as personnel of the Police Department
and to continue to function under the control of the head of the Police
Department. And directions had been given to State Governments to
constitute a separate cadre of Assistant Public Prosecutors by creating a
separate prosecution Department making its head directly responsible to
the State Government. So Apex Court also had stressed on the desirability
of separation of prosecution agency from investigation agency.
In National Human Rights Commission v. State of Gujarat & Ors.5 it has
been held that:
(T)o ensure that the witnesses depose freely and in that context the
need to protect the witnesses from interference by person connected with
it is the protection of victims who in most cases are witnesses. Right from
the inception of the judicial system it has been accepted that discovery,
vindication and establishment of truth are the main purposes underlying
the existence of the courts of justice. Application of these principles involves
a delicate judicial balancing of competing interests in a criminal trial the
interests of the accused and the public and to a great extent that of the
victim have to be weighed not losing sight of the public interest involved
in the prosecution of persons who commit offences.It will not be correct to
say that it is only the accused that must be fairly dealt with. That would
be turning a Nelson’s eye to the needs of society at large and the victims
or their family members and relatives. Each one has an inbuilt right to be
dealt with fairly in a criminal trial. Denial of a fair trial is as much injustice
to the accused as is to the victim and the society. Time has become ripe
to act on account of numerous experiences faced by the courts on account
of frequent turning of witnesses as hostile, either due to threats, coercion,
lures and monetary considerations at the instance of those in power, their
henchmen and hirelings, political clouts and patronage and innumerable
other corrupt practices ingeniously adopted to smother and stifle the
truth and realities coming out to surface rendering truth and justice, to
5

2009(6) SCC 767.

58 / NYAYA DEEP

become ultimate casualties. Broader public and societal interests require
that the victims of the crime who are not ordinarily parties to prosecution
and the interests of the State represented by their prosecuting agencies
do not suffer even in slow process but irreversibly and irretrievably,
which if allowed would undermine and destroy public confidence in the
administration of justice, which may ultimately pave way for anarchy,
oppression and injustice resulting in complete breakdown and collapse of
the edifice of rule of law, enshrined and jealously guarded and protected
by the Constitution. Time has come when serious and undiluted thoughts
are to be bestowed for protecting witnesses so that the ultimate truth is
presented before the court and justice triumphs and that the trial is not
reduced to a mockery. For ensuring of a sense of confidence in the mind of
the victims and their relatives, and to ensure that witnesses depose freely
and fearlessly before the court following steps shall be taken:6
(a) Ensuring safe passage for the witnesses to and from the court
precincts.
(b) Providing security to the witnesses in their place of residence
wherever considered necessary, and
(c) Relocation of witnesses to another state wherever such a step is
necessary.
J. Krishna Iyer in Ratanlal Singh v. State of Punjab7, has stated that it is
a weakness of our jurisprudence that the victims of crime and the distress
of the dependants of the victim do not attract the attention of law. In fact,
the victim reparation is still the vanishing point of our criminal law. This
is the deficiency in the system, which must be rectified by the legislature.
In Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of Gujrat8, the Supreme Court
observed:
(T)he principles of rule of law and due process are closely
linked with human rights protection. Such rights can
be protected effectively when a citizen have recourse
the courts of law. It has to be unmistakably understood
that a trial which is primarily aimed at ascertaining the
truth has to be fair to all concerned. There can be no
analytical, all comprehensive or exhaustive definition of
the concept of fair trial, and it may have to be determined
6
7
8

Ibid.
(1979) 4 SCC 719.
AIR 2006 SC 1381.

59 / NYAYA DEEP

in seemingly infinite variety of actual situations with the
ultimate object in mind viz....It will not be correct to say
that it is only the accused who must be treated fairly dealt
with. That would be turning a Nelson’s eye to the needs of
society at large and the victims or their family members
and relatives. Each one has an in-built right to be dealt
with fairly in criminal trial. Denial of fair trial is as much
injustice to the accused as is to the victim and the society.
In Ambika Pd. v. State (Delhi Administration)9 the Apex Court has held
that the criminal trial is meant for doing justice not only to the victim but
also to the accused and the society at large. The primary object of criminal
trial is to ensure fair trial which is guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, 1950.
The Supreme Court in T.H. Hussain v. M.P. Modkakar10 held that a fair
trial has, therefore, two objects in view. It must be fair to the accused and
must also be fair to the prosecution.
The trial must be judged from this dual point of view. It is, therefore,
necessary to remember that a judge does not preside over a criminal trial
merely to see that no innocent man is punished.
A judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. One is
as important as the other. Both are public duties which the judge has to
perform.
As per the National Crime Record Bureau11 in its report on crimes
in 2013, it was observed that the percentage of cases tried to total cases
for trial and percentage of cases convicted to total cases tried showed a
declining trend12.
9
10
11
12

2000 SCC Cri LJ 522.
AIR 1958 SC 376.
Retrieved from http://ncrb.gov.in/CD-CII2013/compendium%202013.pdf.
These percentages were 28.8% and 62.0% respectively in the year 1973 which wentdown
in 2013 to 13.2% and 40.2% respectively.
There were 97,81,426 cases for trials (including cases pending from the previous years)
during the year 2013 as compared to 93,28,085 cases during the previous year 2012. The
percentage of cases in which trials were completed has decreased to 13.2% in the year
2013 from 13.4% in the year 2012. 84.8% of IPC cases remained pending for trial at the
end of the year in various criminal courts of the country.
Conviction rate of total IPC crimes in the year 2013 was 40.2% which was more as compared to 38.5% reported in the year 2012. The crime head - wise analysis revealed that the
conviction rate was highest in cases relating to counterfeiting (37.8%), murder (36.5%)
and culpable homicide not amounting to murder (34.2%) whereas the lowest conviction

60 / NYAYA DEEP

Conclusion
In a fair trial, the accused person is given a copy of the charge sheet
and all other evidence that is presented against him. The trial is held in an
open court in a public view. The trial is held in the presence of the accused
subject to certain exceptions. The accused is defended by a lawyer. The
lawyer is given a chance to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses. After
all the procedures, the judge announces the sentence only in accordance
with the law following the maxims ‘nulla poena sine lege’ and ‘nullum
crimen sine lege’. The object of criminal trial is to deliver justice by
punishing the criminal. It is also important to remember that the trial
should be concluded expeditiously before the memory of the witnesses
fades away. For a trial to be fair, several different procedures have to be
observed. A fair trial ensures that Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
1950 is followed in letter and spirit.

******

rate was observed under crime head cruelty by husband or his relatives (16.0%). The
highest percentage of cases which were either compounded or withdrawn was reported
under ‘insult to the modesty of women’ (4.5%) cases followed by ‘hurt’ (3.9%).
The conviction rate for SLL (Special laws) crimes (90.9%) was much higher than that of
IPC crimes (40.2%) at the national level. The conviction rate for SLL crimes was much
higher than that of IPC crimes except 6 States/UTs showing the reverse trend.
It was observed that Courts have completed trials of 41,670 cases after 10 years of trial,
trials of 1,70,601 cases took between 5 to 10 years, trials of 2,84,663 cases took between 3
to 5 years, trials of 4,01,524 cases took between 1 to 3 years, trials of 2,28,510 cases took
between 6 months to a year and trials of 1,63,180 cases completed within 6 months. It
may be seen that maximum time taken for disposal of cases by various courts was 1 to 3
years (31.2%) followed by 3 - 5 years (22.1%).

61 / NYAYA DEEP

—Nuzhath Khanam M*

An Analysis of the Slayer’s Rule in
America and India: A Proposal to Amend
The Hindu Succession Act
Introduction:
Laws evolve from time to time. The legal principles are those principles
built upon morals which are applied to serve justice with equity and
good conscience. The authority of legal principles rests entirely upon the
general reception and usage. The only method of proving that a maxim is
a rule of common law is by showing that it had always been a custom to
observe it.1 One such legal principle is, one cannot take benefit of one’s own
wrong. This principle is reflected in the section 25 of Hindu Succession
Act, 1956. Section 25 of the act states, “A person who commits murder or abets
the commission of murder shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the
person murdered, or any other property in furtherance of the succession to which
he or she committed or abetted the commission of the murder” The effect of the
section 25 read along with the section 272 of the act is that a murderer is
totally disqualified to succeed the estate of deceased. The framers of the
Act in the objects and reasons have made a reference to the decision of
Privy Council that a murderer is not to be regarded as the stock of fresh
line of descent but should be regarded as non-existent.3 Where a person
is entitled to succeed in his or her own right as an heir of the deceased
under the act, the rule laid under the section 27 has no application.4 This
implies that a person cannot claim the property of the victim though the
murderer and this is considered to be in accordance to the public policy,
equity and good conscience. This paper points out that the implications of
section 25 and 27 is not in accordance with the principles of equity, justice
and good conscience through the analysis of various Indian cases. This
*

B.A. LL.B. (HONS)-II YEAR

1

Nalwa Suman & Kohli Hari Dev, Commentary on The Juvenile Justice Act. 21st Edn.,
page no.68
If any person is disqualified from inheriting any property under this Act, it shall devolve as if such person had died before the intestate.
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (Act No. 30 of 1956), Kamal Publishers, New Delhi.
Sir DinshawFardunjiMulla, Hindu Law, Updated 21st Edition (Satyajeet A Desai) pg.
no. 1237

2
3
4

62 / NYAYA DEEP

paper also focusses on the evolution of law with regard to changes in the
society and how the principle which seems to be unjust in general has
inevitable existence due to the demand of time by pointing out the flawed
reformative justice system. Through comparison of American cases, this
paper also proposes an amendment to Hindu Succession Act in the light
of public policy, equity and good conscience.

Riggs Vs Palmer (1889)
In the case of Riggs Vs Palmer5 in United States in the year 1889, it was
decided by the majority opinion that the murderer who was a 16 year old lad
during the commission of the murder of Francis B.Palmer, his grandfather
should not inherit property of Francis Palmer despite being him given the
property by will. Francis Palmer wrote the will and testament in 1880, in
which small legacies were given to his daughters and the remainder of
the estate was given to his grandson. This decision was based on a legal
principle which states that no one can take advantage of his own wrong.
He was sent to state reformatory centre in the year 1882 for the murder
he had committed. When the matter of execution of the will came up, the
judges had a total of 3 ways out of which 2 ways upheld the title of the
murderer. One was the direct interpretation of the law which dictates the
execution of will as it is proper to fulfil the intention of the testator and
the other was the principle that he was given punishment for the crime
and he cannot be punished further by not giving the property. The third
way was through the legal principle, “NullusCommodumCaperePotest
De InjuriaSuaPropria” which means that no one can take the benefit of
one’s own crime according to which the boy was denied his grandfather’s
property. This principle prevailed over the other two as it served better
social justice.6
“Besides, all laws as well as all contracts may be controlled in their operation
and effect by general, fundamental maxims of the common law. No one shall be
permitted to profit by his own fraud, or to take advantage of his own wrong, or to
found any claim upon his own iniquity, or to acquire property by his own crime.
These maxims are dictated by public policy, have their foundation in universal
law administered in all civilized countries, and have nowhere been superseded by
statutes”.7
5
6
7

115 N.Y. 506 (1889)
6 “In the end, the principle that was thought to be most fundamental, to represent the
larger and deeper social interests, put its competitors to flight”- Benjamin N.Cardozo,
Nature of Judicial Process, Yale University Press
Riggs V. Palmer (115 NY 506)

63 / NYAYA DEEP

The authority of legal principles rests entirely upon the general
reception and usage. The only method of proving that a maxim is a rule
of common law is by showing that it had always been a custom to observe
it8. The use of this particular principle in Riggs case led to the formulation
of Slayer’s rule. The slayer’s rule prevents the slayer from inheriting the
property. In the nature of Judicial Process, Justice Benjamin Cardozo marks
that the first two principles formed the basis of the minority view and the
last principle formed the basis of prevailing majority view disinheriting
the slayer9. Social justice was thus considered of greater value than the
preservation of property10. Here, it is pertinent to understand the very idea
of social justice.
The sense of justice is a settled disposition to adopt and to want to act
from the moral point of view insofar at least as the principles of justice
define it11. Considering the original position as proposed by John Rawls,
the justice would have been the same for all which includes both the victim
and the accused. When a decision is taken by the court, it has to consider the
effects that the process has on the people involved in the process. A 16 year
was sent to the state reformatory in order to reform him. In a sociological
and psychological view, the society around an individual has a great effect
in influencing people and the crime doers are not solely responsible for
their wrongs but the society is also responsible as socialization determines
the character of the individuals and just punishing the wrong doers can
never bring a large scale change in the society.
“During the nineteenth century, the treatment of juveniles in the
United States started to change. Social reformers began to create special
facilities for the troubled juveniles, especially in large cities. In New York
City, the society for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency established
the New York house of Refuge to house juvenile delinquents in 1825. The
Chicago Reform School opened in 1855. The reformers who supported
these institutions sought to protect juvenile offenders by separating them
from adult offenders. They also focussed on rehabilitation-trying to help
young offenders avoid a future life of crime.”12
8
9
10
11
12

Ibid (Footnote 1)
Benjamin N.Cardozo, Nature of Judicial Process, Yale University Press page no. 41
The slayer’s rule, Nili Cohen, Boston University Law Review, page no. 796, vol.92
John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Universal Law Publishing Company.
http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/migrated/publiced/features/DYJpart1.
authcheckdam.pdf

64 / NYAYA DEEP

If the system itself had the focus on reforming people then the decision
taken by the application of the legal principle has defeated the idea of
reformation. In the end, the principle that was thought to be the most
fundamental, to represent the larger and deeper social interests, put its
competitors to flight.13 With due respect, I contradict this as the application
of principle in this particular case, has created a misconception of social
interest. The societal interest in general should be to serve justice for all
individuals in the society. Here, the judicial discretion also plays a role
where judges decide the cases serving justice for all. Justice can be served
to the wrong doer through reformation which is also the aim of public
policy.
This principle is also seen in Hindu law- section 25 of Hindu Succession
Act which reads as,
“Murderer disqualified-A person who commits murder or abets the
commission of murder shall be disqualified from inheriting the property
of the person murdered, or any other property in furtherance of the
succession to which he or she committed or abetted the commission of the
murder”

Analysis of Indian Cases:
In Vedanayaga Mudaliar Vs. Vedammal14 and Gangu Vs.
Chandrabnagabai15 It was held that the theory of legal and equitable estates
is no part of Hindu Law, and should not be introduced into discussion.
The second question arises whether a title can be claimed through the
murderer. Here, the lordships held that, the murderer should be treated
as a non-existent and not as one who forms the stock for a fresh line of
descent.
In K.StanumurthiyyaAndOrs. Vs K.RamappaAnd Ors.16, it was held
that the sons of the murderer were entitled to the property but not through
the title of the murderer. This was taken based on the decision of the Privy
Council in GanguVs. Chandrabnagabai,
“It is no doubt that because she is the husband’s wife that she becomes
the gotrajasapinda of the deceased. In the other words, her status as wife
13
14
15
16

Benjamin N.Cardozo, Nature of Judicial Process, Yale University Press page no.42.
(1904) 14 MLJ 297.
(1908)10 BOMLR 149.
(1942) 1 MLJ 21.

65 / NYAYA DEEP

is the cause of her status as gotrajasapinda. The former is the cause and
the latter is the effect. But, the sapindaship is an entity by itself, distinct
from, through arising out of the cause. And it is the sapindaship which is
the immediate cause of her heirship”17
In SeetharamaiahVs. Ramakrishnaiah18, it was held that Parliament
had inserted section 25 in the Hindu Succession Act as all matter of high
public policy based on well-known principles of justice, equity and good
conscience so that the person may not be able accelerate the succession by
murdering the last owner of the property and it is done by the next heir he
stands excluded from succession, meaning thereby that he would not be
allowed to take benefit of succession by his own wrong by committing the
murder of the previous owner.
In M.Nagarajan Vs V.M.Nagammal (2011), it was held that the husband
who murdered his wife and children and served life imprisonment should
not inherit the wife’s property and the property was given to her mother.
It appears that sections 25 and 27 were enacted by the legislature to give
statutory approval to the principles of equity, justice and good conscience
which disqualifies murderer from inheriting the property of the person
murdered. Therefore, the words and phrases in these sections will have
to be construed in the light of these principles and this is also a wellestablished principle of public policy.19
In Mata Badal Singh and Ors V. BijayBahadur Singh and Ors.,20 A
murderer is disqualified from succeeding to the estate of his victim upon
the principles of justice, equity and good conscience. Further, a murderer
should be treated as a non existent qua the estate of the murdered person
that is to say no title to the estate of the murdered person can be claimed
through the murderer.
In Chinnappapapal and others Vs. Rajammal21, the property of the
father was not given to the sons as they were convicted of committing their
father’s murder. This is again under section 25 of the Hindu Succession
Act.
In Kenchava Kom Sanyellappa Hosmani Vs. Girimallappa Channappa
17
18
19
20
21

(1908)10 BOMLR 149.
AIR (1970)407.
M.Nagarajan Vs V.M.Nagammal (2011), 23 Dec.
AIR (1976) all 420.
(2002) 1 MLJ 66.

66 / NYAYA DEEP

Samasagar22, it was held that a murderer must for the purpose of the
inheritance, be treated as if he were dead when the inheritance opened
and as not being a fresh stock of descent, the exclusion extends to the legal
as well as beneficial estate, so that neither he can himself succeed nor can
the succession be claimed through him.

Development of Constructive Trust:
In Ellerson Vs Westcott23, the principle of constructive trust developed
which is an improvement in serving justice from Riggs Vs. Palmer. It was
held that the murderer can be a trustee so that the property benefits the
heirs of the murderer and this also prevents the misuse of the property
by the trustee. A constructive trust, does not like an express trust, arise
because of manifestation of an intention to create it, but is imposed as a
remedy to prevent unjust enrichment.24
Constructive trust is the formula through which the conscience of equity
finds expression. When property has been acquired in such circumstances that
the holder of legal title may not in good conscience retain the beneficial interest,
equity converts him into a trustee.25

- Justice Benjamin Cardozo
This evolution in the concept of inheritance is not obvious in the
Indian system which is apparent from the cases discussed above. The
judicial discretion has played a vital role in assuring equity as the judges
have tried the best to make sure that the property benefits the heir with
a sense of natural justice. Thus, the concept of constructive trust should
also be included in the Hindu Succession Act which will enable the
murderers to be the trustees and this will pave way to claim the succession
of property through the murderers. Section 1026 of Indian Trusts Act, 1882
allows the person competent to contract to be a trustee. Further, Section
11 of Indian Contract Act, 1872 disqualifies convicts from entering into
contract. However, on the expiry of the sentence, he is at liberty to institute
a suit27 The disability of convicts lasts as long as the person is imprisoned
22
23
24
25
26
27

AIR (1924) PC 209.
Benjamin N.Cardozo, Nature of Judicial Process, page no. 42.
Restatement of Restitution, Section 160, Comment (a).
Beatty Vs. Guggenheim Exploration Co., 225, N.Y.
Every person capable of holding property may be a trustee but, where the trust involves. the exercise of discretion, he cannot execute it unless he is competent to contract.
M.C.Kuchhal, Business Law, Second Revised Edn, Vikas Publishing House, pg.no. 1.55.

67 / NYAYA DEEP

or supervised by parole authorities.28 Thus, based on the two laws, a
murderer can obviously be made trustees and this will be in accordance
with public policy, social interest, equity and good conscience as it will
benefit the heir.

Conclusion:
With the cases above discussed, there are two aspects to be considered.
1) The idea of reformation
2) The idea of claiming inheritance through the murderer.
The judicial process is being unjust to the murderer. The broad object to
punishment of the accused found guilty in progressive civilized societies
is to impress on the guilty party that commission of crimes does not pay
and it is both against his individual interest and also against the larger
interest of the society to which he belongs. The sentence to be appropriate
should therefore, be neither too harsh nor too lenient.29 Reformation by
contrast, seeks to bring about a change in the offender’s character itself
so as to reclaim him as a useful member of the society30 When the justice
system has succeeded in reforming the murderer thereby protecting the
society’s interest, it can undoubtedly give the property to the murderer.
The introduction of the constructive trust in Hindu Succession
Act is also pertinent as the present provision does not allow the heirs
of the murderer to claim property through the murderer and this will
satisfy the principles of equity, public policy .The property is to benefit
the descendants and not just the immediate heir. The American Justice
system has corrected itself in this aspect. The concept of constructive trust
through which the property can be claimed through the murderer is in
the view of principles of equity, justice and good conscience. The legal
principles are morally just and they are in accordance with the situation
of the time such as no one can take benefit from one’s own crime exists
when the reformative justice system is inefficient. The reformative justice
system should be corrected and the justice should be served through
judicial discretion till the reformative justice system is reformed. The
28
29
30

John D.Ashcroft, Katherine Ashcroft, Martha Patterson, Cengage Advantage Books;
Law for Business (19th Edition).
Shatrughan Chauhan Anr vs Union of India &ors, (2014).
P.J.Fitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th edition, Universal Law Publishing Company, page no.94.

68 / NYAYA DEEP

legal principles can be used for equity, justice and good conscience only
through judicial discretion.

References:
Books:
1)

Herbert Brooms, A Selection
Philadelphia:T.&J.W.Johnson

of

Legal

Maxims

(1874),

2) P.J.Flitzgerald, Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th edition, Universal
Law Publishing Company
3) Benjamin N. Cardozo, The Nature of Judicial Process, Yale
University Press (1946)
4) John Rawls, The Theory of Justice, Universal Law Publishing
Company.
5) NalwaSuman&KohliHari Dev, Commentary on The Juvenile
Justice Act, 2nd edition, Universal Law Publishing Company.
6) M.C.Kuchhal, Business Law, Second Revised Edn, Vikas
Publishing House.
7) John D.Ashcroft, Katherine Ashcroft, Martha Patterson, Cengage
Advantage Books; Law for Business (19th Edition).

Articles:
1) Daniel A.Farber, Courts, Statutes and Public Policy: The Case of
the Murderous Heir, 53 SMU L.Rev.31(2000).
2) D’Amato , Antony, “Elmer’s Rule: A Jurisprudential Dialogue”
(2010).Faculty Working Papers. Paper 110.
3) NkeonyeOtakpor, Judicial Discretion and Democratic Theory,
Archives for Philosophy of Law and Social Philosophy,Vol. 68,
No.2 (1982)

Web Sources:
1) http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/migrated/
publiced/features/DYJpart1.authcheckdam.pdf

Cases Referred:
1) Riggs v. Palmer, 115 N.Y. 506 (1889)
69 / NYAYA DEEP

2) VedanayaMudaliar v. Vedammal, (1904) 14 MLJ 297
3) GanguVs. Chandrabnagabai, (1908) 10 BOMLR 149
4) K.Stanumurthiyya And Ors. Vs K. Ramappa And Ors, (1942) 1
MLJ 21
5) SeetharamaiahVs. Ramakrishnaiah, AIR (1970) 407
6) M.Nagarajan Vs. V.M.Nagammal, (2011), 23 december
7) Mata Badal Singh and Ors V. BijayBahadur Singh and Ors., AIR
(1976) ALL 420
8) Chinnappapapal and others Vs. Rajammal, (2002) 1 MLJ 66
9) Kenchava Kom Sanyellappa Hosmani
Channappa Samasagar, AIR (1924) PC 209

Vs.

Girimallappa

10) Shatrughan Chauhan AnrVs. Union of India &Ors, (2014) 3 SCC 1
11) Ellerson V. Westcott, 148 N.Y. 149 (N.Y.1896)
12) Beatty V. Guggenheim Exploration Co. (1919) 225 NY 380.
******

70 / NYAYA DEEP

—Sharlin Puppal*

Federal Court under Government
of India Act, 1935 vis-à-vis present
Supreme Court of India
Introduction
The creation of the Federal Court of India by the Constitution Act
1935 was a landmark in the judicial and legal history of British India. The
evolution of the courts in India under the British rule and the progressive
application of the British common law to India by enactment of laws, have
left their indelible mark on legal history of India during last 200 years. But
the creation of the Federal Court was the most outstanding contribution
of the British on the eve of their leaving this country on India attaining
Independence.1
The Government of India Act, 1935 envisaged a federal form of
government, with clearly defined spheres of legislation as between the
federating units and the Centre. It was necessary to create an All India
Court to adjudicate upon in the conflicting claims of those units in the
matter of legislation and to interpret the Constitution with particular
reference to the three lists, which sought to demarcate the Central from
the Provincial ambit of legislative jurisdiction2. The creation of the Federal
Court of India by the Government of India Act,1935 was a landmark in the
judicial and legal history of British India. The Government of India Act,
1935 provided for establishment of a Federal Court in India. Such a court
was essential because of the Act 1935 provided for a federal system in
which there was division of power. There was every possibility of conflict
of jurisdiction between the central government and the provinces. Such a
court was necessary to decide those cases. The Act provided that federal
court shall consist of the chief justice of India and not more than 6 judges
appointed by the king.3
*

2nd year student Maharashtra National Law University Mumbai.

1
2
3

M. V Pylee, ‘Federal Court of India’, pp. 46-55 Vikas Publication House,1996.
Ibid.
D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal Courts

71 / NYAYA DEEP

The seat of Federal Court was at Delhi. The federal Court possessed
three kinds of jurisdiction; original, appellate and advisory jurisdictions.4
It had original jurisdiction in so far as any question about their legal rights
was involved. India retained the right of appeal from the Federal Court to
the Privy Council even after the establishment of the Dominion of India.
Then, the Federal Court Enlargement of Jurisdiction Act, 1948 was passed.
This Act enlarged the appellate jurisdiction of Federal Court and also
abolished the old system of filing direct appeals from the High Court to the
Privy Council. Finally, in 1949, the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction
Act was passed by the Indian Government.5 This Act accordingly
abolished the jurisdiction of Privy Council to entertain new appeals and
petitions as well as to dispose of any pending appeals and petitions. It also
provided for transfer of all cases filed before Privy Council to the Federal
Court in India. All powers of the Privy Council regarding appeals from
the High Court were conferred to the Federal Court. Thereafter with the
commencement of the Constitution of India in 1950, the Supreme Court
has been established and is serving as the Apex Court for all purposes in
India. It hears appeals from all the High Courts and Subordinate Courts.
After achieving their political aspirations by obtaining independence
in August, 1947, there was demand from the Indian polity for enlarging
the jurisdiction of Federal Court and granting more powers to it. With
effect from 10th October, 1949 appeals to the Privy Council were abolished
altogether and the entire appellate jurisdiction was vested in the Federal
Court. On 26th January, 1950, Federal Court gave way to the Supreme
Court of India under the new constitution. Supreme Court of India was
inaugurated on January 28, 1950 by late Shri M.C. Setalwad, first Attorney
General for India.6

CHAPTER I
Evolution of federal Court in India
The judicial system that prevailed in India until the inauguration of
Federal Court had no federal characteristic. In fact, the British East India
company in its early days, had very little to do in the field of administration
4
5
6

in India’, pp. 220, Eastern Book Company, 10th edition.
D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal Courts
in India’, pp. 222, Eastern Book Company, 10th edition.
Ibid.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 221, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition.

72 / NYAYA DEEP

of justice, as its activities were of a purely commercial character. The
peculiarity of the Indian judicial system at this time was the coexistence
of two system of Courts, namely the Supreme Court in the Presidency
Town in the province. Even before the Round Table Conferences,
constitutionalists gave expression on the formation of a Federal Court as
an integral part of the federation. The main problem that faced them was
the power and function of federal judiciary.7 There were several patterns
to be viewed and considered but American pattern was copied with some
modification.
The unquestioned supremacy of the federal legislature, with a federal
executive at its behest, might at any time create a serious encroachment on
provincial autonomy. This might spoil not only self-government, but also
good governance. Therefore, it was only a primary requisite to ensure that
body entrusted with the task of interpreting and guarding the Constitution
and determining the disputes between the various units of the federation
should be impartial and independent of the Federation the Provinces and
federated States. The idea of formation of a federal judicature in India and
England took concrete shape during the deliberation of the Second-Round
Table Conference. 8
The British Parliament enacted on 2 August 1935 that ‘There shall be a
Federal Court for India consisting of a Chief Justice of India and such number
of other judges as His Majesty may deem necessary’.9 In pursuance of this
enactment, the Federal Court was duly inaugurated on October 1937. The
establishment of the Court was expected to introduce a new element in the
jurisprudence of one of the oldest and greatest civilizations of the world.
In the exercise of both its original and appellate jurisdiction the Court had
the responsibility and opportunity of displaying in an eminent degree,
those qualities of judicial capacity, fairness and dignity. Thus, the end of
the year 1937 marked the emergence of an all India judicature and this
is a hall-mark in India constitutional history because of the valuable role
that has been played by the Federal Court in the field of constitutional
advancement in India.

7
8
9

George H. Gadbois Jr. ‘Evolution of Federal Court in India’, Indian Law Institute Journal,
Vol. 5,1963, pp. 19-46.
Legislative Assembly Debates, 1942.
M. Ramaswamy, ‘The law of Indian Constitution’, pp. 85- 98, 1938.

73 / NYAYA DEEP

Jurisdiction of Federal Court in India
Under the Government of India Act, 1935 the Federal Court was given
three kind of jurisdiction, namely: 1) Original 2) Appellate 3) Advisory.10
Section 206 empowered the federal legislation to pass an Act enlarging the
appellate jurisdiction of the Federal Court in civil cases to its full extend.
From 15 August 1947, two independent dominions, India and Pakistan
came into existence and they were given full sovereignty by the British
parliament. As regards the constitutional law to govern the Dominions, it
was laid down that the Act of 1935 should be used with necessary changes
in it.11 Under the powers given by section 206 of the Act, the Federal Court
Act, 1947 and the Abolition of Privy Council Act, 1949 were passed in the
Indian Dominion to meet the new situation after independence.12 Both
these Acts enlarged the jurisdiction of the Federal Courts of India which
continued its existence up to the establishment of the Supreme Court of
India on 26 January, 1950 under the new Constitution of India.
1.

Original jurisdiction: Section 206 of the Act provided that the original
jurisdiction of the Federal Court was confined to disputes between
units of the Dominion or between the dominion or any other units. In
the exercise of original jurisdiction, the Federal Court had no power
to entertain suit brought by private individuals against the Dominion.

2.

Appellate Jurisdiction: The Federal Court exercised appellate
jurisdiction in constitutional cases under the Act of 1935, its appellate
jurisdiction was extended to civil and criminal cases from 1948.

3.

Advisory Jurisdiction: Section 213 of the Act of 1935 empowered
the Federal Court to give advisory opinion to governor general. The
Governor General was not bound to accept the opinion moreover, the
court was not bound to give its opinion on every matter.13

Foundation of the Federal Court
The Government of India Act, 1935 changed the structure of Indian
government from ‘Unitary’ to ‘Federal’ type. It established the foundation
for federal framework in India. A Federal Constitution, it must be noted,
involves distribution of powers between the centre and the constituent
units.
10
11
12
13

V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 221, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition.
Ibid.
D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal Courts
in India’, pp. 221 Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 222-223, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.

74 / NYAYA DEEP

A) Inauguration- On 1 October 1937, the federal court was inaugurated
at Delhi and the Viceroy administered the oath of allegiance to three
judges of the court, namely, Sir Maurice Gwyer CJ, and two Judges,
Sir Shah Mohammed Sulaiman and Mukund Ramrao Jaykar.14
B) Appointment of judges: The federal court was to consist of a chief
justice and not more than six judges, who were appointed by the king.
The king could increase the member of judges. Every judge could
hold the office till the age of 65 years.
C)

Qualification: for appointment of judge in the federal court, the
qualification was: 1) five years’ experience as judge of the high court,
or 2) a barrister or an advocate of 10 years’ sanding, or 3) a leader in
the High court of 10 years’ standing.15

Abolition of Federal Court in India
On 1949 the Constituent’s Assembly decided to give full judicial
autonomy to the Indian judiciary. The draft of the new Constitution of
India was at its final stage and the leaders wanted to give it a smooth
transition. The Assembly, therefore, passed the Abolition of the Privy
Council Jurisdiction Act in 1949. The act came into force from 10 October
1949 and it severed all connections of the Indian courts with the Privy
Council. The act repealed section 208 of the Government of India Act, 1935
which was the basis of the Privy Council’s appellate jurisdiction over the
federal court.16 It transferred all the pending appeals, except those which
were at the advantage stage, to the Federal Court of India for final disposal.

CHAPTER II
The Supreme Court of India
The most distinctive character of the Federal Court was that it was
the first all India judicature established in the country. It is true that its
jurisdiction embraced only the British Indian Provinces, and not the Indian
States which numbered more than five hundred. Nevertheless, the Federal
Court, for the first time, gave the vision of truly all India Supreme Court
of the future. The federal scheme of the Government of India Act,1935
was indeed the fore runner of the federal system of an independent India.
14
15
16

V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 221, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 221-222, Eastern Book Company, 10th edition, 2013.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 226, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013

75 / NYAYA DEEP

Under Art. 32 of the Constitution the Supreme Court is made the protector
of all the Fundamental Rights embodied in the Constitution.17 And the
Court has to guard these rights against every infringement at the hands
of either the Union Government or the State Government by declaring
the significance and operation of these rights from time to time.18 It
protects the citizens from unconstitutional laws passed by the legislatures
and arbitrary acts done by the administrative executive authorities. The
Supreme Court is also an all India supreme appellate court having both
criminal and civil jurisdiction.19
The Constitution invests the Court with extensive powers of reviewing
the decisions of the Courts below it in criminal and civil cases. In the
process, it gets an opportunity to construe not only the Constitution and
the laws enacted by Parliament, but also the laws passed by the various
State Legislatures.20 Further, the Supreme Court of India plays a unique
role by giving its advice, from time to time, to the President of India on
questions of law or fact which are of such a nature and of such public
importance that President refers to them to the Court for its consideration
and opinion.
The Supreme Court at present consist of the Chief Justice and twentyfive other judges. In 1950, when the Court was inaugurated with the new
Constitution, it had only eight judges. In any country, the judiciary plays
the important role of interpreting and applying the law and adjudicating
upon controversies between one citizen and the State.21 In a country with a
written Constitution, courts have the additional function of safeguarding
the supremacy of the Constitution by interpreting and applying its
provisions and keeping all authorities within the constitutional framework.
In a federation, the judiciary has another meaningful assignment, namely,
to decide controversies between the constituent States inter se, as well
as between the Centre and the State.22 Therefore in order to maintain
the supremacy of the Constitution, there must be an independent and
impartial authority to decide disputes between the Centre and States. Art.
17
18
19
20
21
22

‘Supreme Court of India’, accessed on 16th Feb(6:00pm), 2017, supremecourtofindia.nic.in/
history.html
Ibid.
M.V Pylee, ‘Federal Court of India’, Vikas Publication House,1996, pp. 46.
‘Supreme Court of India’, accessed on 16th Feb(6:00pm), 2017, supremecourtofindia.nic.in/
history.html
‘Supreme Court of India’, accessed on 16th Feb(6:00pm), 2017, supremecourtofindia.nic.
in/history.html
Jain, M.P., Constitutional law of India, Wadhawa and Company Law Publisher, p. 120.

76 / NYAYA DEEP

124 Provides that there shall be a Supreme Court of India.23 In India, the
judiciary has the significant function of enforcing the Fundamental Rights
of people granted to them by the Constitution.
India has a unified judicial system with the Supreme Court standing
at the apex and the High Courts below it. The Supreme Court thus enjoys
the top most position in the judicial hierarchy of the country.24 It is the
ultimate Court of appeal in all civil and criminal matters and the final
interpreter of law of the land, and thus helps in maintaining a uniformity
of law throughout the country.

Supreme Court – The Guardian of the Constitution
The essence of a federal Constitution is the division of powers
between the central and the State government. This division is made by
a written Constitution which is the supreme law of the land. There must
be an independent and impartial authority to divide disputes between
the Centre and the States or the States inter se.25 This function has been
entrusted to the Supreme Court. It is the final interpreter and the guardian
of the Constitution.

Jurisdiction of Supreme Court of India
Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Iyer has rightly observed ‘The Supreme Court
in Indian Union has more power than any Supreme Court in any part of the
world’26 But this was not the position in the Draft Constitution which
had envisaged only a narrower jurisdiction for the Supreme Court than
it has today. Some of the prominent lawyer members of the Constituent
Assembly took the lead in enlarging the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court can be divided into three categories,
(1) Original jurisdiction (2) Appellate jurisdiction (3) Advisory jurisdiction
(4) Review jurisdiction.27
23
24
25
26
27

‘Esrablishment of Supreme Court of India’, ‘Article 124 of the Constitution of India’,
accessed on 20th Feb (7:00pm), 2017, https://indiankanoon.org/doc/1164880
Jain, M.P., Constitutional law of India, Wadhawa and Company Law Publisher, p. 120.
‘The Supreme Court of India’, ‘Supreme court of India as a guardian of Fundamental rights, accessed on 17th Feb, 2017, www.preservearticles.com/.../essay-on-the-supreme-court-of-india.html.
Constituent Assembly Debate: Official Report, Vol. VIII, Lok Sabha Secretariat, 1999, pp.
596
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 230, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.

77 / NYAYA DEEP

1. Original Jurisdiction: A comparison of the Supreme Court of
India and U.S.A. shows that the original jurisdiction of the American
Supreme Court is wider than that of the Supreme Court of India.
In addition to the settlement of disputes among the units of the
federation in the United States, the American Supreme Court can try
cases relating to ambassadors, consist, minister’s treaties, naval forces
and maritime matters.28
In India, the Supreme Court will have no original jurisdiction to
decides disputes between residents of different States or those
between a States and the resident of another States.
The original jurisdiction of the court extends to the following two
types
of cases:
i) Dispute relating to the Union and the States – The following
disputes are
covered under this jurisdiction:
a)

Any dispute between the Government of India and one or more
States; or

b) Disputes between the Government of India and any State or
States on the
c)

one side and one or more States on the other side; or

d) Disputes between two or more States
The above jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising out of any
treaty, agreement, or covenant or similar document which, having been
executed before the commencement of the Constitution continues in
operation after such commencement. But these disputes may be referred
by the President to the Supreme Court for its advisory opinion.
The first suit brought before the Supreme Court was between West
Bengal vs. Union of India29 in 1961 to declare the unconstitutionality of
the coal bearing Area Act 1957. In this case the court held that the States
under the Constitution are not sovereign and that the union has authority
28
29

Mahajan, V.D., Constitutional Development and the National Movement in India, S.
Chand Company,1970, pp. 341.
State of West Bengal V. Union of India, A.I.R. 1963, p. 1241.

78 / NYAYA DEEP

to acquire compulsorily land belonging to State Governments.
ii) Disputes/cases Involving the Violation of Fundamental Rights:
The cases involving the violation of Fundamental Rights can be
initiated either in the High Courts or the Supreme Court. Art. 32 of the
Constitution gives special responsibilities to the Supreme Court for the
protection of Fundamental Rights of the citizens. In case of the violation of
these rights the Supreme Court can issue the writs in the nature of Habeas
Corpus, Mandamus, quo warranto, prohibition and certiorari.

Appellate jurisdiction
Appellate jurisdiction means the right and jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court to entertain appeals against the decisions of the lower courts, e.g.,
High Courts.
The appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court can be divided into
four main
Categories:30
a) Constitutional matters,
b) Civil matters,
c) Criminal matters,
d) Special leave to appeal.

Advisory Jurisdiction
According to Art. 143, the Supreme Court has advisory jurisdiction.
On the matters referred to the court for legal advice, by the President. If
at any time, it appears to the President that a question of law has arisen,
which is of such public importance that it is necessary to obtain the
advice of the Supreme Court, he may refer such question to the Court for
consideration.31 The Supreme Court, may after due consideration; report
to the President its opinion on that matter. The Supreme Court is not
bound to give its legal opinion on all matters referred to it by the President
30
31

V.D Kulshreshtha’s,‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 230, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s,‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pp. 230-231, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition, 2013.

79 / NYAYA DEEP

also the President is not bound to abide by such legal opinion.32

Judicial Review
Judicial Review is the power of the Courts to determine the
constitutionality of Legislative Act in a case instituted by aggrieved person.
It is the power of the Court to declare a legislative Act void on the grounds
of unconstitutionality. It has been defined by Smith & Zurcher, ‘The
examination or review by the Courts, in cases actually before them, of legislative
statutes and executive or administrative acts to determine whether or not they
are prohibited by a written Constitution or are in excess of powers granted by it,
and if so, to declare them void and of no effect’.33 Edward S. Corwin also says
that Judicial Review is the power and duty of the courts to disallow all
legislative or executive acts of either the central or the State governments,
which in the Court’s opinion transgresses the Constitution.34

The Supreme Court as the guardian of Fundamental Rights
The Constitution has assigned to the Supreme Court a special role
“The protector and guarantor of fundamental rights by Art. 32(1)”. Where,
therefore, the infringement of a fundamental right has been established,
the Supreme Court cannot refuse relief under Art. 32 on the ground.35
a) That the aggrieved person may have his remedy from some other
Court or under the ordinary law’ or
b) That disputed facts have to be investigated or evidence has to be
taken before relief may be given to the petitioner.
c) That the petitioner has not asked for the proper writ applicable
to his case. In such a case the Supreme Court must grant him the
proper writ and, if necessary modify it to suit the exigencies of the
case.
d) Generally, only the person effected may move the Court but the
32
33
34
35

Ashok K. Ghosh, Basu, D.D, Introduction to the Constitution of India, Prentice Hall of
India, 1998, p. 294.
Basu, D.D., Limited Government and Judicial Review, Sarkar and Sons Publication,
1972, pp. 275.
‘Judicial Review’, accessed on 16th Feb, 2017, https://indiankanoon.org/search/?formInput=judicial%20review
Kapur, Anupchand, The Indian Political System, S. Chand & Company, New Delhi,
1982, pp. 303.

80 / NYAYA DEEP

Supreme Court has held that in social or public interest, any
person may move the Court. This is called expansion of the right
to be heard’ it favours public interest litigation. The Supreme
Court can declare any law null and void if it violates the exercise of
fundamental rights. The Court also protect these rights if they are
infringed by the action of the executive. In case of violation of these
rights, the affected person may directly approach the Supreme
Court and the Court may issue the writs in the nature of Habeas
corpus, Mandamus, Prohibition, certiorari, Quo warrranto.36
1. Habeas Corpus: The writ of Habeas Corpus is issue by the Court
to affect the release of a person who has not been detained legally. Under
this writ, the Court issue order to the concerned authority or person to
produce the detainee before the Court in order to let the Court known on
what ground the concerned person has been detained and to set him free
if there is no legal justification for imprisonment.
2. Mandamus: The writ of mandamus meaning command is addressed
to a public authority to command him to do a duty which he is supposed
to do but he has not performed.
3. Prohibition: The writ of prohibition is issued by the Supreme
Court or High Courts against the lower Courts to prevent the latter from
usurping their designated jurisdiction.
4. Certiorari: The writ of certiorari is also issued against inferior
Courts by the Supreme Court or the High Courts, if the lower Courts have
violated their designated jurisdiction and pronounced the decision on the
case.
5.Quo-Warranto: The writ of quo warranto is issued against a person
occupying a public office which he is not entitled to. The purpose of the
writ is to prevent the unlawful occupation of a public office by persons
who are not eligible to that office.37

Comparative analysis of Federal Court and Supreme Court of
India
The government of India no doubt established a Federal Court but
its jurisdiction was very limited and even in those cases appeals were
36
37

’The Supreme Court of India as Guardian of Fundamental Rights’, accessed on 21st Jan,
2017 (6:00 pm), www.yourarticlelibrary.com/essay/the-supreme-court-of-india...of...
and.../24918
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal Courts in
India’, pg. 222-223 Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition.

81 / NYAYA DEEP

allowed to the Privy Council. The system of appeals was from High
Court to Privy Council, which had been operation hitherto, was left intact
and unaffected. What was therefore done at time was to interpose the
Federal Court between the High Courts and the Privy Council for only the
restricted category of cases in which a question of Constitutional law was
concern (This was done usually at the initial stage).38 Whereas Supreme
Court of India exercises much wider power, it is quite independent and
it combines in itself the functions and power both of the federal Court
and the Privy Council. Further, the constitution of India has granted three
types of Jurisdiction to the Supreme Court, namely, Original, Appellate,
Advisory. It is also given special powers, e.g. to review its judgement, to
punish the guilty for contempt of court, to issue writs, judicial review of
legislation, etc.
The Federal Court in India as provided by section 209 of the
Government of India Act of 1935, had no machinery of its own to execute
its judgements. I was sending back the case with its decision on respective
High Court so that its order could be substituted for the order of the High
Court. Further, the provision of section 209 was amended by the Privy
Council Act, 1949. its effect was that the Federal Courts order was made
enforceable in the manner as provided by the Civil Procedure Code or
by any law which was made by the dominion legislature.39 Whereas the
Supreme Court of India, under Article 142 is empowered to pass decree
or make necessary order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any
person, the discovery or production of documents and or any investigation.
The mode of execution of such decree is left to the Union Parliament to
pass necessary legislation. The President has made the Supreme Court
(Decrees and Orders) enforcement order, 1954.40 The time span of the
Federal Court in India was very less i.e. from 1937-1950 a lot of limitation
and short life but still it had a noteworthy contribution. The Federal Court
built up a great tradition of independence, impartiality, integrity, which
inherited by the successor, the Supreme Court of India.

Conclusion
The Federal Court was established in October 1937 was superseded
by the Supreme Court of India, 1950. During this short period of a little
more than 12 years, it left a permanent mark on the legal history of India.
38
39
40

V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pg. 221, Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition.
V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional History’, ‘Federal
Courts in India’, pg. 224 Eastern Book Company, 10th Edition.
State of Haryana vs. state of Punjab (2004) 12 SCC 2348.

82 / NYAYA DEEP

It was not only the first constituents court but also the first all India court
of extensive jurisdiction.
The court was liberally conceived by the British authorities as an
indispensable adjunct to the Federation envisages by the Government of
India Act, 1935. During transition period in the legal history, when there no
written constitution, in a sense it was a product of a constitutional curiosity.
It could function successfully and effectively in the absence of essential
federal agencies such as federal executive and federal legislature. In spite
of its limitation and short life span it made a noteworthy contribution to
the functioning of all-India court such as the Supreme Court.
There were about six judges who got the rare distinction of being the
judges of the Federal Court in India. They contributed a great deal to the
establishment of sound Federal System in India. The Federal Court built
up a great tradition of interdependence, impartiality and integrity which
was inherited by its successor i.e. Supreme Court of India.

Bibliography
Books
•

V.D Kulshreshtha’s, ‘Landmarks in Indian Legal & Constitutional
History’, ‘Federal Courts in India’, pg. 222-223 Eastern Book
Company, 10th edition.

•

M V Pylee, ‘Federal Court of India’, pp.12 Vikas Publication House
Delhi,1996.
This source was referred because it gives extensive information
about the Federal Courts and its emergence.

•

Jain, M.P., Constitutional law of India, Wadhawa and Company
Law Publisher, p. 120

•

Pandey, J.N., Constitutional law of India, Central Law Agency,
Allahabad, 1991, pp.319.

•

Basu, D.D., Introduction to the Constitution of India, Ashok K.
Ghosh, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 1998, p. 294.

•

Raj Kumar, ‘Essays on Legal Systems in India’, pp. 108–109,
Discovery Publishing House, 2003.
This source gives an immense information about the setting up of
federal system India and emergence of Supreme Court of India.
83 / NYAYA DEEP

Case laws
•

State of West Bengal V. Union of India, A.I.R. 1963, p. 1241.

•

State of Haryana vs. state of Punjab (2004) 12 SCC 2348.

Web sources
‘Privy council and Federal Court’, accessed on 19th Jan, 2017, ://
notesmilenge.files.wordpress.com
This source gives an information regarding the historical
perspective of setting up of Privy council and Federal Courts in
India.
• ‘History of supreme court of India’, accessed on 19th Jan, 2017,
supremecourtofindia.nic.in/history.htm
This source gives information about the history of Supreme Court
if India, it evolution and history of setting up Supreme Court.
• ‘Structure of supreme Court of India’, accessed on 20th Jan, 2017
(8:00 pm), supremecourt.gov.jm/content/court-structure-andhierarchy
This source specifically talks about the core structure of supreme
Court of India, role and function of Supreme Court.
• “The Supreme Court of India its composition and appointments’,
accessed on 21st Jan, 2017 (6:00 pm), www.yourarticlelibrary.com/
essay/the-supreme-court-of-india...of...and.../24918
This source provides information about the composition of
Supreme Court and appointment of judges.
• ‘Role of Supreme Court’, accessed on 20th Jan, 2017 (9;00pm),
www.silf.org.in/16/indian-judicial-system.htm
This source talks about the role of Supreme Court in dealing with
Cases, how does it work independently i.e. without any oppression by the
Union government.
•

•

’The Supreme Court of India as Guardian of Fundamental Rights’,
accessed on 21st Jan, 2017 (6:00 pm), www.yourarticlelibrary.com/
essay/the-supreme-court-of-india...of...and.../24918

•

Judicial Review’, accessed on 16th Feb, 2017, https://indiankanoon.
org/search/?formInput=judicial%20review

Other sources:
•
•

Legislative assembly debates, 1942.
Constituent Assembly Debate: Official Report, Vol. VIII, Lok
Sabha Secretariat, 1999, pp. 596
******
84 / NYAYA DEEP

News from States
(April, 2016 to June, 2016)

ANDHRA PRADESH
NALSA New Schemes: Apart from the State Plan of Action, we are
also organising programmes on 7 new Schemes launched by NALSA. Of
these 7 Schemes, this Authority has adopted 3 Schemes namely “Protection
of Rights of Tribals and Availability of Legal Services”, “Protection of
Rights of Victims of Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation and availability of
Legal Services” and “NALSA ( Child Friendly Legal Services to Children
and their Protection) Scheme, 2015”, as its State Project for focussed
implementation.
Child Friendly Legal Services: The State Government, vide GOMs.
No.19, dated 26-4-2016 has constituted the High Level Committee, as
stipulated under Section 16(2) of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection
of Children) Act, 2015, to review the pendency of cases, before the
Juvenile Justice Board, periodically. The Executive Chairman of APSLSA
is the Chairman of the said Committee and 4 other Members have been
nominated.
Three Day Training Programmes to Counsellors and Academicians:
In the Psychological evaluation of children in conflict with the law,
the role of psychologist assumes significance. In coordination with
Women Development and Child Welfare Department of the State,
three day training programme on “Capacity Building, to Counsellors
and Academicians on Psycho Social Care for Children in Difficult
Circumstances”, was organised from 4th to 6th April, 2016 at Tirupati,
wherein identified Professors of Psychology from various universities of
the State, Counsellors and Probation Officers, participated. The resource
persons for this programme were Professors and Doctors of NIMHANS,
Bangalore, who enlightened the participants on the techniques to be used
in counselling children for their behavioural modification. The services of
Members, who underwent training in this programme, is intended to be
utilised to train more psychologists in the State.

85 / NYAYA DEEP

Protection of the Rights of Victims of Trafficking and Sexual
Exploitation Scheme, 2015: A programme was organised regarding
implementation of the NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and Commercial
Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015 at Anantapur on 25-6-2016. Around 150
participants attended the programme. Professor Sri Pulla Reddy, Professor
of Law at Sri Krishna Devaraya University, addressed the gathering on the
scope of Sections 359 to Sections 374 IPC and related amendments.
Dr. Shaiba Saldanha, Founder Enfold India, Chief Trainer for Police
and Medical Personnel made a power point presentation on protection of
children from Sexual Offences Act, (POCSO) Act, 2012. Sri S.V.Rajasekhar
Babu, D.S.P, Anantapur, made a power point presentation on the “Scenario
of Human Trafficking”, and the manner in which the Police Department
was tackling these issues, and taking preventive measures to curb the
human trafficking menace. Sri SRA Rosedar, Senior Public Prosecutor of
Chittoor District, delivered a lecture on “The Immoral Traffic (Prevention)
Act, 1956”, and on rescue and rehabilitation of victims of trafficking.
Smt. S. Rajya Lakshmi, Joint Director, Women and Child Welfare
Department, delivered a lecture on the role of the Women and Child
Welfare Department in rescue, rehabilitation and re-integration of victims
of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation. The Chairman of a local
NGO, from Kadiri in Ananthapuram District, addressed the gathering on
the role of NGOs in prevention of trafficking, rescue and re-integration
of victims. 3 rescued women shared their experiences, of physical and
mental abuse by traffickers and pimps, with the participants at the meet.
Legal Services to the Tribal People: Around 15 youngsters from
the Scheduled Tribes (i.e. 5 from Visakhapatnam District; 5 from
Vizianagaram District and 5 from Srikakulam District) were identified,
and a training programme was organized not only for them but also for
the panel lawyers at Visakhapatnam on 30.04.2016 and 01.05.2016. Several
of these scheduled tribe youngsters not only reside in agency areas but
are also highly qualified. They were imparted training on laws made for
protection of the rights of tribals. Their services as PLVs is intended to be
utilised to help the tribals of these 3 districts.
At our request, Dr. V.N.V.K.Sastry, retired Director of Tribal Research
Institute, Government of India, prepared a training module on the rights
of tribals in the scheduled areas of the State, as part of the exercise of
86 / NYAYA DEEP

implementation of the NALSA Scheme.
International Day against Drug Abuse: All the 13 DLSAs organised
Awareness Programmes, on the occasion of International Day against
Drug Abuse, on 26th June, 2016 regarding the ill – effects and disastrous
consequences of drug abuse. On this occasion around 90 Legal Literacy
Camps were conducted throughout the State, wherein 8866 persons
participated.
Public Hearing for Marginal Communities: On 04-04-2015, the
DLSA, East Godavari district, in coordination with “VARADHI” and other
Government Departments, conducted a “Public Hearing for Marginal
Communities” at Rajahmundry, wherein officials from Police, Health,
Revenue and Social Welfare Departments participated. The programme
not only helped marginalised community, but also sensitized officers of
different Departments of the need for a change in attitude towards victims
from these marginalised communities.
14th All India Meet of SLSAs: This Authority, along with TSLSA,
organised the 14th All India Meet of State Legal Services Authorities on 9th
and 10th April, 2016 at Hyderabad.
Training to Special Juvenile Police Units: As per the directions of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in “Sampurna Behrua Vs. Union
of India and others”, and as per the guidelines of NALSA, 9 training
programmes were conducted in various districts for Special Juvenile
Police Units, CWCs, JJBs and other stakeholders wherein 656 participants
were imparted training on the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, and other connected aspects.
U.T.P. Review Committee Meetings: In this quarter, in the month
of June, 2016, U.T.Prisoners Review Committee Meetings have been
conducted in all the 13 districts as per the directions of Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India in WP(C) No.406 of 2013 in the case of “Inhuman Conditions
in 1382 Jails”
Awareness through Doordarshan, All India Radio and ETV: On
the active initiation of this Authority, Doordarshan, Saptagiri, Andhra
Pradesh, has allotted a Slot of 30 minutes every Monday between 2.30
PM and 3.00 PM to telecast Legal Services Programmes under Public
Broadcasting, free of charge. During the period, 9 programmes have been
87 / NYAYA DEEP

conducted in Doordarshan covering various legal aspects including the 7
new schemes of NALSA. Similarly 10 Live Programmes were broadcasted
in All India Radio, and 13 Live programmes have been telecasted in ETV-2
channel, during the period.
Legal Aid Clinics: During the quarter, 11 new Clinics were established
at JJBs, CWCs, villages and Community Centres and during the quarter, 33
Clinics were closed which are non-productive. Now there are 870 Clinics
functioning in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Workshop on ADR Methods: The SLSA, in coordination with
the ICADR, organised a two Day Workshop on Alternative Dispute
Resolution methods at Kadapa on the 18th and 19th June, 2016. Around 75
persons i.e., 27 Judicial Officers, 34 Advocates and 4 Professors of Law,
Law College Lecturers, and 10 others, including Mediators and Social
Workers, participated in the workshop.
Training of Panel Lawyers: The Panel lawyers of Prakasam,
Anantapur, Chittoor, East Godavari and Guntur districts have been
imparted training by Master Trainers, in “Advancing Lawyering Skills”,
and around 296 panel lawyers were imparted training during this period.
PLVs Training: In this quarter, 28 training programmes were
conducted and imparted training to 498 Para-Legal Volunteers. Of these
training programmes, 6 are induction programmes, 20 basic trainings, one
orientation programme and one advanced training programme.
Regular and National Lok Adalats: During the quarter, total 11,111
cases were settled in regular Lok Adalats out of which 10,130 cases are of
pending litigation and the rest are of pre-litigation. Rs.78.36 crores was the
settlement amount in those cases. In addition, in the National Lok Adalat
conducted on 11-06-2016, around 19,751 cases were settled, out of which,
17,523 are pending litigation and the rest are pre-litigation. The settlement
amount in the cases settled in National Lok Adalat is Rs.48.38 crores.

88 / NYAYA DEEP

STATISTICAL INFORMATION FOR THE QUARTER:
Sl.No
1
2

Activity
Number of Lok Adalats conducted
Number of cases settled through

Result
2,731
11,111

Regular Lok Adalats
Criminal Compoundable cases – 6,670
Bank Cases - 21
MACT Cases - 737
Matrimonial cases - 338
Labour Cases - 71
Land Acquisition cases - 4
Civil Cases - 1,350
Revenue cases - 10
Other cases - 1,910
3
4

(Pending cases – 10,130 + Pre-litigation cases 981)
Settlement amount in the settled cases
Rs. 78,36,50,637/Cases settled in the National Lok Adalat conducted on 19,751
11-06-2016
Pending cases - 17,523

5
6

Prelitigation cases - 2,228
Number of cases settled through Mediation
Number of cases settled in the PLAPUS

210
199

Postal, telegraph and
telephone Service -190
Insurance Service – 1
7

Banking and Financial Institutions – 8
Number of persons to whom Legal Aid provided

1,212

Scheduled Castes – 37
Scheduled Tribes – 11
Women – 296
Children - 63
Persons in cusdtody – 169
Persons with disability – 4
Industrial Workmen – 12
General – 281
8
9

Others – 339
Number of Legal Literacy Camps conducted
Number of persons participated

1,654
1.44 Lakhs

89 / NYAYA DEEP

GUJARAT
National Lok Adalats: On 9th April, 2016 National Lok Adalat was
held throughout the State on the subject of Labour and Family Matters in
which total 4755 cases were disposed of by amicable settlement and award
of Rs. 3.406 (Cr) were made towards settlement.
On 8th May, 2016 Mega General Lok Adalat was held throughout the
State on the subject of Section 138 N.I. Act in which total 6592 cases were
disposed of by amicable settlement and award of Rs. 34.807 (Cr) were
made towards settlement.
On 11th June, 2016 National Lok Adalat was held throughout the State
on the subject of MACT and Insurance Claims in which total 3707 cases
were disposed of by amicable settlement and award of Rs. 35.306 (Cr)
were made towards settlement.
Lok Adalats & Legal Literacy Camps: - Gujarat SLSA also organized
Continuous Lok Adalats and Legal Literacy Camps including General Lok
Adalats during the quarter ending June-2016 throughout the State. In all
4030 Lok Adalats and 2036 Legal Literacy Camps were organized. In the
above Lok Adalats, 26,624 cases were disposed of by amicable settlement
and award of Rs.114.974 Cr were made towards settlement including
M.A.C.P. Cases.
Special Legal Literacy Camps on the rights of HIV/AIDS patients in
Collaboration with District Organization of GNSP+ for people living
with HIV: During the quarter April – June 2016, District Legal Services
Authorities in the Gujarat State have organized 183 Special Legal Literacy
camps on the rights of HIV/AIDS patients in collaboration with District
Organizations of GNSP+ for people living with HIV.
Special Legal Literacy Camps on few areas focused by the SLSA:
Senior Citizens: During the quarter April - June, 2016, total 126 Legal
Literacy Camps have been organized on the areas to be focused by this
Authority and Schemes of Government relating to the benefits of Senior
Citizens in various districts of the State by the District Legal Services
Authorities in their respective Districts.
Mal-nutrition: During the quarter April - June, 2016, total 95 Legal
90 / NYAYA DEEP

Literacy Camps have been organized by District Legal Services Authorities
on the subject of Mal-nutrition for creating awareness amongst the
adolescent girls, pregnant women, nursing mothers, children etc. During
the said Camps, necessary information is provided as to various Schemes
framed by the State Government.
Women’s Rights/ Human Rights: During the quarter April – June 2016
total 330 LLCs have been conducted by the various District Legal Services
Authorities in the State, out of which 205 LLCs have been organized on the
subject of women’s rights and 125 LLCs on Human rights.
TV Programme: - Programme on “Rights Related to Properties”,
telecasted on D.D. Girnar on 25/04/2016 at 6.00 p.m. with the help of
Mr. Paresh Jani, Mediator and Advocate, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad.
Programme on “Rights of HIV Affected Peoples”, telecasted on D.D.
Girnar on 23/05/2016 at 6.00 p.m. with help of Mr. B.N. Jani Former
Principal Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad. Programme on “Women
and Law”, telecasted on D.D. Girnar on 27/06/2016 at 6.00 p.m. with
help of Dr. Jyotsnaben Yagnik, Former Principal Judge, City Civil Court,
Ahmedabad. All these Programmes are telecasted in collaboration with
Prasar Bharti, Doordarshan Kendra, Ahmedabad. The Mediator Advocates
& retired judicial officers have been nominated by this Authority as
Resource Persons for these T.V. Programmes.
ADR Centre: - New Alternative Dispute Redressal (ADR) Centre
was inaugurated in Amreli District at Amreli on 01/05/2016. Honourable
Mr. Justice R. Subhash Reddy, Chief Justice, High Court of Gujarat and
Honourable Mr. Justice M. R. Shah, Hon’ble Judge High Court of Gujarat,
Honourable Mr. Justice Vipul M. Pancholi, Honourable Administrative
Judge of Amreli District remained present in the said function.
Mediation Programme: - Mediation Awareness Programme and
Referral Judges Programme held at Petlad Taluka of District Anand and
Referral Judges Programme at Kheda @ Nadiad District on 17/04/2016.
Mr. Niranjan Bhatt, Advocate City Civil Court, Ahmedabad was a Trainer
for the Said programme and Hon’ble Mr. Justice M. R. Shah, Hon’ble
Member of Mediation Monitoring Committee and Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Rajesh H. Shukla, Hon’ble Administrative Judge of Anand District, Mr.
H.S. Mulia, Member Secretary and Mr. R.G. Devdhara Joint Secretary of
SLSA remained present.
91 / NYAYA DEEP

Mediation Awareness Programme at Ranavav Taluka, District
Porbandar and also at Jamnagar District on 24/04/2016. Dr. Jyotsnaben
Yagnik, Former Principal Judge, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad was Trainer
for the said Programme. Hon’ble Mr. Justice M.R. Shah, Hon’ble Member
of Mediation Monitoring Committee and Hon’ble Mr. Justice K.M. Thaker
Hon’ble Administrative Judge of Porbandar District and Hon’ble Mr.
Justice A.G. Uraizee, Hon’ble Administrative Judge of Jamnagar District
and Mr. H.S.Mulia Hon’ble Member Secretary of Gujarat SLSA had
remained present in the said Programmes.
Mediation Awareness Programme and Referral Judges Programme
were organized at Kalol Taluka of Gandhinagar District on 19/06/2016.
Mr. A.C. Rao, Principal District Judge Gandhinagar and Dr. Paresh Jani,
Advocate, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad were resource persons in the said
Programme.
Mediation Awareness Programme at Limbdi Taluka of Surendranagar
District and Referral Judges Programme held at Surendranagar District on
19/06/2016. In this Programme Mr. Niranjan Bhatt, Advocate, City Civil
Court, Ahmedabad had remained present as a Resource Person.

HARYANA
Visit to District Legal Services Authorities: On 2.4.2016, Hon’ble Mr.
Justice A.K. Mittal, Executive Chairman of Haryana SLSA visited DLSAs,
Sonepat, Panipat, Karnal, Kurukshetra and Ambala and interacted
with the Secretaries, DLSAs and took stock of the various legal aid
programmes being carried out at these districts. Front offices were also
visited, and the registers kept in the Front Offices were also seen by His
Lordship. ADR centre at Ambala is under construction. Hon’ble Executive
Chairman visited the site under construction and reviewed the progress
of construction of ADR centre.
Special Legal Literacy Camp during Navratra Mela: A Special
Legal Literacy Camp was organized during Navratras at Mata Mansa
Devi Temple Complex, Panchkula from 8.4.2016 to 15.4.2016. The legal
literacy camp at Mata Mansa Devi Temple evoked enthusiastic response
from the visitors who visited the camp in large numbers. Panel lawyers
and Para-Legal Volunteers rendered their services at the camp. Books
and pamphlets, prepared by Haryana State Legal Services Authority, were
92 / NYAYA DEEP

also distributed to spread legal awareness. Students of different schools
also participated. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal, Judge, Punjab
and Haryana High Court-cum-Executive Chairman, Haryana State Legal
Services Authority also visited the said stall.
Monthly National Lok Adalats on 9.4.2016 and 14.5.2016: On 9.4.2016,
monthly National Lok Adalat on the Labour & Family Matters was held.
In the said Lok Adalat, 178 cases were settled. On 14.5.2016, monthly
National Lok Adalat on the MACT and Insurance Matters (PLA/PUS) was
held. In the said Lok Adalat, 173 cases were settled. Pre-litigation cases
as well as pending cases were settled involving an amount of Rs.3, 67,
72,031/-.
Training Programmes for Panel Lawyers: Training Programmes were
organized by the Master Trainers for the Panel Lawyers of District Legal
Services Authorities, Faridabad, Gurgaon & Panipat on 16th & 17th April,
2016, 23rd & 24th, April, 2016 & 14th & 15th, May, 2016 respectively with
an objective to enhance skills of the Panel Lawyers so that quality Legal
Services are rendered to the weaker and marginalized sections of society. In
the said programmes, training was imparted as per the schedule provided
by NALSA in Training Module Part-I. Various methods of teaching were
used in the said programme such as lecture method, group discussion,
quiz method etc.
Legal Awareness Camps for Officials at Grass Root Level: As per
the calendar provided by Haryana SLSA, legal awareness camps were
held for officials at grass root level by the DLSAs of Jhajjar, Jind & Kaithal
on 16.4.2016, 30.4.2016 & 7.5.2016 respectively. Sarpanches, Aanganwari
workers, Asha workers, BDO’s etc. participated in the said Legal
Awareness Camps. They were told about the concept of “Free Legal Aid”.
Various schemes and Legal Aid Programmes were explained to them.
They were also told about front offices and legal care and support centres.
They were exhorted to work for the weaker and marginalized sections of
society.
Legal Awareness Programme at PDM Group of Institutions: On
19.04.2016, DLSA, Jhajjar organized Legal Awareness Programme at PDM
Group of Institutions. The Secretary, DLSA, Jhajjar apprised the gathering
about the various schemes of NALSA and HALSA. Various activities
which are being carried out by DLSA, Jhajjar were also explained to the
93 / NYAYA DEEP

gathering. The concept of free legal aid was also explained. The gathering
comprised of the staff and the students of PDM Group of Engineering.
Awareness on Earth Day: On 22.04.2016, DLSA, Mewat at Nuh held
an awareness camp in coordination with Care Trust on the occasion of
Earth Day with an objective to make people understand the importance
of environmental issues so that more people become aware of the actions
which are required to be taken to protect our environment. The importance
of planting trees was also emphasized.
Legal Awareness about Rights of Disabled Persons: DLSA, Jhajjar in
collaboration with Nav Chetna Viklang Sahayata Samiti organised Legal
Literacy Awareness Programme on 27.04.2016. Officials from the District
Social Welfare Office and District Red Cross Society were also associated. In
this programme, about 150 disabled persons assembled. They were made
aware about the various Welfare Schemes for disabled persons. Pamphlets
containing brief descriptions about various schemes for disabled persons
were also distributed.
Preparation of Documentary Films on socio-legal issues: On
29.4.2016, state level competitions at school level were held at Kurukshetra.
On 23.4.2016 divisional level competitions at college level were held at
Gurgaon.
Awareness through Community Radio: Haryana SLSA is spreading
legal awareness through community radio. In the month of May, 2016,
various legal awareness programmes were conducted through community
radio stations at Gurgaon and Mewat. In the said programmes, various
legal topics were covered such as Protection of women from domestic
violence, free legal aid, victim compensation scheme etc.
International Labour Day: On 1.5.2016, International Labour day was
celebrated. The legal awareness camps were organized across the State of
Haryana for labourers by the DLSAs under the aegis of Haryana SLSA. An
effort was made, in these camps, to make labourers aware of the various
beneficial enactments and schemes meant for their upliftment and welfare.
Awareness Programme in District Jail Karnal: On 04.05.2016, DLSA,
Panipat held awareness camp for inmates after the conclusion of jail Lok
Adalat on the said day. Secretary, DLSA, Panipat addressed the under
trials and informed them about free legal aid and the purpose of legal care
94 / NYAYA DEEP

and support centre in jail premises. They were also apprised about the
various activities being carried out by DLSAs. The grievances of the under
trials were heard through personal interaction
Legal Awareness in Schools: On 11.05.2016, lectures on Fundamental
Duties were given by Secretary, DLSA Jhajjar to the students of Govt. Sr.
Secondary School at Guddha and Govt. Sr. Secondary School at village
Dujana. The students were told that a nation is what the citizens are. The
importance of Fundamental Duties was explained to the students. They
were also explained the relevance of having a fully functional legal literacy
club.
Awareness Camp at Red Cross Society: On 12.05.2016, DLSA,
Kurukshetra organized Legal Literacy Programme at Red Cross Society.
The said programme was primarily attended by the volunteers of Red
Cross Society. They were apprised by the Secretary, DLSA, Kurukshetra
about the concept of Free Legal Aid and also about the various Legal Aid
Programmes being carried out by DLSA.
Programme for DDPO and BDPOS: On 16.05.2016, a programme was
organized by DLSA, Kurukshetra for District Development and Panchayat
Officer (DDPO), Block Development, Panchayat Officers (BDPOs) and
Sarpanches of the villages. It was organized with an aim to sensitize
them about the functioning of Legal Care and Support Centres opened
in the various villages in District Kurukshetra. They were exhorted to
spread awareness about the utility of Legal Care and Support Centres
amongst the villagers so that weaker and marginalized sections of society
utilize the services rendered at those centres. It was emphasized that
Sarpanches should take due care while issuing attendance certificates to
Panel Advocates and Para-Legal Volunteers for attending Legal Care and
Support Centres.
Legal Awareness Camps in the Rural Areas Of Panipat: On 17.5.2016,
DLSA, Panipat, organized four legal awareness camps in the schools of
villages Nara, Dariyapur, Urlana Kalan and Urlana Khurd. Each camp
served three purposes. Firstly, the people were made aware about their
rights and duties and the schemes floated by NALSA. The provisions of
victim compensation scheme were discussed and information relating
to Accident Information Report in motor accident claims was given. The
pamphlets of “Motor Accident Claims relating to Accident Information
95 / NYAYA DEEP

Report” were distributed among the general public in pursuant to the
directions issued by HALSA.
Workshop on Section 158 (6) of Motor Vehicles Act: On 17.05.2016,
workshop was organized at ADR Centre Kurukshetra to sensitize the
Judicial Officers, Police Officers and the Panel Advocates and PLVs about
the different aspects of Section 158(6) Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. It was
presided over by Sh. Arun Kumar Tyagi, District & Sessions Judge-cumChairman, DLSA, Kurukshetra. It was emphasized in the said workshop
Section 158 (6), mandates SHOs to submit an accident information report
to the Motor Vehicle Accident Claims Tribunal within 30 days of the
accident. The Claims Tribunal shall treat the said report as a claim petition
and conduct an enquiry into the same. Important directions given by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jai Parkash Vs. National Insurance Company
Ltd. and others 2010(2) SCC607 were also explained to the participants.
Encouraging Participation in an Electoral Process: On 18.05.2016,
DLSA, Mewat conducted a programme and also held public march to
sensitize people to participate in the democracy by enrolling themselves in
the electoral roles and voting at the time of election. In the said programme,
the importance of participation in an electoral process to ensure a
responsive, accountable and democratically elected representatives was
emphasized.
Sensitizing Principals about Legal Literacy Clubs: Under the
Students Legal Literacy Mission, the principals of Government and
Private Colleges were sensitized by Secretary, DLSA, Mewat about the
Legal Literacy Clubs. The principals of colleges where Legal Literacy
Clubs have not been opened were impressed upon to open Legal Literacy
Clubs in the colleges so that the objective of making students aware of the
various rights and duties under various laws is achieved.
Workshop on Victim-Sensitive Approach: On 21.05.2016, workshop
was organized by DLSA, Kurukshetra for sensitizing the Panel Lawyers
and the PLVs to have sensitive approach when dealing with the cases of
women and child victims. It was emphasized that women and children
often face difficulties regarding the Access to Justice, and the need is to
provide quality legal services to the said section of society by taking extra
care to deal more sensitively with them. Sh. Narender Pruthi, Physiatrist,
LNJP Hospital also addressed the Panel Advocates and PLVs.
96 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganized Sector: On
21.05.2016, Panel Lawyers were sensitized by DLSA, Kurukshetra
about the newly launched scheme of NALSA regarding workers in the
unorganized sector. The panel lawyers were explained the existing legal
frame work regarding the workers in the unorganized sector. They were
also told about NALSA (Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganized
Sector).
Observance of Anti-Terrorism Day : On 21.05.2016, DLSA, Mewat in
coordination with Care Trust, Mewat and Muslim Maha Sabha organized
two programmes at Mewat on the occasion of Anti-Terrorism Day. The
objective behind the holding of programmes on anti-terrorism day was
to sensitize people about the need to uphold and promote peace, social
harmony, and understanding among all fellow human beings and
fight forces of disruption threatening human lives and values. In the
said programmes, the suffering of common people due to violence was
highlighted and it was emphasized that the cult of violence is prejudicial
to the national interest. Chief Judicial Magistrate-cum-Secretary, District
Legal Services Authority, Mewat addressed the gathering in the said
programmes.
Legal Awareness Programme at the Millennium School, Kurukshetra:
On 23.05.2016, Legal Awareness Programme was held by DLSA,
Kurukshetra at the Millennium School. In the said programme, the staff
members and the students of the school were told about the Fundamental
Rights and the Fundamental Duties as given in the Constitution of India.
Law relating to anti-ragging and Cyber Crime was also explained.
“Jan Sampark Abhiyan” in Panipat: DLSA, Panipat launched “Jan
Sampark Abhiyaan” to spread awareness among the public about the
existence of DLSA and the various legal aid programmes being carried
out by it. In the said context, march was carried out on 26.5.2016. The
march started from ADR Centre. Secretary, DLSA, Panipat alongwith
Panel Advocates and PLVs walked through the city of Panipat (about four
kilometers) for direct interaction with people. The two big banners printed
in English and Hindi carried the message about District Legal Services
Authority. The helpline number was also displayed. Four thousand
pamphlets spelling out the eligibility conditions for obtaining legal aid
were distributed amongst the general public at places like Bus Stand,
Cycle Rikshaw stands, Auto Rikshaw Stands and other busy business
97 / NYAYA DEEP

centers like Insar Market etc.
HALSA Released A Booklet On Victim Compensation Law: Hon’ble
Mr. Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal, Executive Chairman of HALSA, released
a booklet, on “Victim Compensation Law” prepared by HSLSA. It was
released in the workshop conducted for all the Secretaries of DLSAs of
Haryana at HALSA office on 29.05.2016.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal emphasized the need to work
for the weaker and marginalized sections of society, and to increase the
quality of legal services rendered to marginalized sections of society. His
Lordship stressed that work in Legal Services Authorities must be done
with honesty, sincerity and devotion. Officers were sensitized on Victim
Compensation Law and the various aspects of access to justice and legal
aid programmes. Various legal aid schemes which are being implemented
by HALSA were also discussed. The ways and means to implement
Mediation and Lok Adalats in an effective and meaningful manner for
resolving disputes were also discussed.
Awareness Camps on World No Tobacco Day: World No Tobacco
Day is held on May 31 on each year. On 31/5/2016, DLSAs of Haryana
held awareness camps under the aegis of HALSA to draw attention to
the health problems that tobacco use can cause. It was emphasized in the
camps that it is not just the smokers who are at risk. The people around
them, the so called passive smokers, are also vulnerable to developing
smoking related diseases. Tobacco, no matter in which form it is, like
cigarettes (even light or filtered), cigars, chewable tobacco, huqqa or even
the ever popular sheesha, is a silent killer. Anti-tobacco marches were also
held across the State.
Awareness on POCSO Act: DLSA, Panchkula organized Legal
Awareness Programmes in the various schools at Panchkula in the month
of May, 2016 to spread awareness about POCSO Act. The students were
told that the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO Act),
2012 was formulated in order to effectively address sexual exploitation of
children. They were told that the Act defines a child as any person below
18 years of age. It provides for special courts. Trials are conducted without
revealing the identity of the child. The copies of booklet on “Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO Act), 2012” prepared by
HALSA were also distributed amongst the students.
98 / NYAYA DEEP

Special Drive for Unorganized Workers in District Mewat : Mewat
is one of the most backward districts of Haryana in terms of several
vital socio-economic parameters. It falls way behind other parts of the
country, despite being a part of the prosperous state of Haryana. This
district is in the grip of poverty. Major part of the population is engaged
in agriculture and labour activities. Due to the developmental projects
like construction of Kundli-Manesar-Palwal Express Way, construction of
Check Dams in Arawali Hills, construction of District Headquarters etc.
at Nuh, the concentration of labour engaged in construction industry is
more in the region situated on the periphery of Nuh or spreading from
village Rojka meo to Nuh. DLSA Mewat noticed that there was not even
a single registration office of the Labour Department in Mewat District.
Benefits of most of the welfare schemes of labour Department flow only
when workers are registered. Keeping in view all this, special drive
was launched in District Mewat for making people aware of the welfare
schemes of labour department, and to help them get registered so that
they start getting the benefits of labour welfare schemes. This special drive
was launched from 1st June, 2016 to 15th June, 2016 to effectively and
meaningfully implement NALSA (Legal Services to the Workers in the
Unorganized Sector) Scheme, 2015.
In the first phase of special drive, 30 villages namely Tain, Ghasera,
Rehna, Biwan, Shok, Muradbas, Khedla, Salamba, Rojka Meo, Bichor,
Jharokdi, Rewasan, Khod, Basai, Dirduka, Mahon, Mahrola, Bainsi,
Shahpur Nagli, Badka, Rithoda, Adbar, Danduka, Bajadka, Alduka,
Chapera, Kurthla, Baupur, Tapkan and Meoli were selected. All these 30
villages were visited by Secretary, DLSA, Mewat. Camps were organized
there. The participants therein were made aware about the schemes of
Labour Welfare Board meant for the benefit of workers. On 15th June,
2016 a program titled as “Rastariya Majdoor Adhikar Sammelan” was
convened. It was attended by about 1500 people. They were not only
made aware about their rights under various welfare schemes of Labour
Department but were also sensitized and made aware about the welfare
policies carried out by other departments of the government.
Besides the stall of department of labour, around 12 other departments
including the Education Department, Agriculture, Horticulture & Soil
Conservation Department, Forest Department, Ayush Department,
Dakshin Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Department, District Social Welfare
Officer & District Welfare Officer Department, Additional Deputy
99 / NYAYA DEEP

Commissioner, National Rural Livelihood Mission & District Development
Project Officer, Health Department, Red Cross & District Information
Technology Society Department, Rural Development Department,
Mewat Development Agency, Women Protection Officer etc. and some
NGOs namely S.R.F. Foundation, Sehgal Foundation, Care Trust, Digital
Empowerment Foundation(CIRC), manifested their core activities meant
for the lower strata of public at large by installing stalls. Officers of the
various departments made people aware of the welfare scheme of their
respective departments. Under this drive, till 15th June 2016, 569 workers
were registered with the labour department. In this special drive, Labour
Department also co-ordinated with the Legal Services Authority.
World Environment Day: World Environment Day is celebrated every
year on 5th June to raise global awareness to take positive environmental
action for protecting nature and the planet earth. On 5/6/2016, Legal
Awareness Camps were organized by the DLSAs under the aegis of
HALSA across the State of Haryana. In the said camps, it was emphasized
that it is our fundamental duty, as per the Constitution of India, to protect
and improve the environment. Important laws and judgments relating to
environment were explained to the participants. It was also emphasized,
in the said camps, that the well-being of humanity, the environment and
the functioning of the economy, ultimately depend upon the responsible
management of the planet’s natural resources. On the said day, plantation
was also done at several places. The need for a green and healthy
environment was also stressed upon by DLSA.
World Day against Child Labour: World day against child labour
was observed on June, 12/6/2016. On the said occasion, Legal Awareness
Camps were organized under the aegis of HALSA across the State of
Haryana with the purpose of raising awareness and activism to prevent
child labour. In the said camps, law relating to child labour was explained.
Workshop on the Prevention of Sexual Harassment of Women
at Workplace: A workshop “DIGNITY” on the Prevention of Sexual
Harassment of Women at workplace was conducted by DLSA, Gurgoan
for the female lawyers and female employees working in the District
Court, Gurgaon. The workshop was attended by approximately 60 female
advocates and female employees who work as stenographers and clerks
in the Courts. Important provisions of Sexual Harassment of Women at
Workplace (Prohibition, Prevention and Redressal) Act were explained
100 / NYAYA DEEP

and highlighted in the workshop.
Lok Adalats: During the period from 1st April to 30th June, 2016,
DLSAs and Sub-Divisional Legal Services Committees under the guidance
of HALSA organized 119 Lok Adalats/Special Lok Adalats throughout the
State wherein 15,600 cases were taken up out of which 5,036 cases were
disposed of by amicable settlement between the parties and an amount
of Rs. 5, 54, 72,031/- was awarded as compensation to the claimants in 174
MACT cases.
Permanent Lok Adalats pertaining to Public Utility Services: At
present the PLA (PUS) are working in all the 21 districts of Haryana.
During the period from 1st April to 30th June, 2016, these Permanent Lok
Adalats, Public Utility Services settled 8,309 cases out of 60,226 cases taken
up therein.
Daily Lok Adalat: To make the Lok Adalat a permanent and
continuous process, HALSA requested all the District & Sessions Judgescum-Chairmen, DLSAs that every court in the Session Divisions should
convert into a Daily Lok Adalat from 2:00 p.m. to 2:30 p.m., extendable
to 3:00 p.m. depending upon quantum of work [4:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.
extendable upto 5:00 p.m. from March, 2012 onwards].
During the period from 1st April to 30th June, 2016, DLSAs and
SDLSCs under the guidance of HALSA organized 8,218 Daily Lok Adalats
throughout the State wherein 31,555 cases were taken up out of which
21,193 cases were disposed of by amicable settlement between the parties
and an amount of Rs. 3, 43, 82,500/- was awarded as compensation to the
claimants in 181 MACT cases.
Mediation: During the period from 1stApril to 30th June, 2016, 1729
Cases were referred by Referral Judges to the Mediators for mediation
and conciliation in the District Mediation and Conciliation Centres, out of
which 423 cases were settled by the Mediators.
Legal Literacy/Legal Awareness Camps/Seminars : During the period
from 1st April to 30th June, 2016, 2,819 Legal Literacy/Legal Awareness
Camps were organized by various DLSAs/SDLSCs in the State of Haryana
and 10,43,077 persons were benefited by these Legal Literacy/Legal
Awareness Camps.
101 / NYAYA DEEP

Free Legal Aid: During the period from 1st April to 30th June, 2016,
3,768 persons were provided with free legal services at by Sub-Divisional
Legal Services Committees, District Legal Services Authorities, Haryana
State Legal Services Authority and High Court Legal Services Committee.

JAMMU & KASHMIR
State Plan of Action 2016-17 : As per state plan of Action 2016-17, 12
Radio programmes and 12 TV programmes were broadcasted/telecasted
during the said period throughout the State of J&K under Legal Services
Programme ”Qanoon Ki Baat” and Qanoon Aur Insaf Ki Baat” on Various
Law relating subjects like (1) Children‘s Issues (i)Victim of Trafficking
and Commercial exploitation.(ii) Children Labour, Children in need
of care & protection (2) Atrocities on Women & remedies available
under Law(Domestic Violence)(ii) Sexual harassment at workplace/rape
laws (3) Labour laws(Special provision for the workers in unorganised
Sector),(4) Accident Claim:- (i) MACT (ii) Workmen Compensation. Legal
Services Authorities and their activities (i) Structure (ii) Eligibility
(iii) Modes of Legal Services litigation (5) Crimes (i)Cyber Crimes
(ii) E-Governance (iii) Ragging (6) Alternate Dispute Resolution
Mechanism(ADR) (i) Conciliation /Informal Counselling (ii) Mediation
(iii) Arbitration. (7) Maintenance & Welfare of Parents & Senior Citizens
Act, 2007.(ii) Implementation of poverty & Alleviation Schemes. (8) Victim
of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace. (9) Consumer Issues,
Negotiable Instrument Act. (10) Easementry Rights.
National Lok Adalats: In National Lok Adalats held in the month
of April 2016, 978 Labour and Family matters were disposed off and
an amount of Rs 56.57 lacs as settlement amount. In the month of May
2016 National Lok Adalat regarding MACT and Insurance Claims was
conducted in which 305 MACT and Insurance Claims were settled and an
amount of Rs 8.58 Crores was awarded as compensation. From April to
June 2016, 75 continues lok Adalats were held in the State in which 2054
different kinds of cases were settled and and Rs7.58 Crore was settlement
amount.
Jail visits : As per standard operating procedure (SOP) for
representation of persons in custody prepared by NALSA, the requisite
guidelines regarding the same has been transmitted to all DLSA’s and
102 / NYAYA DEEP

TLSC’s for compliances.

JHARKHAND
The Legal Services Programmes organized during the period April,
2016 to June, 2016 are as under:
Month

Programme Organized

April,
2016

National Lok Adalat (For the Cases relating to Labour and Family
matters) on 09.04.2016

May,
2016

June,
2016

•

Inauguration of the New Court Building Civil Court,
Mediation Centre, Garhwa on 14th May 2016

•

National Lok Adalat ( For Cases relating to MACT and
Insurance matters)

•

Refresher Training Programme for Sensitization of
Secretaries of DLSAs/SDLSCs along with Retainer Lawyers
and Front Office PLVs of the State of Jharkhand on 12th
June, 2016 at NYAYA Sadan, JHALSA, Ranchi

•

Meeting in regard to 3rd Special Lok Adalat Exclusively
for Cases related to the Universities of Jharkhand” at
RAJBHAWAN on 23-6-2016.

•

Meeting of Hon’ble Executive Chairman with Senior
UNICEF Officials and Executive & Police Officers on 28-62016 in regard to Centre for Child Right

National Lok Adalat: As per directives of NALSA a “National Lok
Adalat” (For the Cases relating to Labour and Family matters) was
organized on 9th April, 2016 across the State of Jharkhand. It was the
result of active participation and concrete efforts of Hon’ble Mr. Justice
D.N.Patel, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman,
JHALSA that the National Lok Adalat became a resounding success. The
settlement and disposal of large number of cases in the said National Lok
Adalat had certainly rekindled the faith of the public in the ADR and right
to speedy and effective justice. The details of the cases settled in the said
National Lok Adalat are as follows:
FOR DISPOSAL IN NATIONAL LOK ADALAT HELD ON 9.4.2016
(for the cases relating to Labour and Family matters)
Name of the State Authority

Jharkhand

103 / NYAYA DEEP

Total
Taken up
cases

Total
disposal
cases

5146

Pre-Litigation Cases
Subject/

4982

Total
settlement
amount

18231314

Pending Cases
Settlement

Nature
of cases

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement Amt.

Taken
up

Labour

4775

4774

8246161

138

73

3782153

Family
Matters

8

8

0

225

127

6203000

TOTAL

4783

4782

8246161

363

200

9985153

Services
Provided
by DLSA

4905

Disposal

Amt.

Inauguration of the New Court Building Civil Court, Mediation
Centre, Garhwa on 14th May 2016: The New Court Building, Civil Court
Mediation Centre was Inaugurated by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Virender Singh,
Chief Justice, High Court of Jharkhand-cum-Patron-in-Chief, JHALSA
on 14.05.2016 in the benign presence of Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N.Patel,
Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman, JHALSA,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. Chandrashekhar, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand
& Zonal Judge, Garhwa. The Principal District Judge, Garhwa Sri Pankaj
Srivastava, Judicial Officers, Advocates, Officers of Local Government
Administration, and a large number of common people and litigants were
also present on the occasion.
National Lok Adalat: As per directives of NALSA a “National Lok
Adalat” (For the Cases relating to MACT and Insurance matters) was
organized on 14th May, 2016 across the State of Jharkhand. The settlement
and disposal of large number of cases in the said National Lok Adalat had
certainly rekindled the faith of the public in the ADR and right to speedy
and effective justice. The details of the cases settled in the said National
Lok Adalat are as follows:
NATIONAL LOK ADALAT HELD ON 14.5.2016
(for the cases relating to MACT and Insurance matters)
Jharkhand

104 / NYAYA DEEP

Total
Taken up
cases

1549

Total
disposal
cases

Pre-Litigation Cases
Subject/

Taken up

Disposal

Nature
of cases

1395

Total
settlement
amount

68202665

Pending Cases
Settle-

Taken up

Disposal Settlement
Amt.

ment
Amt.

MACT
Insurance

TOTAL

19

19

1620497

241

142

59042758

1289

1234

7539410

0

0

0

1308

1253

9159907

241

142

59042758

Refresher Training Programme for Sensitization of Secretaries of
DLSAs/SDLSCs along with Retainer Lawyers and Front Office PLVs
of the State of Jharkhand on 12th June, 2016 : Jharkhand State Legal
Services Authority (JHALSA), Ranchi organised a Refresher Training
Programme for Sensitization of Secretaries of DLSAs/SDLSCs along with
Retainer Lawyers and Front Office PLVs of the State of Jharkhand. In the
said programme Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N.Patel, Judge, High Court of
Jharkhand & Executive Chairman, JHALSA, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Paresh
Upadhyay, Judge, Gujarat High Court, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Anant Bijay
Singh, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand and Hon’ble Judges of High Court
of Jharkhand graced the occasion. Sri Alok Agarwal, Member Secretary,
NALSA, Sri Navneet Kumar Judicial Commissioner, Ranchi, Sri Arun
Kumar Rai, Member Secretary, JHALSA, Sri Santosh Kumar Secretary,
HCLSC, Ranchi and Sri Satyakam Priyadarshi, Deputy Secretary, JHALSA
attended the said programme. The target group of the said programme
were the Secretaries of DLSAs/SDLSCs, Retainer Lawyers of DLSAs and
front office PLVs. On the said occasion Hon’ble Dignitaries addressed the
participants and make them sensitize and aware about the various aspects
of Legal Services for its effective implementation at grass root level.
Meeting of Hon’ble Executive Chairman with Senior UNICEF
Officials and Executive & Police Officers on 28-6-2016 in regard to Centre
for Child Right: A meeting of Senior Unicef Officials, Government Officers
105 / NYAYA DEEP

and JHALSA official was held under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Mr.
Justice D.N.Patel, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman,
JHALSA on 28.06.2016 at Nyaya Sadan, Doranda, Ranchi. The objectives
of the meeting were effective implementation of JJ Act, Centre for Child
Rights and rehabilitation of the children. Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N.patel,
Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman, JHALSA, Sri M.S.
Bhatia, Director, Department of Women, Child Development & Social
Security, Govt. of Jharkhand, Senior Unicef officials , Jharkhand Head
of Unicef, Ms. Madhulika jonathan, CFO UNICEF, Jharkhand, Ms. Priti
Srivastava, Child Protection Officer, UNICEF, Jharkhand, Sri Arun Kumar
Rai, Member Secretary, JHALSA, Sri Santosh Kumar Secretary, HCLSC,
Ranchi and Sri Satyakam Priyadarshi, Deputy Secretary, JHALSA attended
the said programme.

Details of Cases Settled in Lok Adalat
From April 2016 to June 2016
Total No. of Cases Settled

Total Settlement
Amount (Rs.)

April, 2016

4163

19613649

May, 2016

1397

24428479

June, 2016

3696

17585965

TOTAL

9256

61628093

Month

Details of Legal Awareness /Literacy Camps Organised
From April 2016 to June 2016
Total No. of Legal
Awareness/Literacy
Camps Organized

Total No. of Persons
Benefitted

April, 2016

550

21649

May, 2016

756

61725

Month

June, 2016

678

72374

TOTAL

1984

155748

Details of Legal Aid Beneficiaries under Different Categories [April,
2016 to June 2016]
106 / NYAYA DEEP

In-Custody

General

Other

Total

1

117

20

12

237

25

2

155

38

13

274

47

29

4

74

46

6

213

111

92

7

346

104

31

724

Month

SC

ST

Women Children

April,
2016

7

42

38

May,
2016

19

22

June,
2016

7

TOTAL

33

Details of Cases Settled by PLA under Different Categories
From April 2016 to June 2016
Service
Public
in HosConserpital or
vancy or
DisSanitapensation
ry

Transport
service

Postal,
Telegraph or
Telephone
Service

Supply of
Power,
light or
Water

April,
2016

0

13

2

19

0

May,
2016

0

6

1

16

June,
2016

0

21

6

TOTAL

0

40

9

Month

Insurance
Services

Other

Total

78

77

189

0

179

10

212

12

0

107

15

161

47

0

364

102

562

/Banking

KERALA
Lok Adalat : The National Lok Adalat was organized on 09.04.2016 on
the subject of Labour and Family matters throughout the State in which
1411 cases were disposed of and Awards for Rs.78536042/-was passed.
National Lok Adalat was organized on 11.6.2016 on the subjects of MACT
and insurance claims in which 4651cases were disposed and Awards for
Rs.538593831/-was passed. Details of cases settled in the National Lok
Adalats is furnished below.
107 / NYAYA DEEP

No. of cases settled (Both pending matters and
PLPs)

Award Amount

Court pending matters

4592

570426273

PLP matters

3174

46703600

Total

7766

617129873

In addition to the National Lok Adalat, 528 regular weekly Adalats
were also conducted on different topics during April, May and June, 2016.
In the weekly Adalats total 6236 cases were settled throughout the State
and Awards were passed to the tune of Rs.400732161/-. Details of cases
settled in the Lok Adalats is furnished below.
No. of cases settled (Both pending matters and
PLPs)
Court pending matters

2436

PLP matters

3800

Total

6236

Award Amount
400732161
400732161

During the Mid-Summer Vacation Special Criminal Adalat was
conducted throughout the State for Criminal Compoundable cases.
Virtual/Visual Lok Adalat: Telecast of a televised version of Lok
Adalat, ‘Kathayillithu Jeevitham” and ‘Jeevitham Sakshi’ continues in
Amrita and Kairali Television respectively with the support of KeLSA to
spread the message of peace and harmony in family through conciliation.
Training to Panel Lawyers: Induction Training to the panel lawyers
was given in four districts. Master Trainers, Member Secretary and the
Secretary, DLSA conducted the classes. 733 Panel Lawyers attended the
programme. One PLV Training was conducted during the quarter.
Victim Compensation Scheme: 125 applications under Victim
Compensation were pending and 42 cases were decided during the
quarter.
Legal Literacy and Legal Awareness Programmes :Total number of
345 legal awareness programmes were conducted throughout the State
during the quarter, in which 95 classes were conducted in School/Colleges
on the subjects Fundamental Rights, Law relating to Child Rights, Cyber
Laws, POSCO Act, Anti-ragging, General Laws, Environmental Law,
108 / NYAYA DEEP

Child Labour, Drug Abuse etc. 141 legal awareness classes were conducted
at village/community level on the topics, Domestic Violence, class based
on the book published by KeLSA ‘ Sthreeyum Niyamavum’, Constitution,
Sexual harassment, Women Empowerment, Children and Social Security,
NALSA Schemes etc. 14 legal awareness classes were conducted in the
jails on the topics General Laws, Plea bargaining etc.

SPECIFIC LEGAL AWARENESS PROGRAMMES
Love Kottayam [Kottayam]: ‘LOVE KOTTAYAM’ is a project conceived
and prepared by the District Legal Services Authority, Kottayam with a view
to lead Kottayam into a District of 100% legal literacy. The project requires
a lot of training programmes, classes, seminars, meetings, interactions,
audio visual presentations, advertisement and other activities throughout
the District. A large number of notices, books, leaflets, pamphlets, cartoons,
banners etc. have to be printed and distributed among the people in the
entire Kottayam District for the purpose of the aforesaid project. All
these would incur approximate expenditure of about one Crore rupees.
Apart from the fund received from KeLSA, DLSA expect sponsorships,
contributions and other support from various Government Departments,
Local Self Government institutions, Banks, social organizations, free
services etc. The District Collector assured all possible help and assistance
in finding necessary fund or sponsorship in conducting the programme.
A training programme for the master trainers of Love Kottayam
Project was conducted for the advocates.
A meeting of the CDS Chairpersons of the Kudumbasree of all Grama
Panchayats and Presidents of Grama Panchayaths were convened on
17.5.2016 to discuss about the successful implementation of the Love
Kottayam Project.
The Panchayat level inauguration of the Love Kottayam Project at
Aimanam Grama Panchayat was inaugurated. A meeting was convened
by the Chairperson DLSA with Film Director Jayaraj. He informed that he
is ready to prepare short film clippings of various personalities (of the film
industry), belongs to Kottayam for spreading the message of the Legal
Literacy project’ Love Kottayam’.

109 / NYAYA DEEP

Dove Mission and Kutty Mission [Kelsa]: The Kerala State Legal
Services Authority had adopted the project ‘Dove Mission and Kutti
Mission’ as project of the year 2013-’14. DOVE Mission aims at prevention
and eradication of domestic violence against women. The object of Kutty
Mission is prevention of domestic violence against children by imparting
awareness to them. Conducting of legal awareness programmes under
the project is still continuing. In connection with the implementation
of Dove Mission, TLSC, Mananthavady conducted 2 Legal Awareness
programmes for women at Payyampally Colony and Pariyaramkunnu
Colony of Mananthavady Taluk. 23 persons participated in the programme
conducted at Payyampally colony and 38 persons at Pariyaramkunnu
colony on 30.4.2016. TLSC, Pala conducted Special Adalat on DOVE
Mission. 16 cases were considered and 1 case was settled.

10000 Legal Awareness Classes [Wayanad]:
•

Under District Legal Services Authority Wayanad, 10000 legal
awareness classes are going on in association with Kudumbasree
Mission and Integrated Tribal Development Project Wayanad in 3300
tribal colonies.

•

District Legal Services Authority, Kottayam conducted a medico
legal camp on 21-4-2016. A stall of the DLSA was also constituted for
giving free legal aid. More than 500 people attended the function.
Free medicines were also supplied. Also conducted medical camp at
District jail, Kottayam.

•

A Legal Awareness Class on Rights and remedies (stigma and
discrimination) for the HIV affected students of Kottayam was
organized by District Legal Services Authority Kottayam on 5.6.2016
in association with the VIHAAN Kottayam. Study materials, School
bags, Umbrellas sponsored by the Judicial Officers and Lady
Advocates of the Kottayam District Centre were distributed to 38 HIV
affected students.

•

A Legal Awareness class for the Students Police Cadets of the Kottayam
District was conducted on 25-4-2016 at CMS College High School
Auditorium, Chalukunnu, Kottayam.

•

District Legal Services Authority, Kottayam in association with
Department of Emergency Medicine, Amrita Institute of Medical
110 / NYAYA DEEP

Sciences, Kochi, organized a one day training program on ‘Emergency
Disaster Management’ for the Para-Legal Volunteers on 23-4-2016 at
the District Panchayath Hall Kottayam.
•

District and Taluk Legal Services Institutions in Wayand conducted 10
legal awareness classes in various tribal colonies and 485 tribal people
attended the class.

Legal Awareness through Doordarshan, Air and Community Radio
Stations [KELSA]
•

A two minute programme on ‘Constitutional values’ is aired on all
days through AIR, in association with KeLSA. The programme has
completed one year in November 2015. It has been decided to publish
a booklet on the programme.

•

A one hour phone-in-programme named ‘Hello Akashavani’ is being
aired through AIR, Kochi for more than one year. The programme
helps the public to clear their doubts on legal issues. A Lawyer is
deputed from the panel of KeLSA to answer the issues raised by the
public over phone.

•

A live phone-in-programme named “Samoohyapadom” is telecast
by “Doordarshan Malayalam” once in a month on various socio-legal
issues. An advocate from the panel of KeLSA is deputed to answer
the doubts raised by the public and explain the functions of the Legal
Services Authorities and its allied institutions in the State.

Short Film -“Katha Katha Kaaranam” [Reason behind the Story]
•

District Legal Services Authority, Kozhikode in association with
Mental Health Centre, Kozhikode produced a short film, ‘Katha,
Katha, Karanam’ (Reason Behind the Story) about the rehabilitation
issues on rehabilitation of cured patients in Mental Health Centres
with a view to sensitize the society on the need to rehabilitate mentally
ill patients in their family. This short film has been screened in more
than 100 venues including schools, colleges, training classes, police
stations, IMG etc.

111 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Literacy Programmes at School & College Levels [Kelsa]
Legal literacy books for students of Schools and Colleges namely
’Niyamapadam’ (in vernacular language ) and ‘Lessons in law’(in
English) for CBSE Students are printed, published and distributed every
year by the Kerala State Legal Services Authority throughput the State.
Induction of all the Tribal Students in a College as PLVs – First In
India : All the Tribal students of Institute of Tribal Studies and Research
Centre,[ITSR] Chethalayam, Wayanad District , probably first of its kind
in the country, were enrolled as PLV’s so as to identify tribal issues and
problems and bring it for legal solutions through DLSA.. Conducted PLV
training programme for ITSR students. Legal Aid Clinic was inaugurated
at ITSR Chathalayam and at Veterinary College Wayanad, by Hon’ble
Mr.Justice Thottathil B.Radhakrishnan, Acting Chief Justice, High Court
of Kerala at Veterinary College Campus. Legal awareness programme was
inaugurated by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Babu Mathew P. Joseph, Judge, High
Court of Kerala. 500 students of Veterinary College and 40 PLVs of ITSR
participated in the Programme.
Observance of Days:
World Environment Day: World Environment day was observed by Kerala
State Legal Services Authority, District Legal Services Authorities and Taluk
Legal Services Committees by organizing befitting Programmes. Kerala
State Legal Services Authority organized a Way Forward Programme in
connection with the World Environment Day on 6th June 2016 at High
Court of Kerala. Hon’ble Mr.Justice Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan, then
Acting Chief Justice, High Court of Kerala & Executive Chairman, KELSA
inaugurated the programme. Adv.S.U.Nazar, President, Kerala High
Court Advocates’ Association presided over the function. Dr. K. Vasuki
IAS, Executive Director, Suchitwa Mission made a presentation on ‘MY
WASTE MY RESPONSIBILITY- A change in the paradigm of Waste
Management’.
World day against child Labour: ‘World Day against Child Labour’ was
observed by Kerala State Legal Services Authority, District Legal Services
Authorities and Taluk Legal Services Committees and organized different
programmes involving various Stakeholders. Kerala State Legal Services
Authority organized an academic session on “Child Labour – Issues and
112 / NYAYA DEEP

Challenges” in connection with the World Day against Child Labour on
16th June, 2016. The valedictory session was inaugurated by Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan, then Acting Chief Justice, High Court
of Kerala & Executive Chairman, KeLSA. Hon’ble Mr.Justice Antony
Dominic, Judge, High Court of Kerala and Chairman, Juvenile Justice
Committee presided over the function.
Legal Aid: During the quarter14170 number of persons were given legal
aid. Category wise details of legal aid beneficiaries are given below.

Category

No. of Legal Aid
beneficiaries

Scheduled Caste

426

Scheduled Tribe

176

Women

5017

Children

101

In custody

4098

General

4352

Total

14170

Specific Instances of Legal Aid
Transit of Poonam Singh from Haryana [Thrissur]: One Poonam Singh
from Panipath, Haryana state, discharged from the Mental Health Centre,
Thrissur because of the initiative of DLSA legal aid clinic counsel Adv.
Jockin. A. Pereira and PLV Ammini. K.A. She was sent to her native place
by tracing out her relatives.
Rescue and Rehabilitation of a Mentally Ill Woman with her child
[Kozhikode] : A woman suffering from mental illness was hospitalized
by some persons with a 2 months old child. She was given psychiatric
treatment. Her illness was cured. She was taken to Govt. Short Stay Home
with the Child from where she was rehabilitated to her peer group of
wandering labourers at Malappuram, with whom alone she was found
comfortable.
By knowing this hospitalization several compassionate persons including
the District Collector visited her. During such visits one person noticed the
113 / NYAYA DEEP

lack of infrastructure facilities in Psychiatric ward of Medical College and
sponsored a Television and Water Purifier with Cooler through DLSA.
Improvement of Living Conditions at the Mental Health Centre (MHC)
•

DLSA Thiruvananthapuram co-ordinated with all concerned to
ensure safe rehabilitation of persons hailing from other states and
shifted from MHC.

•

Arranged essential medicines to the inmates of MHC through
sponsors.

•

Mentally ill persons in neglected conditions were provided
treatment at MHC, and necessary steps were taken to bring them
under the welfare schemes.

•

Wandering mentally ill persons were removed to MHC with the
aid of police.

Master Plan for Mental Health Centre: The Government has approved the
Master Plan prepared at the initiative of DLSA Kozhikode for construction
of a modern psychiatric research centre at the Mental Health Centre,
Kozhikode. Rupees 100 Crores has been set apart by the Government for
this project.
TRIBAL WELFARE
Repair of Houses in Tribal Colony : On 8th November 2015 team DLSA
Kozhikode comprising of Secretary, Panel Lawyers, PLVs, Interns and
members of an NGO (Art of Living, Feroke) have visited Muthappan
Puzha Tribal Colony and repaired 25 houses which were not fit for use.
Medical Attention to a Person with Burn Injury in Acid Attack: A person
from a tribal colony, who sustained grievous burn injury in an acid
attack by some unknown persons while he was sleeping, was wandering
in the forest without getting any treatment. He was taken to hospital and
rendered immediate treatment at the instance of DLSA Kozhikode.
Medical Aid to a Child: One child who was the resident of Odapoyil
Tribal Colony was suffering from hernia with his tentacle enlarged. No
medical aid was made available to him either by the Tribal Promoter or
anybody else. DLSA Kozhikode immediately arranged hospitalization of
the child at IMCH, Kozhikode and surgery was done on him.
114 / NYAYA DEEP

A destitute tribal Velutharaman who was ousted from house by his
children. He was suffering from hunger and diseases. DLSA kozhikode
took him to Govt General Hospital, Kozhikode, treated him there and
then took him to Govt. Old Age Home. On taking legal action against
his children in a pre-litigation petition, his children took him back home.
PLVs used to visit his house regularly to keep a vigil.
Special Monthly Adalat to Complete Construction of Tribal Houses
under Government Schemes: DLSA Wayanad conducted Special monthly
Lok Adalat to complete construction of tribal Houses under Government
Schemes based on the complaints received from settlements through PLVs.
Cholanaikan Aadivasi Community:
•

As directed by the Hon’ble Executive Chairman, KeLSA based on a
report in a newspaper DLSA Wayanad took up the issue of lack of
shelter, food and clothing to Cholanaikkan adhivasi community of
Parappan Para adhivasi colony where 13 families consisting of 54
members were living. Ration Card was distributed to all the families
within a week and solved their problems in getting food grains cloths
etc. The Judicial Officers at the district centre voluntarily contributed
for purchase of blankets and to provide food.

•

The Secretary, DLSA, Thalassery visited Tribal Colonies at Peravoor
and Kottiyoor Grama Panchayaths. A meeting of
Para-Legal
Volunteers was conducted on 25.4.2015. 20 Para-Legal Volunteers
were instructed to visit selected 10 Tribal Colonies in Peravoor Grama
Panchayath and also conducted a Survey as to the availability of basic
amenities and note the problems of Tribals. The Para-Legal Volunteers
were directed to submit their report.

•

Special Adalat for Scheduled Tribes at Punchavayal and Kombukuthy
in Kottayam District was conducted. The outstanding achievement of
the Tribal Legal Fest/Adalat was the construction of a new house (in the
forest land) for Smt. Janamma Raghavan, w/o Raghavan, Charalickal
House, Kombukuthy with the service of National Service Scheme of
St. Dominic’s College, Kanjirappally by spending Rupees 2.25 lakhs.
She belongs to the Malampandaram category.

•

More than 500 APL ration cards belonging to Tribes were converted
to BPL by the co-operation and support of the Taluk Supply Officer,
115 / NYAYA DEEP

Kanjirappally.
•

Trees standing dangerously in the forest land near the houses of Tribes
were cut down

•

Forest land was allotted to Govt. Tribal School at Kombukuthy.

•

Voltage problems in various places were solved by KSEB

Mobile Lok Adalat at Aralam Farm:
•

District Legal Services Authority Kannur arranged a Mobile Lok
Adalat associating Various Government Department Officials, in
Aralam Farm, the Largest Tribal Re-Settlement Colony in Kerala
State. In the Adalat various issues of the tribals pending with the
Govt. Departments could be solved.

•

The Taluk Supply Officer with the assistance of Grama Panchayat
directed to issue 112 ration cards to tribals. The Tahsildar, Iritty
scheduled a camp on 5.5.2016 issue voter’s identity cards to tribals.

•

The issue of non-availability of drinking water was solved by K.S.E.B.
repairing motor pump set of Review Water Project and assured timely
assistance in future.

•

Forest Department deputed more staff in the area for taking effective
measures to drive away wild elephants.

•

With the intervention of DLSA a private bus resumed trips to the area.

•

Construction of rail fencing to prevent entry of wild animals was
expedited.

•

A Monitoring Committee with various department officials was
formed in the Lok Adalat to monitor the actions in the Tribal Colony.
The said committee is holding regular meetings.

•

District Legal Services Authority, Kannur decided to extend the same
activities to other Tribal Areas in the District

Sri. Soman, found in a Paralysed State in the Forest: On the basis of a
news in a television channel and pursuant to the direction of the Hon’ble
Executive Chairman, KELSA, DLSA helped an adhivasi by name Soman.
He was hospitalized after he was found in a paralysed state inside the
forest to get proper medical aid. He is now recovering from the illness.
DLSA has alerted the tribal department to provide regular assistance to
him.
116 / NYAYA DEEP

Prevention of Child Trafficking and Child Labour:
•

District Legal Services Authority, Kannur received reports of child
trafficked from other States and employed for heavy domestic works
denying education and kept in the houses, as if in confinement.

•

As per the direction of the Honourable Executive Chairman, KeLSA
Secretary, DLSA conducted enquiry into the allegation of Child
Trafficking and Child Labour.

•

Based on the report, Honourable Executive Chairman, KeLSA
forwarded the report to State Nodal Officer for Anti Human Trafficking,
District Collector, Kannur, Chairman, Child Welfare Committee and
District Social Justice Officer for necessary action. DLSA was directed
to continue to observe the situation.

•

With the intervention of Child Line, Police registered 15 Cases of Child
Labour and Child Trafficking in the month of June, 2016 in Kannur
District.

•

Investigation into Child Trafficking is in progress.

•

The District Collector, following the direction of KeLSA, issued
deadline of 10 days to send back children employed in the area to
Home States, announced a drive against Child Labour thereafter.

•

The District Legal Services Authority, Kannur introduced a project
to form Ward/Division Level bodies named ‘Niyama Jyothi’ to assist
the Taluk Legal Services Committees in the functions. The DLSA,
Kannur has also introduced a project to achieve total legal literacy in
the District with the help of Niyama Jyothi Units.

A girl from West Bengal gets back to Home.
•

A girl from West Bengal, aged 16 years was living at the Mahila
Mandiram Thalassery, as no one came to take back her home. DLSA
Thalassery contacted the District Child Protection Officer and requested
to initiate steps to take the girl to West Bengal. The Secretary, DLSA
also contacted West Bengal Police to ascertain the identity of the girl.
The Kannur Child Welfare Committee contacted the concerned Child
Welfare Committee in West Bengal and arrangements were made to
take the girl to West Bengal with the assistance of Police.

•

Based on the report received from the Principal Magistrate, Juvenile
Justice Board under a case of POSCO, team under TLSC, Kozhencherry
117 / NYAYA DEEP

visited the Mahila Mandiram on 27.6.2016 and necessary steps were
taken to return the child to her home.
Legal Aid to the Victims of Trafficking and Sexual Exploitation : Four
Bangladeshi women who were victims of Trafficking and commercial
sexual exploitation were held up in India (Shelter Home, Kozhikode) for
many years awaiting completion of legal formalities to deport them. As
directed by KeLSA, DLSA Kozhikode undertook the task of deporting
them by expediting the formalities. NALSA and Karnataka SLSA also
helped us. A reputed NGO at Bangladesh assisted the repatriation and to
find out suitable rehabilitation.

DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Flood Affected Kadinamkulam and Valiyathura [Thiruvananthapuram] :
•

Visited victims of flood and sea erosion at Kadinamkulam and
Valiyathura.

•

Supplied essential materials for their living through sponsors.

•

Co-ordinated with revenue and medical authorities to attend their
requirements.

GENERAL
Old Age Home:
•

On the basis of the complaint of inmates of Government owned Old
Age Home at Thodupuzha, a PLP was registered suo moto by District
Legal Services Authority, Thodupuzha.

•

Toilets and bathrooms were repaired and made to working conditions.

•

25 numbers of beds and pillows were supplied through sponsorship

Removal of Encroachment into Government Land:
• In June 2016 District Legal Services Authority, Kozhikode settled
a PLP in Lok Adalat. In that settlement the petitioner obtained
Rs.60000/- from the respondent which amount he insisted to spend
on some charitable activities. DLSA send him to Govt Institute for
Dermatological Diseases, Chevayur which a most neglected Govt.
Institution where several unfortunate persons are living after curing
leprosy. Their relatives are not willing to take them home. The
118 / NYAYA DEEP

petitioner spent the entire amount of Rs.60000/- for purchase of chairs
for OPs and other required furniture for inmates.
•

Encroachment by a person into the property of Government PHC
was removed through settlement on a complaint submitted by a PLV
under District Legal Services Authority, Thodupuzha.

Shelter Home:
• The District Legal Services Authority, Kozhikode prepared a
comprehensive report about the infrastructural shortcomings in all
the Govt. Shelter Homes in Kozhikode and presented it before the
Minister for Social Justice
•

Government sanctioned necessary funds.

•

Proper infrastructure is in place now. Repairs were carried out and
new buildings were constructed.

•

As requested by DLSA a dispensary was started within the premises
of Children Home, Old Age Homes, Mahila Mandiram, Short Stay

Home, After Care Home, and Asha Bhavan

Launching of NALSA Scheme, 2015, State Level Rolling Out
On 18.6.2016:
•

The State level rolling out of 7 NalSA Schemes, 2015 was inaugurated
on 18.6.2016 by Hon’ble Justice Thottathil B. Radhakrishnan, then
Acting Chief Justice, High Court of Kerala and Executive Chairman,
KeLSA at the Mental Health Centre, Thiruvananthapuram. NaLSA
(Legal Services to the Mentally Ill and Mentally Disabled Persons)
Schemes, 2015 was launched on the same day.

•

There was an interactive academic session attended by doctors, para
medical staff, social workers, psychologists, panel lawyers, Para-Legal
Volunteers, representatives of NGOs, law students etc on different
topics.

•

Implementation of the scheme: In connection with the implementation
of NaLSA (Protection and Enforcement of Tribal Rights) Scheme, 2015
DLSA Pathanamthitta conducted meeting of the Tribal promoters,
Tribal Officers, Divisional Forest Officers and Social Welfare Officers
were conducted on 28.6.2016 as a part of the implementation of the
scheme. In the meeting a comprehensive survey report of Tribes
119 / NYAYA DEEP

was submitted by the Tribal Development Officer, Ranni towards
the implementation of the Scheme. The Divisional Forest Officer,
Konni submitted a detailed report with respect to the Tribal colonies
identified under the division.
•

DLSA Kottayam convened a meeting on 8-4-2016 to discuss about
the NALSA project, Protection and Enforcement of Tribal Rights
Scheme, 2015. The meeting was attended by the District Officers of
SC Development Department, District Officers of ST Development
Department, Planning department, DIET, and officials of the Revenue
department for conducting surveys in Tribal Colony/Colonies in
the District, by collecting details, materials or information from the
Governmental or Non-Governmental departments/institutions/
organizations including SC/ST Department. A second follow
up meeting was convened on 21-4-2016. The groundwork for
implementing the scheme is going on.

•

DLSA, Kannur conducted, a Lok Adalat on 20.6.16 at Block Panchayat
Office Hall, Peravoor, exclusively for the Tribals in Peravoor Grama
Panchayat. Prior to the Lok Adalat, Para-Legal Volunteers had visited

10 Tribal colonies in Peravoor Grama Panchayat conducted
survey. In the Lok Adalat, various grievances petitions from Tribals
from the colonies in Peravoor Grama Panchayat were received. It
was decided in the meeting that, the tribal promoters shall contact
the concerned Village Officer and Secretary of Grama Panchayat to
obtain Income Certificate and residence certificate for the tribals and
apply to Taluk Supply Office for Ration Card. The Grama Panchayat
assured that, temporary building numbers will be given to houses
for the purpose of Ration Card. It was decided to call for a report
of the Grama Panchayat, Block Panchayat, District Panchayat and
Revenue Department to prepare a project for construction of houses,
in substitution of materially damaged houses. The Sub Engineer,
KSEB stated that, Electricity re-connection would be given to those
who lost connection on account of huge electricity bill arrears, on
payment of 1/6 of the total amount and giving opportunity to pay
the arrears in installments. On 1.6.2016, District Child Protection Unit
participated in the ‘Pravesanolsavam’ of Aralam High Court and
also made arrangement to distribute bags, Umbrella etc. for newly
admitted students. The same was done as a follow up action of the
120 / NYAYA DEEP

decision of Aralam Farm Monitoring Committee, formed by District
Legal Services Authority, Kannur.

•

On the report a Para Legal volunteer, that the residents of Tribal Colony
at Aralam was not issued rice due to non-allotment of boiled rice in the
Ration shop the Secretary, DLSA contacted the Taluk Supply Officer,
Iritty. The Taluk Supply Officer, Iritty, made an enquiry and informed
that non-supply of boiled rice was due to the shortage in supply from
Civil Supply Department. He assured that, steps would be taken to
allot 35 kilograms of rice including boiled rice to the Tribals.

•

On the basis News Paper report that, 7 Teak trees in the Government
hospital Compound, Kuramba were damaged and may fall on the
nearby school, a Para Legal Volunteer, Sri. Pradeepan was deputed
to inspect the site and gave a report. On the basis of the report of
Para Legal Volunteer, communications were sent to Superintendent
of Government Hospital, Kuthuparamba, Tahsildar, Thalassery and
Divisional Forest Officer, Kannur to take steps to cut and remove trees.

•

DLSA, Kannur convened a meeting with the Chairman, Thalassery
Municipality on 17.6.16 and held discussions on various issues,

including the menace of plastic waste and the problems of
workers of non-organised sector. The non-functioning of a waste
plant in the vegetable market in Thalassery Municipality also was
discussed in the meeting. The Secretary, District Legal Services
Authority informed the Chairman, Thalassery Municipality that a
private company at Chennai was willing to take over the working
of the waste plant and the Chairman agreed for a meeting with the
officials of the private concern.
•

On the basis of news paper report regarding the Waste Management
and Traffic arrangements DLSA, Idukki constituted a National regular
Lok Adalat on 26.5.2016. Muttom Grama Panchayat Secretary, Health
Inspector, S.I. of police, Muttom were called and an award was passed.

•

The Secretary, DLSA Thodupuzha visited the Vridha Vikalanka
Sadanam under the Social Justice Department run by Thodupuzha
Municipality. On seeing the pathetic condition of the institution
the Secretary filed suo-moto petition in the Adalat in favour of the
institution and notices were issued to the Authorities to solve the
problems.
121 / NYAYA DEEP

•

In Kottayam District a serious pest infection was reported in an area of
28 Hectors plot at Malayakunnu in ward 11 of Pampady Panchayat. A
PLV has reported the fact to the office of the DLSA Kottayam. Principal
Agricultural Officer, Kottayam was directed to do the needful. A report
was submitted by the officer after the successful mission.

Green Wayanad and Cool Wayanad Scheme, 2016[Wayanad]:
•

‘Green Wayanad ‘and ‘Cool Wayanad’ Scheme launched by DLSA,
Wayanad in association with Regional Agricultural Research Station
Ambalavayal and Forest Department proposes to enhance the water

retention capacity of existing ponds, new ponds and elephant
proof trenches by using most cost effective techniques to generate
harvesting of fish to generate regular income for Tribes.
MANIPUR

1. On 23rd April, 2016 a Mega Legal Awareness Programme
was organised at Multipurpose Hall, Mini Secretariat, Ukhrul
(a hill district) with the aim of sensitizing the Legal Authority,
infrastructures and various legal services schemes. Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Rakesh Ranjan Prasad, Chief Justice (Acting) High Court
of Manipur & Patron-in-chief, Manipur State Legal Services
Authority and Hon’ble Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh, Judge, High
Court of Manipur & Executive Chairman, Manipur State Legal
Services Authority graced the occasion along with Hon’ble Mr.
Justice W.A. Shishak, Chief Justice (Jharkhand) (Retd.) on the dais.
Chiefs of different villages of Ukhrul, civil society organizations,
representatives of administration and police, and students also
attended the function.

2. 3 (Three) Legal Aid Clinics were opened during this quarter,
i.e., from April to June, 2016 in various districts. The newly opened
Legal Aid Clinics are (1) Legal Aid Clinic at RIMS Hospital, Imphal
West District opened on 22nd April, 2016, (2) Legal Aid Clinic at
Tumukhong, Moirangpurel, Imphal East District, opened on 30th
April, 2016 & (3) Legal Aid Clinic at Kiyam Leitanpok, Thoubal
District, opened on 28th May, 2016. All the three Legal Aid Clinics
were inaugurated by the Hon’ble Executive Chairman, Manipur
State Legal Services Authority, the opening functions were
122 / NYAYA DEEP

attended by Member Secretary, MASLSA, Chairman and Secretary
of the respective DLSAs. PLVs have been deputed to the newly
opened legal aid clinics in order to cater to the need of legal aid
seekers, litigants and public.

3. Manipur SLSA, Manipur Commission for Protection of Child
Rights and DLSA (Thoubal and Bishnupur) in collaboration with
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR)
organised “One Day Awareness Programme” on the topics
“Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act,
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, Child
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act and Right to Education
Act”. These legal awareness programmes were held at Thoubal on
16th May, 2016 and at Bishnupur on 29th June, 2016.

4. Manipur SLSA in association Human Rights Law Network and
MacArthur Foundation organised a Judicial Colloquium on
“Sexual Health and Reproductive Rights” on 29th May,
2016. Hon’ble Mr. Justice B.K. Sharma, Judge, Gauhati High Court
(Retd.), Hon’ble Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh, Judge, High Court
of Manipur and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ujjal Bhuyan, Judge, Gauhati
High Court addressed the gathering of judicial officers, social
workers, police officers, officials of various Govt. Departments on
the issue.

5. Manipur SLSA organised “Two days Lecture cum Interaction

Programme” at the Auditorium of High Court of Manipur on

11-12 June, 2016. Shri Laxmidhar Pangari, Sr. Advocate of Odisha
High Court as resource person deliberated on various legal issues
including Negotiable Instruments Act. The programme was
attended by Judicial Officers, Police Officials, Advocates, Panel
Lawyers, Legal Aid Counsels, law students etc.

6. A “One Day Lecture cum Interaction Programme” was
also held on 25.06.2016. The Programme was graced by Hon’ble
Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh, Executive Chairman, MASLSA,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S. Serto, Judge, High Court of Manipur, Shri L.
Birendrakumar Sharma, Smt. Kh. Gomati Devi, Shri U. Kol Singh,
Retd. District & Sessions Judges, Shri M. Padmeshwar Singh, Retd.
Special Judge (ND&PS), Manipur. The programme was attended
by Judicial Officers, Police Officials, Advocates, Panel Lawyers,
123 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Aid Counsels, law students etc.

7. During this period, Manipur SLSA under the direction of His
Lordship Hon’ble Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh visited various
Children Homes/ Shelter Homes in the State. On 23.04.2016,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice R.R. Prasad, Chief Justice (Acting), High Court
of Manipur accompanied by Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh &
Member Secretary, MASLSA visited the Destitute Children Home,
Nirgin Club, Ukhrul and inspected the condition of the Home and
interacted with the children residing at the Home. Hon’ble Mr.
Justice N. Kotiswar Singh accompanied by the Member Secretary,
MASLSA also made visits to various Homes in the State viz.
Observation Home cum Special Home, Takyelpat, Homes located
in Bishnupur Districts etc and inspected the Homes.

Observances :(i) Manipur SLSA in association with All Manipur Bar Association
organised “Observation of May Day/International
Labour’s Day” on May 1st, 2016 at the Cheirap Court Complex,
Uripok by a simple legal awareness programme. It was also
observed by the Loyalam Construction Worker’s Welfare Union at
Kangmong Manglak Community Hall, Imphal West by organising
“Painting Competition and Lecture Programme”. Learned
District & Sessions Judge, Imphal East, S. Imocha Singh and
R.K. Memcha Devi, Member Secretary, Manipur SLSA were the
presidium members on both the occasions. Shri S. Imocha Singh
highlighted the changing labour law regime and the various legal
issues connected therewith. May Day was thus celebrated across
the State through the DLSAs. At Thoubal District, a programme
on the NALSA (Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganised
Sector) Scheme was also conducted amongst the construction
workers with official from Labour Department deliberating on
the scheme and Manipur Building & Other Construction Workers’
Welfare Scheme, 2016.

(ii) “World Environment Day” was observed at various places
in the State. At Lamphelpat Court complex, the observance
programme was organised by Manipur SLSA in association
with All Manipur Bar Association. Hon’ble Mr. Justice N.
124 / NYAYA DEEP

Kotiswar Singh, Executive Chairman, MASLSA along with Smt.
R.K. Memcha Devi, Member Secretary, MASLSA planted tree
saplings at the Court Complex to mark the occasion. Street plays
by popular comedy group “NOKPHADE” was also performed
at Moirang Lamkhai, Bishnupur District to sensitise the people
about the need of preserving our environment and conservation
of wild life. As a part of the observance Legal Aid Clinic, Moirang
College organised an Awareness Programme at Diligent Public,
School, Moirang. Hon’ble Mr. Justice N. Kotiswar Singh, Executive
Chairman, MASLSA along with Smt. R.K. Memcha Devi, Member
Secretary, MASLSA, Shri Ch. Brajachand Singh Chairman,
Bishnupur DLSA & Smt. Binny Ngangom, Secretary, Bishnupur
DLSA attended the programme and also planted tree saplings at
Moirang. The day was also observed at Thoubal District Court
complex by DLSA/Thoubal in association Divisional Forest Office,
Thoubal by organising a lecture programme. Various tree saplings
were also planted in the Court complex.

(iii) Observance of “World Day against Child Labour” was also
held on 12th June, 2016 by organising “Street Play” performed by
popular actors/comedians (Nokphade Group) at Shamumakhong,
Khwairamband Bazar (Heart of Imphal Town) and Lilong Bazaar,
Thoubal District to spread awareness of the menace of Child
Labour and legal provisions relating to the same. The play was
able to attract a huge crowd and effectively spread awareness
in entertaining way. As a part of the observance programme
MASLSA in association with DLSAs also organised “Poster
Campaign and Painting Competition” in various schools.
Posters depicting menace of child labour and legal provisions for
protection of children were published and distributed to Legal
Aid Clinics, Offices, Police stations etc.

(iv) As part of efforts to tackle drug abuse and illicit trafficking and
to mark the observance of “International Day against Drug
Abuse and Illicit Trafficking”, District Legal Services
Authority, Imphal East in collaboration with Imphal East District
Police held a Sensitisation/ Awareness programme on 26.06.2016
at the office complex of the Superintendant of Police, Imphal
East. The target audience mainly consisted of police personnel.
125 / NYAYA DEEP

Churachandpur DLSA on the same day held “Poster Campaign
and Legal Awareness Programme” in Churachandpur to
mark the observance of “International Day against Drug Abuse
and Illicit Trafficking”.

8. During the period from April to June, 2016, Manipur SLSA
in association with DLSAs and various NGOs, local clubs/
organisations have organised a total of 112 Legal Literacy/
Legal Awareness Programmes in different parts of the State to
spread awareness to the masses on various topics such as “POCSO
Act, 2012, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015, Child Trafficking & Child labour, Availability of free legal
aid through legal services institutions, Protection of Women From
Domestic Violence Act, Mob Justice, Consumer’s Rights, Right to
Information Act, Right to Education Act, Food security Act, Labour
Laws and welfare schemes of unorganised workers etc. as well as
different welfare schemes of Government such as Food Security
Act, MGNREGA, RSBY, JSY, Scheme for unorganised workers, etc.

9. Manipur SLSA organised Live Phone-in- Programme at

2(two) Channels of AIR, Imphal viz. Sangai Channel &
Kangla Channel on 18.04.2016, 16.05.2016 & 20.06.2016 on the

topics “Fundamental Rights & duties of Indian Citizen”, “Scope of
10th Schedule under the Constitution of India” & “Manipur Land
Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960” respectively as a part of
legal literacy programmes through T.V./ Radio.

10. During the period from April to June, 2016, Manipur SLSA
provided free legal services (Panel Advocates) to 46 applicants.
Category-wise representation of the persons provided legal aid
(Panel Advocates):
Woman

UTP(in custody)

Children

Others

Total

10

26

6

4

46

11. Training Programmes :
(i) Manipur SLSA conducted one Day Training cum Interaction
Programme for the Panel Lawyers on 03.04.2016 at the office
of MASLSA, High Court of Manipur Complex.
126 / NYAYA DEEP

(ii) Conducted Advanced Training Programme for the PLVs of
Imphal West District along with PLVs of Legal Aid Clinic,
Nongbrang, Imphal East on 17.04.2016 at the office of MASLSA,
High Court of Manipur Complex.
(iii) Conducted Induction Training Programme for the PLVs of
Legal Aid Clinic, Mao, Senapati District on 27.04.2016
(iv) MASLSA in association with Thoubal DLSA conducted
Induction Training programme for PLVs of Legal Aid Clinics
located at Thoubal District on 14.05.2016 at District & Sessions
Court, Thoubal.
(v) Conducted Induction Training Programme for the PLVs of
Legal Aid Clinic, Moreh, Chandel District on 15.05.2016.
(vi) Conducted Induction Training Programme for the PLVs
of Legal Aid Clinic, Kumbi, Bishnupur District & Sagang,
Churachandpur District on 5.06.2016.

12. Manipur SLSA organised National Lok Adalat 09.04.2016,
14.05.2016 & 11.06.2016 as per the calendar issued by NALSA. In
the National Lok Adalats held during this period a total of 668
cases relating to family matters, MACT/ Insurance claims cases,
civil cases, criminal compoundable matters, Bank matters, cases
under Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 etc were disposed of. Data for
disposal of cases in National Lok Adalats during the period is as
follows:
Lok Adalat
held on

No. of Cases Taken up

No. of Cases
Disposed

Amount Settled

09.04.2016

479

402

Rs. 51,30,262/-

14.05.2016

16

7

Rs.8,50,000/-

11.06.2016

1168

259

Rs.1,22,05,797/-

Total

1663

668

Rs.1,81,86,059/-

127 / NYAYA DEEP

MADHYA PRADESH

Settled Cases through Various Camps (April-June 2016)
No. of
Persons
Benefitted

Total
No. of Camps
Held on

Total
No. of
persons
Benefitted

SC

ST

Legal Literacy
Camp

931

83532

6729

6597

20970

Micro Legal
Literacy Camp

47

4588

627

432

0

MNREGA
Camp

20

1673

160

188

0

Type of Camps

Total
Expenditure

Settled Cases through Mediation (April-June 2016)

Months

Opening
Balance
Of
Month

No. of
cases
referred
during
the
month

Total
no. of
cases

Success
Full
Settled
Cases

Unsuccessful
Settled
Cases

Total
Considered
Cases

Total
no. of
Pending
Cases

Percent
of
Successful
Settled
Cases

AprilJune
2016

11,167

14,944

26,111

6,781

9,059

15,840

10,271

42.81

Settled Cases through Lok Adalat (April-June 2016)

Type of Lok Adalat

No. of
Lok Adalat Held
on

Total
Taken up
cases

Total
Disposed
off cases

Total
Benefitted
persons

Total Settlement Amount

Monthly National
Lok Adalat

3

177786

125387

192558

724985259

Permanent &
continuous

446

35089

3183

5698

125501252

128 / NYAYA DEEP

Permanent Lok
Adalat for Public

93

1612

195

216

160000

MNREGA

11

60

60

60

-

Jail

5

12

12

12

-

Mobile Lok Adalat

90

2723

435

1027

497284

Plea Bargaining

-

40

37

37

-

Total-

648

2,17,322

1,29,309

1,99,408

85,11,43,795

In an outstanding event of Legal Services, under guidance of Hon’ble
Acting Chief Justice and Executive Chairman MPSLSA has made
tremendous achievement in the world famous event of “Singhasth Mela”.
As per the religious tenant Singhasth Mela was held from 22nd to 31st May
2016 at Ujjain. The Madhya Pradesh State Legal Services Authority with
the cooperation of DLSA, Ujjain conducted continuous Legal Literacy and
Awareness Camp in the Singhasth Mela by establishing temporary tent
in which for about 31 days following Legal Services were provided to the
public at large.
The above event has marked a place in the judicial history of the State
as it was one of the most lengthy and huge Camp benefiting the public
particularly persons of lower strata living below poverty line. About 85,000
(Eighty Five Thousands) pamphlets of various schemes were distributed.
The volunteers of our office (MPSLSA) reached to 31 other camps in Mela
wherein publicity of ADR and various schemes were announced in mike
during the period of one month benefitting 1,77,000 (One lakh seventy
seven thousands) people. As a result about 2, 62,000 (Two lakh sixty two
thousands) persons in all were benefitted in the continuous camp of DLSA
Ujjain. The above mentioned data itself gives to show that the above Camp
has been a grand success.
The Camps organized by DLSA, Ujjain was also supervised, and
inspected by Portfolio Judge, Ujjain, Hon’ble Justice Shri Prakash
Shrivastava and also by other Hon’ble Judges, including Justice Shri
Jagdish Prashad Gupta. The District Judge Ujjain Shri S.K. Singh with
other Judicial Officers of the Districts has satisfied various quarries raised
by common peoples regarding implementation of their right in lack of
knowledge and financial difficulties. The Deputy Secretary MPSLSA Shri
Anand Kumar Tiwari also monitored the event by visiting the tent and
advising suitable changes.
129 / NYAYA DEEP

NAGALAND

Kohima|19.04.2016: As part of the action plan programme for
the year 2016, the Kohima District legal Authority organized a Legal
Awareness Programme at Mount Hermon Hr.Sec School, Kohima on
19.4.2016. A total of 515 beneficiaries participated in the programme from
among the students and faculty members. A quiz competition was also
conducted on the topics of fundamental duties which were presented
during the session and prizes were awarded. The programme was
chaired by Ms. Neiteo Koza, Panel Lawyer who highlighted the activities
of the Kohima District Legal Senvices Authority and welcome address
was delivered by Mr. Ngangom Surjit Signh, Principal Mount Hermon
Hr. Sec. School, Kohima. Ms Akumla Longchari, Thejapfutuo Khezhie
and Ms Wapangienla Kichu, panel lawyers, as resource persons. Ms
Akumla Longchari spoke on “Online violence and cyber-crime,” in which
she briefed the students that while technology is playing an important
role in each of our lives, but at the same time it comes along with some
disadvantages and dangers. She said many youngsters were lured and
had become victims of online violence and cyber-crimes through cyber
bullies, social engineering, online shopping, online games and online
betting. Longchari added that there are over 1 million people who fell
victims to cyber-crime. She said India is the 5th amongst the affected
cyber-crime countries. “We need to understand social media and should
use it more responsibly because indulging in irresponsible use of social
media could amount to cyber-crime and attract the law with punishment
of imprisonment and fine under various sections of IPC and IT Act,’ she
advised. Thejapfutuo Khezhie spoke on the “Protection of children from
sexual offences Act 2012,” and explained about the provisions of the Act.
He said this law aims at protecting children under the age of 18 years
against sexual assault, sexual harassment and child pornography. He said
the Act provides special setting of child–friendly court proceedings for a
child victim and the sole purpose of stressing on the issues of child sexual
abuse was to make children understand, identify the concept of what
child sexual abuse is all about so that children could protect themselves
by approaching the various agencies such as the panel lawyers, Childline,
Child Welfare Committees, the police and the special juvenile police
unit who are always there to protect and assist them. Ms Wapanginla
Kichu shared on Human Trafficking and Immoral (Prevention) Act,
1956. She said Nagaland is not only a transit point for trafficking women
130 / NYAYA DEEP

and children but is also a recipient and a supplier. She pointed out the
major reasons for the rapid rise in human trafficking was mainly due to
poverty, lack of job satisfaction in the state, lack of awareness, imitation of
western culture. She said that trafficking of human is punishable under
the Immoral Trafficking (Prevention) Act, 1956.

Kohima|28.04.2016: The Kohima DLSA joined hands together with
the District Level Coordination Committee (DLCC), Health and Family
Welfare Department, Kohima and the Students of Tobacco Free Schools,
Kohima in their quest for a Smoke Free Kohima City.
The “Campaign for Smoke Free Kohima City” was organized by
District Tobacco Control Cell, Health and Family Welfare Department
with the initiative of the students of tobacco-free schools in Kohima at
Phoolbari Junction. As part of the campaign, the students held interesting
placards, some of which read “Tobacco Companies kills their Best
Customer”, “tobacco kills us”, “Smoking is Paying Someone to Kill You”
and “Say No to Tobacco and ?Yes to Life”, “Be Brighter put down the
lighter”, etc. The programme was chaired by Mr. Kovi Meyase, Kohima
Municipal Council (KMC) administrator.

Peren|18.04.2016 : First of its kind in the state, the newsletter
of Peren DLSA was released by Deputy Commissioner, Peren, Peter
Lichamo along with member secretary, Nagaland State Legal Services
Authority, Nino Iralu. DC congratulated Peren DLSA for the success of
the programme and for extending legal aid services to the people since
its inception in 2012. Speaking at the launch, Nino Iralu appraised on
various schemes available under National Legal Services Authority. In
the past, people used to come seeking for lawyer’s assistance but now
through the Legal services Authority, the panel lawyers could reach the
unreached delivering justice at door steps, she informed. She also said that
the Panel Lawyers and Para-Legal Volunteers were the bridge between
the beneficiaries and service providers. Secretary Peren DLSA, Ajongba
Imchen spoke on Ombudsman Lok pal and Lok Ayukta Bill which were
yet to be implemented in Nagaland. He encouraged the various HoDs,
NGO’s and public leaders to take initiative in introducing the bill in
the state. The launching of Newsletter was followed by legal awareness
programme where, for the first time, all the HoDs, NGOs and judiciary
participated and deliberated on generic issues of the district.
131 / NYAYA DEEP

TRAINING OF PANEL LAWYERS ON ADVANCING
LAWYERING SKILL
Nagaland|21st & 22nd April, 2016|NSLSA : A two day State

Level Orientation Training for Panel Lawyers for Advancing Lawyering
Skills was organized by Nagaland State Legal Services Authority at the
Training Hall of State institute of Rural Development. The training was
imparted with the participation of Panel Lawyers from all the eleven
Districts Legal Services Authorities of Nagaland. A total of 51 panel
lawyers’ panel lawyers participated in the training programme. Speaking
at the inaugural programme, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shri. L.S Jamir, Judge
Guhati High Court, expressed his appreciation to the NSLSA for their
tireless effort in working out the training programme which is pertinent
in developing the skills of every panel lawyers and the topics which will
be dealt with during the following sessions are relevant and of utmost
importance. Justice L.S Jamir reiterated that there is no doubt, hurdles and
obstacles along the way for the smooth functioning of NSLSA. However,
this problems can be solved once Nagaland has a separate High Court not
only that there will be many avenues and opportunities opened for the
people. He urged the Justice and Law department to take up necessary
steps to make it possible for everyone’s benefit. He also encouraged the
participants to grasp the opportunities in learning and develop a better
lawyering skills so that they can deliver better service to the people. Mrs.
Kharinla T. Koza, Secretary, Justice & Law Department, Nagaland while
conveying the keynote address lauded the NSLSA and Panel lawyers of
various District Legal Services Authority for their selfless contribution
towards the welfare of the society. She said that working under Legal
services Authority demands excess work, sacrifices and commitments
and said that the services rendered by them is nothing short of a noble
act. This orientation and training will certainly help the Panel Lawyers in
achieving the goals of the Legal Services Authority she added. Welcome
address was delivered by Mrs. Nino Iralu, NJS, Member Secretary, NSLSA
and Master Trainer, Mr. Tongpang L Jamir gave the introduction of the
orientation and training programme while vote of thanks was proposed
by Mr. Alemwapang Ao, Trainer of Trainees, NSLSA.

Day 1: This was followed by the first session of the Training, chaired

by Mrs. Y.Longkumer,NJS, Registrar, Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench
and Mr. Kakheto Sema, Additional Advocate General. The Training
imparted using various methods includes Ice Breaking Session, Power
132 / NYAYA DEEP

point Presentation, Group Discussion, Interaction, Lecturing and Video
clip. The resource Person Mrs. Nino Iralu, Member Secretary, NSLSA,
presented her lecture on the topic “Constitutional Perspective & Legal
Services Authority Act, 1987 and the Schemes thereunder”. Resource
Person, Ms. Akumla Longchari, Master Trainer, NSLSA delivered
presentation on “Basic knowledge on various provisions for child & child
rights”.
The second session chaired by Mr. Ashu Theyo, Legal Aid Counsel,
NNP+, Kohima, DLSA with the resource persons as Mr. Kezhokhoto Savi,
Advocate, Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench, delivering presentations
on “Consumer Rights & Its Relevancy to a Lawyer”. The resource person
Mr. Tongpang L.Jamir, Master Trainer, NSLSA, presented Case Study and
Success stories on Consumer Rights.
The first day of the Training Programme finally ended with the third
Session, with chair persons as Shri. Imtiakum, Deputy Secretary, Law
& Justice Department and Mr. T.B.Jamir, Additional Advocate General.
Lecturing on “Roles & Responsibilities of Legal Services Lawyers, Do’s &
Don’ts for a Panel Lawyer” was presented by resource person Mrs. Mezivolu
T.Therieh, NJS, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kohima & Secretary, Kohima
District Legal Services Authority. Open House-Sharing experiences was
done with the resource persons as Ms. Cheliam Khiamniungan, Master
Trainer, NSLSA. She also present on the issues regarding “Concerns on
rendering Quality Legal Services by the District Legal Services Authority
& Legal services lawyers”.

Day 2: the day witnessed 4 sessions where different topics were
presented by the resource persons, Ms. Limasenla Longkumer, Project Coordinator,A2J Project, Mr. Joshua Sheqi, Retainer & Legal Aid Counsel,
Mrs Esther Aye,Legal Aid Counsel and Ms. Cheliam Khiamniungan,
Master Trainer. Special topics were given by the Learned Senior Advocate
Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench, Mr. C.T Jamir, A. Zho, Advocate,
Ms. Visevonuo, Principal Kohima Law College and Mr. Imti Imsong,
President, Dimapur Bar Association. Member Secretary NSLSA, Mrs.
Nino Iralu, NJS gave a summing up of the sessions and opined that this
programme will yield a good result from the side of the panel lawyers
from all the districts. She said that the orientation training programme
will be organized quarterly where success stories from the participants are
expected in the days to come while Vote of thanks was proposed by Mr.
133 / NYAYA DEEP

Tongpang L Jamir, Master Trainer NSLSA.

Valedictory Session: In the valedictory, Hon’ble Justice Mr.

L.S Jamir, Judge Gauhati High Court said that the orientation training
programme was a success hearing the comments and remarks of the
participants. He hoped that the traits on the professional ethics of the
advocates learned has been instilled in the minds of the participants
and will be followed by them. He also remark on the 7 new schemes
introduced by the National Legal Services Authority in the year 2015, that
it has great importance and hope that it will be implemented effectively in
all the districts of Nagaland under the initiatives of the panel lawyers. He
urged the participants to stand united, need to be hardworking and have a
clear concept on the objectives of the Legal Services Authorities. He stated
that Nagaland State Legal Services Authority under the leadership of the
Member Secretary has been doing a tremendous work and is expected to
continue with the good deeds in the near future. He also added that the
panel Lawyers are the link between the weaker sections of the society and
the court in delivering justice, he said that the panel lawyers are lesser to
none. He encouraged them to penetrate deep into the remotest area so
that the weaker sections are not neglected. After the Valedictory Session
Hon’ble Mr. Justice L.S Jamir presented the Certificates to the participants
of the two day Orientation Training programme.

SUCCESS STORY:

ASSISTANCE TO A DESTITUTE, RAPE VICTIM &
MENTALLY CHALLENGED LADY.
Nagaland|2016|NSLSA: On 3rd of May 2016, Smti Ase Konyak

a destitute and victim of rape was been brought from Dimapur. The
members of Kohima District Legal Services Authority along with the
Member Secretary, Nagaland State Legal Services Authority visited
the destitute lady admitted at State Mental Hospital, Kohima. As per
the findings, the victim is a mentally challenged women aged about 55
years. She was found wandering around in a shabby condition near City
Tower by two MSW students of North East Institute of Social Sciences &
Research (NEISSR), Dimapur on 23rd of February 2016. She was taken to
the Women Cell Dimapur and thereafter referred to Women Short Stay
home at Fellowship colony. Along with the police from women cell and
the staffs of Prodigal home took her to Dimapur Civil hospital for medical
134 / NYAYA DEEP

check- up where they found out that she was about 28 weeks pregnant
and therefore she was further referred to a private clinic. She said she was
forcefully assaulted and raped however the identity of the culprit cannot
be ascertained. A letter dated 31.03.20l6 was received by the District and
Session Judge, Dimapur from the Director of Prodigal home Dimapur
requesting for rape compensation, Psychiatric medical treatment and
rehabilitation of mentally challenged Ms. Ase Konyak. Accordingly on the
same day an order was passed appointing Panel Advocate of Dimapur
DLSA to make necessary enquiry and to furnish the report for forwarding
her case to the State government as per Section 357A Cr.PC.
As directed vide order dated 31.03.2016, the Panel Lawyer DDLSA
conducted enquiry and submitted report on 01.04.2016 confirming the
mental instability and the conditions of pregnancy at the advance stage
of Ms. Ase Konyak, requiring immediate medical attention and urgent
psychiatric treatment and care at State Mental Institute, Kohima. She
was forwarded to Kohima District Legal Services Authority for logistical
assistance in coordination with State Mental Institute, Kohima and Naga
Hospital Authority Kohima. In the course of conversation along with the
interpreter, it was found that a few years back, she moved to Dimapur and
that most of the time she used to stay around City Tower, Dimapur.
She mentioned that she have three elder sister and one elder brother
who came along with her. It was observed that she cannot understand
much of what others says but keeps repeating the same thing all over
again.
As per her medical report, her delivery date was due on 10th of May, as
such the doctors at Mental hospital authority recommending that she be
admitted at Naga Hospital for her delivery and that only after the delivery
her mental treatment will be initiated.
No family members nor any relatives came forward to take care of
the destitute lady Ms. Ase Konyak. It was resolved that Ms. Ase Konyak
will be under the care and assistance of Legal Services Authority until any
further arrangement was done. Hence, special care for Ms. Ase Konyak
was extended and administered by the Nagaland State Legal Services
Authority and Kohima District Legal Services Authority.

135 / NYAYA DEEP

ONE DAY WORKSHOP ON EFFECTIVE SERVICES-TOOLS
& TECHNIQUES
Kohima|19.04.2016|NSLSA :The Nagaland State legal Services
Authority (NSLSA) and Pathfinders, in collaboration with Initiatives of
Change (IofC), Panchani, Maharastra organized a day-long workshop on
16th of May 2016 at the Nagaland State Leal Services Authority Conference
all under the theme “Effective Services: Tools & Techniques”.
The workshop was attended by various stakeholders such as the
Lawyers, Women helpline, Students and faculties of Kohima Law College,
ofﬁcials from Kohima Municipal Council (KMC), Women Resource Centre
for Women, Child Welfare Board, Nagaland Informative Center and State
Intelligence Bureau. The Kohima District Legal Services Authority was
represented by the Chief judicial Magistrate & Secretary of KDLSA Mrs.
Mezivolu T Therieh along with Panel Lawyers.
The workshop started with a welcome note by Mrs. Nino Iralu,
Member secretary, Nagaland State Legal Services Authority (NSLSA)
where she thanked all the participants for availing their valuable time to
attend this workshop and appreciated the team of Initiative of Change
for their afford and motivational spirit in working to bring changes in
the world. Mr. Suresh Khatri, Fiji, IofC Volunteer for over 50 years in
his inaugural speech said that change may look impossible but history
has showed that mankind is progressing. He said that poverty level has
reduced from two billion to 762 million in the last 15 years. He also stated
that technology has helped in bringing change to great extent, and that
unaccounted money if employed could vanish poverty.
During the interactive session, lawyers and law students shared the
need to have an independent judiciary in the state adding that many laws
in center are not applicable in the state because of Article 371(A). They also
stressed on the need to have a proper laws enacted by the state legislature.
Resource persons for the programme were Ms. Stephenia Menezes.
Karnatakal Kuwait, Computer Science. Mr. Anup Pawar, Punel Singapore,
Engineer and MBA. I of C Volunteer, Mr. Gaurav Sah, Nainital, Commerce
graduate, I of C Volunteer. Ms. Penuo Hiekha, Kohima. I of C Volunteer and
Mr. U Wanyal Damko, Tibet, Commerce graduate, Artist, I of C Volunteer.
Various topics discussed during the workshop were “ Nagaland I Care‘,
better Public Service, Relationships, Team Building Exercise, Beyond
136 / NYAYA DEEP

Personnel Care, My Vision of Nagaland, The message for each topics were
conveyed through the form of songs and skits by the resource persons.
Different demonstrations were also presented to encourage people and to
make them think conscientiously. The participants in the workshop also
shared their concerns on how to uplift the society in contributing services
in the best possible way by suggesting independent judiciary system to
educate and reach out to the masses. The concluding remarks were given
by Mrs. Mezivolu T Therieh, Chief judicial Magistrate, Kohima and Ms.
Zhekhali, Advocate, Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench.

OBSERVING WORLD NO TOBACCO DAY BY LEGAL
SERVICES AUTHORITIES.
Nagaland|31.05.2016: District Legal Services Authorities observed
World No Tobacco Day with school children at the villages and subdivisions across the state. Legal tools and activities undertaken to
sensitize the students on the danger of tobacco and the prohibition thereof
were simplified into painting, extempore speeches, posters and quiz
competitions. Prizes were awarded to winners by District Legal Services
Authorities. Legal aspects on prohibition and prevention and control of
use of tobacco products, right to health and Healthy living, Danger and
Harmful effect of using drugs, child rights etc. were some of the topics,
highlighted by the DLSAs Chairman, secretary, panel lawyers and
doctors. The day was observed in a befitting way with the participation of
the DLSAs aided by empanelled lawyers, Para-Legal Volunteers, doctors
and school authorities.
Kohima DLSA: Kohima District Legal Services Authority observed
World No Tobacco Day with Don Bosco School, Cheiphobozou and
Government Middle School Nerhe, Model Village at Don Bosco School
Chiephobozou. Kekriengulie, Retainer Lawyer, KDLSA chaired the
programme. Father Matthew, Chairman, Don Bosco School Cheiphobozou
said the welcome address. Mezivolu T Therieh, NJS, Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Kohima and Secretary, KDLSA spoke on ‘Dangers of using
Tobacco.’ Speaking on ‘Right of Children’, Thejapfutuo Khezhie, Panel
Lawyer stressed on the POCSO Act. Nancy Lotha, Panel Lawyer spoke on
the topic ‘Right to Health and Healthy Living.’ Later, a quiz was conducted
by Apila Sangtem, Panel Lawyer, on the topics which were presented
during the session followed by distribution of pamphlets and sweets. A
total of 470 students and teachers attended the programme.
137 / NYAYA DEEP

Zunheboto DLSA: The Zunheboto District Legal Services
Authority (ZDLSA) organized an awareness programme on 31st May
2016 at Olympic Higher Secondary School, Zunheboto in collaboration
with the school management on the occasion of “Anti-Tobacco Day”. The
programme was chaired by Shri. Vinoto Yeptho, Headmaster of Olympic
Higher Secondary School and began with an invocation prayer by the
school faculty. A short speech on the significance of Anti-Tobacco Day was
delivered by Shri Atoka Achumi, Secretary of Zunheboto DLSA.
Resource Person namely Dr. Esther Chophy Ngullie, Dental Surgeon
at District Hospital Zunheboto spoke on the harmful effects of tobacco
use from the medical perspective. Resource Person namely Shri Tovi
Z. Yeptho, Panel Lawyer Zunheboto DLSA spoke on the legal aspects
pertaining to the prevention, prohibition and control of use of tobacco
products. He primarily dwelled on the restrictions provided by law on the
sale, consumption, promotion and use of tobacco and its products and the
punishments imposed by law for contraventions thereof.
Other highlights of the programme included a Speech competition and
Painting competition on the theme of “No Tobacco”. The winners of the
competition were awarded gift hampers with token prize money which
was sponsored by Zunheboto DLSA.

21st & 22nd of May, 2016: Training Programme of Para-Legal
Volunteers (PLVs).
At State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD), Nagaland: Kohima.
The inaugural programme of the two day Training begins at 9.00 am with
a welcome note tendered by presented by Smti. Nino Iralu, NJS, Member
Secretary, Nagaland State Legal Services Authority.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Nishitendu Chaudhury, Judge Gauhati High
Court and Executive Chairman, Nagaland SLSA inaugurated the session.
Delivering inaugural address, Justice Chaudhury said that “until laws are
made known to the people, it become meaningless...” Pointing out that
there were many legislation/laws that were beneficial to the people, Justice
Chaudhury, however, said that many did not know about such laws. He,
therefore, urged the PLVs to work in “mission mode” by connecting laws
and the people. He also urged PLVs to be properly equipped and work for
the people, particularly in rural areas.
138 / NYAYA DEEP

Giving introductory speech, Master Trainer PLVs NSLSA, Alemwapang
Ao, said that the fundamental right conferred under Article 14, which
provides equality and equal protection of laws, become meaningless if
the citizens faced barriers to access to justice. The barriers to access justice
were multifarious - illiteracy, social backwardness, physical, geographical,
social and psychological distancing and even mental incapacity, he added.
He mention that one of the objectives of the “Policy For Access to Justice
For All” was formulated by the National Legal Service Authority for
developmental of PLVs in imparting legal awareness to various target
groups of PLV who in turn bring legal awareness to all sections of people.
While Vote of thanks was pronounced by Ms. Akumla Longchari,
Master Trainer for Panel Lawyer, Nagaland SLSA followed by Ice Breaking.

Ms. N.K. Kenny, a PLV, social activist/worker and the awardee
of the Zonal & National Best Para-Legal Volunteers (2015) shared some
her experience on the role of Para-Legal Volunteers in Legal Clinic/
Police Station/NGOs/ DLSA(s)/Jail etc. A slide show was shown on her
works in the past which deals with various NGOs, Police, Government
Departments, victims and destitute people in different places and parts of
the country.
On the second day of the training, at the valedictory session, Mrs. Y.
Longkumer, NJS Registrar, Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench urged the
PLVs to inculcate whatever has been learnt and dispense various activities
for the weaker sections of the society in their respective districts. She
also stated to be an effective PLV, the only quality one need to possess is
empathy, and a heart to serve people.
Resource Persons,Trainers and Master Trainers (ToT) for the two days
training programme were Ms. Limasenla Longkumer, Project Coordinator,
Mrs. Esther Aye, Legal Aid Counsel, Ms.Cheliam Khiamniungan, Master
Trainer, Mr.Asungbe Nhau, Legal Aid Counsel, Ms. N.K Kenny, Zonal &
National Best PLV (2015), Mr. Kezhokhoto Savi, Advocate & President
NVCO, Mr. A.Zho, Advocate, gauhati High Court, Mr. Alemwapang Ao,
Master Trainer, Ms.Neiteo Koza, Panel Lawyer, Ms. Akumla Longchari,
Master Trainer, Mr.Joshua Sheqi, Retainer Lawyer who spoke on different
relevant topics while Mrs. Mezivolu T Therieh, Chief Judicial Magistrate
& Secretary, Kohima DLSA , Mr. V.Ashu Theyo Retainer Lawyer, Mr.
Visevonuo, Principal Kohima Law College, Ms. Zhekheli Zhimomi,
139 / NYAYA DEEP

Retainer Lawyer Gauhati High Court Legal Services Committee, Kohima
spoke on Role of Legal Services Authority, Expectation on PLV, PLV Code
of Conduct, The Vision of PLVs respectively.
A total of 45 PLVs participated from all the 11 Districts of Nagaland in
the training Programme.

Dimapur|15.05.2016: The Nagaland State Legal Services Authority

(NSLSA) in association with the Dimapur District Legal Services Authority
(DDLSA) opened a Legal Care and Support Centre at the Additional
Deputy Commissioner’s Office, Medziphema, on May 15.
The Legal Care and Support Centre was inaugurated by the Hon’ble
Justice Nishitendu Chaudhury of the Gauhati High Court. Justice
Chaudhury who is also the Executive Chairman of the NSLSA, delivered
the inaugural address where he affirmed that the uplift of the weaker
sections was an essential prerequisite for the overall progress of society.
He also pointed out that with the introduction of free legal aid schemes,
legal services have become more accessible to the people.
Such Support Centres are being set up at various places in all Districts
to serve as a bridge between the public and legal services institutions.
Rokuonicha Kuotsu, Former Minister of Waste Land & CAWD also
addressed the gathering. Neiko Kanuo, Chairman, Dimapur DLSA, and
District & Session Judge, Dimapur, explained the concept and purpose of
the Support Centres. The programme was well attended by community
leaders and members of Medziphema Town Municipal council.

OBSERVING WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY ON 5TH OF
JUNE 2016.
DLSAs reach out to varied/ targeted groups on Environmental
Awareness and Protection across the State of Nagaland.
Nagaland|05th June, 2016|NSLSA : District Legal Services

Authorities observed World Environment Day across the State, in
collaboration and convergence with NGOs, Nodal Departments, District
Administrations, Schools and Social Organizations. The goal was to reach
to the varied and targeted group of people, to promote Legal awareness
on the importance of Environmental issues and the related legal aspects

140 / NYAYA DEEP

through Legal Awareness Programme, Posters/Hoardings, social work
and clean-up at the Social Work Site, Painting/essay Competitions among
the School students. Special focuses were on identifying the problems
related to the environment and various provisions of law to take corrective
action and measures.
The Legal Awareness Programme on Environmental awareness has
received wide range of support from the public, NGOs, students and
Governments Departments in all the Districts. Various activities such as
surroundings clean-up, plantation of trees saplings, were also carried out
to encourage people for the protection of environment.
Drawing competitions and quiz competitions were conducted to
sensitize the school students on protection & safeguarding the environment
under the provisions of Law. Winners were conferred awards & cash
prizes.
Dimapur DLSA: In Dimapur District , the Dimapur DLSA in
collaboration with Life NGO and Dimapur Govemment College observed
World Environment Day by organizing an awareness program and mass
social work and clean-up with the students of Dimapur Government College.
Miss M. Glory Sema, Panel Advocate DDLSA, spoke on environmental
issues and highlighted various provisions of related laws. Other resource
persons included Miss Imyarila Changkire, Researcher, who dealt with
the topic of environment and waste and also cited various judgments
dealing with environmental issues. Miss Yupangnenla Longkumer,
journalist, who also represented Life NGO enlightened the participants
on various aspects of waste management and disposal practices. The well
attended program was followed by mass social work and plantation of
tree saplings which were donated by the Forest Department. The program
was chaired by Smti. Ningshijungla Longchar, Asst. Professor/Eco Club
Convenor, Dimapur Government College while the keynote address was
delivered by Shri. Neiko Kanuo, Chairman DDLSA/District & Sessions
Judge Dimapur. The vote of thanks was extended by Shri. Louis Humtsoe,
Vice Principal, Dimapur Government College.
Zunheboto DLSA: The Zunheboto District Legal Services Authority
(ZDLSA) organized an awareness programme on the Environment
Protection Act 1986 to mark the occasion of World Environment Day at
the premises of Observation Home, Zunheboto.
141 / NYAYA DEEP

Miss Juvily Kitho, Superintendent of Observation Home Zunheboto
gave a short speech on the significance of World Environment Day. She
dwelled on global warming affecting the temperature of the earth and the
need to plant more trees to counter its adverse effects on the environment.
The resource person for the programme Shri Tovi Z. Yeptho, Panel Lawyer
of Zunheboto DLSA gave an overview of the Environment Protection Act
1986. He spoke of the urgent need of citizens to realize the damages being
caused by everyday pollution of the environment. He dwelled on the legal
provisions for penalties and fines laid down in the Act for offences relating
to damage to the environment. The programme was chaired by Para Legal
Volunteer Miss Rebecca Chophy. The programme concluded with
planting of pine saplings around the premises of the Observation Home
to mark the occasion.
Peren DLSA: Peren District Legal Services Authority (PDLSA) in
collaboration with Forest Department, NGOs and Student Organisation,
observed World Environment at the Auto stand, Jalukie town. The
programme was led by the resource persons, Shri. Rampaukai Mpom,
ACF, Jalukie Division, Forest Department, Nagaland and Smti. Somet
C.Chang, Secretary, PDLSA & Civil Judge (Jr), Peren, Nagaland. This
was followed by a Plantation drive where all the participants planted tree
saplings.
Other DLSAs: Phek District Legal Services Authority and Tuensang
District Legal Services Authority observed the World environment
day in collaboration with schools, NGOs, Social Organizations, District
Administrations, Govt. Departments and Assam Rifles (Tuensang
Garrison) on the topic of Environmental Laws and Legal aspects. Painting
and quiz competitions were conducted at school level to promote
awareness on protection and safeguarding the environment.

WORLD DAY AGAINST CHILD LABOUR
Nagaland|12th June, 2016|NSLSA : District Legal Services Authorities
across Nagaland State, observed World Day Against Child Labour on
12th of June 2016, to promote Legal awareness, highlighting the various
provisions and amendments in Child labour Laws. Child rights and
protection were sensitized to the participants and the National Legal
Services Authority Schemes of “Child friendly Legal Services to Children
142 / NYAYA DEEP

and their protection” was also presented to emphasis the need to create
awareness and protect the victim of Child Labour.
The programmes were organized focusing on targeted groups and
vulnerable sections of the society against the Child Labour to discourage
the Child Labour practice. Representatives from various NGOs, Social
Organizations, Schools/colleges, Government departments and stake
holders participated in the programme.
Peren DLSA: The Peren District Legal Services Authority observed the
World Day against Child Labour with the school students at Peren town.
Somet Chang, Civil judge (Jr.) & Secretary, Peren DLSA along with Panel
lawyers and PLVs provide Legal Literacy on the topic NALSA 2015
Scheme “Child friendly Legal Services to Children and their protection”.
Dimapur DLSA: In Dimapur, World Day against Child Labour was
observed at Government Higher Secondary School, Medziphema
Town on the theme “End Child Labour in supply chain, its everyone’s
business!!!” with resource persons Glory Sema, Panel Lawyer, Dimapur
DLSA, Vimeno K.Nakhro, Panel Lawyer, Dimapur DLSA and Kekhrieleii Mezhii, Panel Lawyer, Dimapur DLSA. The programme ended with a
signature campaign against child labour.
Kohima DLSA: In Kohima, the Anti Child Labour day was observed
at Baptist High Higher Secondary, kohima organized by the Kohima
District Legal Services Authority. (Page News Service) Kohima District
Legal Services Authority conducted a legal awareness programme with
the theme ‘-‘Legal Literacy Against Child Labour” in compliance with
the Common Action Plan laid down by the Nagaland State Legal Services
Authority on the 14th day of June, 2016 in collaboration with Baptist High
Higher Secondary School, Kohima at the school campus with Retainer &
Panel Lawyers, Mr V. Ashu Theyo, Ms. Wapanginla Kichu and Ms, Neiteo
Koza as Resource Persons. Speaking on “Child Labour (Prohibition &
Regulation) Act, 1986, Wapanginla Kichu stressed on the deﬁnition of
Child Labour.
While enlightening the students on the NALSA (Child friendly Legal
Services to Children and their Protection Schemes) S2015, Resource
Person Neiteo Koza said that the scheme made mandatory to open up all
opportunities for every child to unfold its personality, potentials and rise
143 / NYAYA DEEP

to its fullest stature morally, physically, spiritually and mentally making
sure that children are given equal rights and their interest is protected at
all cost
Resource Person,V. Ashu Theyo spoke on the topic Legal Rights and
Duties. He encouraged the students to speak up their rights but at the
same time perform their duties as law abiding citizens.
Mr. Keviseto, Principal Baptist High Higher Secondary School while
delivering a Welcome Address stated that the event was the ﬁrst ever of
its kind as the school never witness or organised programmes pertaining
to legal topic and these topics are also not covered in the school textbooks
though it is a vast and important subject. He expressed his appreciation to
KDLSA for coming to make the students be aware of their rights.
The programme was chaired by Thejapfutuo Khezhie, Panel Lawyer Who
in his opening remark mentioned about the functionings of the Legal
Services Authority While quiz Was conducted by Ms Akumla Longchari,
Panel Lawyer where the children anticipated with much enthusiasm. The
number of beneﬁciaries present Were, 410 in all.

INTERNATIONAL DAY AGAINST DRUG ABUSES AND
ILLICIT TRAFFICKING
Nagaland|26th June, 2016|NSLSA: District Legal Services Authorities
(DLSA) organised and conducted seminars and sensitization programmes
across the State, commemorating the International Day of Anti-Drugs and
Illicit Trafficking. Various programmes were held in collaboration with
church bodies, schools, NGOs targeting venerable sections of the society.
Considering the phenomenal rise in drug trafficking and drug abuse
amongst the youth, children and adolescence has serious complications,
adversely affecting national health and economy, the Legal services
Authorities felt that a contribution to the society can be extended by
playing a role in the reduction of supply and demand, de-addiction and
rehabilitation against drug abuse and addict.
In spite of comprehensive legislations such as ‘The Drugs and Cosmetic
Act 1940’ and ‘The NDPS Act 1983’ drug abuse is growing manifold.
Zunheboto: The day was observed by Zunheboto District Legal
144 / NYAYA DEEP

Services Authority led by Khesheli Chishi, District & Session Judge and
Chairman, Zunheboto DLSA, along with Atoka Achumi, Civil Judge (Jr.)
& Secretary, ZDLSA and Para Legal Volunteer. The team visited the deaddiction centre for drug addicts and alcoholics run by KRIPA Foundation
on the outskirts of Zunheboto town and conducted a seminar with the
inmates and management of KRIBA Foundation, Zunheboto presenting
the benefits and provisions on the central Schemes by National Legal
Services Authority, a Scheme called ‘Legal services to the victims of drug
abuse and eradication of drug menace scheme – 2015’.
Tuensang: In Tuensang, the district Legal services Authority in
association with DEF and Police Baptist Church, Tuensang commemorated
International Day of Anti-Drugs and Illicit Trafficking chaired by
Antimangyang, Panel Lawyer, Tuensang DLSA. The programme was
conducted with resource person as Cheliam, Panel Lawyer, DLSA
Tuensang introducing the topic on NALSA Schemes-2015, Legal services
to the victims of drug abuse and eradication of drug menace. Legal
Provisions on Narcotic Drugs and illicit trafficking was highlighted by
Yimtsusangla, Panel Lawyer, DLSA Tuensang. A short play was also
presented by Youth Department of Police Baptist Church, Tuensang. The
programme started with invocation by Wangshi, ASI, Youth Advisor, with
keynotes address by Uniel Kichu, IPS, SDPO Tuensang and winded up
with the benediction by Khumchong Stm, Associated Pastor, Youth, Police
Baptist Church, Tuensang.
Mokokchung: Mokokchung District Legal services Authority along
with the Para-Legal Volunteers Talimoa and along visited Care Counseling
Center with a message that Drug abuse, usage, disorders are preventable
and treatable. Booklets and Leaflets on the agenda of Anti-Drugs and
Illicit Trafficking were also distributed.
Longleng: The Longleng District Legal services Authority organized a
sensitization programme to observe the day. The programme chaired by
Imlichuba Phom, Para Legal Volunteer was led by the resource persons,
Chuje, Programme Manager, Yingli Mission Society, Longleng and Mane
Phom, Panel Lawyer Longleng DLSA as resource Person.
Dimapur: In Dimapur, District & Session Judge and Chairman,
Dimapur District Legal services Authority, Dimapur, initiated the
observance of the day by creating awareness about the impact of drug
145 / NYAYA DEEP

abuse and highlighted the legal provision and NALSA scheme 2015 to curb
and eradicate the illicit drug abuse and drug traffic, targeted at various
churches in Dimapur. Pamphlets on Legal Provisions of Drugs Act were
distributed to all the Church congregations. The awareness programme
was also extended to Hindi Baptist church Burma camp, Dimapur.
Kohima: In Kohima the Drugs and Illicit Trafficking day was observed
at Sunday School Children, Jakhama Christian Revival Church, organised
by Kohima District Legal services Authority. The programme stated with a
brief introduction of the importance of the Day by Metseilenuo, Para Legal
Volunteer of KDLSA. Keduvi Zhotso, Panel Lawyer, KDLSA, highlighted
on the NALSAS scheme ‘Legal services to the victims of drug abuse and
eradication of drug menace scheme – 2015’. Dr. Ayo Thao spoke on health
issues related to Drug abuse and use. Legal aspects on child Rights was
presented by Zhkuseto Natso, Panel Lawyer, KDLSA. The programme
ended with a closing remark from V. Ashu Theyo, Panel Lawyer, KDLSA.
News on National Lok Adalat
09th April, 2016: National Lok Adalat on Labour, Family Matters, Municipal
Matters & others. Nagaland State Legal Services Authority conducted
National Lok Adalat throughout the State of Nagaland along with the
rest of the country on 9th April,2016. The Lok Adalat was conducted on
Labour, Family Matters, Municipal Matters, Money Suit, petty criminal
matters by the respective District Legal Services Authority.
FOR DISPOSAL IN NATIONAL LOK ADALAT HELD ON 09.04.2016
(for the cases relating to Labour, Family matters & Others)
Total Taken up Cases

Total Disposal

293

278

Total Settlement Amount
(Rs.)
62,680.00

Pre- Litigation Cases

Pending Cases

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

270

270

61,080.00

23

8

1,600.00

Presiding Judges were assisted by Panel Lawyers, Para-Legal
Volunteers, Municipal members for Municipal Matters, Traffic Police
personnel for traffic cases.
A total of 210 cases were taken up and total of 195 Cases were
146 / NYAYA DEEP

disposed, with a settlement amount of Rs. 49,880/- (forty nine thousand
eight hundred eighty) only.

14th of May, 2016: National Lok Adalat on MACT, Insurance
Claims & Others.
The Dimapur District Legal Services Authority (DDLSA) conducted
Lok Adalat on MACT, insurance claims, and banks cases on Saturday.
During the event, cases worth more than Rs. 1 crore were settled, the
organizers informed in a press release that was issued through the media
on Saturday.
The Lok Adalat was conducted in the premises of the Dimapur district
court. During the event, 65 pending MAC cases were settled through the
Lok Adalat. The total amount from the settled cases was Rs. 1, 52, 55,000.
“The settlement of large number of cases has helped in reducing the
pendency, besides benefitting the client. The Lok Adalat has created an
opportunity for the common man to get speedy and inexpensive justice,
besides helping the court tackle pending cases,”
FOR DISPOSAL IN NATIONAL LOK ADALAT HELD ON 14.05.2016
(for the cases relating to MACT & Insurance Claims)
Total Taken up Cases

Total Disposal

65

65

Total Settlement Amount
(Rs.)
1,52,55,000

Pre- Litigation Cases

Pending Cases

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

Nil

Nil

Nil

65

65

1,52,55,000

The DDLSA has expressed appreciation to insurance companies,
conciliators, lawyers and the public in general for participating in the
Lok Adalat. The public are encouraged to avail the opportunity to bring
forward any such matters before the Lok Adalat for settlement.

11th June, 2016: National Lok Adalat on MACT, Insurance
Claims & Others:
National Lok Adalat conducted today across the State relieved the
burden of Case pendency on the Judiciary by taking up a total of 264
147 / NYAYA DEEP

cases among which 220 cases were disposed. The total settlement amount
involved in the disposed cases amounts to Rs. 29, 33,491/- (Rupees twenty
nine Lakh thirty three thousand four hundred ninety one) only. The Lok
Adalat was conducted on Motor Accident Claims & Tribunal, Insurance
claims, Municipal matters, Revenue matters, Trade License, Traffic Matter
& others by the respective District Legal Services Authority.
The Lok Adalat sittings and proceedings was done with the District &
Sessions Judge, Chief Judicial and Civil Judges as Presiding Officers. The
Lok Adalat proceedings, assisted by the Panel Lawyers, Retainer Lawyers,
Legal Aid Counsels, Social workers, Police personnel, and Para-Legal
Volunteers serve as conciliators. In traffic cases, Traffic Police personnel
assisted the proceedings and Bank Managers & Bank officials assisted in
Bank & insurance Matters.
FOR DISPOSAL IN NATIONAL LOK ADALAT HELD ON 11.06.2016
(for the cases relating to MACT, Insurance Claim & Others )
Total Taken up
Cases

Total Disposal

264

220

Total Settlement Amount
(Rs.)
29,33,491.00

Pre- Litigation Cases

Pending Cases

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

Taken up

Disposal

Settlement
Amt. (Rs.)

242

218

19,22,349.00

22

2

10,11,142.00

Mobile court on Traffic was held at Pfutsero, Phek Town, Peren &
Mokokchung along with the sensitizing and promoting awareness on
Motor Vehicle Act, on various provisions of Law that vehicle owners need
to comply. This also ensured and encouraged the vehicle owners to carry
relevant and proper documents such as Registration Certificate, Insurance
& pollution Certificate.
The Judges as Presiding Officers and Lawyers sitting on the Town
square, road Junctions on proceedings of the Mobile Lok Adalat, created
the opportunity for the people to come forward, seeking legal advice and
availing sensitization on legal issues and topics. The Govt. Department
& Authorities, NGOs and Public were impressed with such coordinated
efforts of the District Legal Services Authorities and Traffic Police
personnel.
148 / NYAYA DEEP

ODISHA

Lok Adalats
At National level held on 09.04.2016
As per the instruction of National Legal Services Authority, Monthly
National Lok Adalat for the cases relating to Labour and Family matters
was organized throughout the State on 09.04.2016. Apart from the High
Court Legal Services Committee, 30 District Legal Services Authorities,
and 74 Taluk Legal Services Committees participated in the said National
Lok Adalat. 360 Pre-litigation Cases (Labour disputes) were taken up, out
of which, 99 Labour disputes were settled. Similarly, 6916 pending Cases
(Labour disputes-2971 and Family matters-3945) were taken up in the
said National Lok Adalat, out of which 947 cases (Labour disputes-388
and Family matters-559) were settled. Further, 49 cases were disposed of,
out of 424 cases, by the High Court Legal Services Committee, Cuttack
which includes Labour Disputes-03, Family matters-06 and Motor
Accident Claims Appeals-40. A sum of Rs.94, 87,000/- was awarded as
Compensation amount in the above M.A.C. Appeals.

National Level held on 14.05.2016
Similarly, Monthly National Lok Adalat for the cases relating to
MACT and Insurance Claims was also organized throughout the State
on 14.5.2016. Apart from the High Court Legal Services Committee, 30
District Legal Services Authorities, and some of the Taluk Legal Services
Committees participated in the said National Lok Adalat. 8037 MAC cases
were taken up, out of which 1198 MAC cases were settled/disposed of
and a sum of Rs.37,65,63,702/- was awarded as Compensation amount in
the above MAC cases. Besides, the High Court Legal Services Committee
disposed 87 cases (77-MAC Appeals, 09-OJC/W.P. (c) & 01-Land
Acquisition). A sum of Rs.1, 94, 35,000/- was awarded as Compensation in
the above MAC Appeals.

At District & Taluk Levels:
During the above period, the field units i.e. 30 District Legal Services
Authorities and 74 Taluk Legal Services Committees organized 187 Lok
Adalats in the State of Odisha. In the above Lok Adalats, total 74,612 no.
of cases comprising 721-Civil, 12,649-Compoundable Criminal Cases,
149 / NYAYA DEEP

61175-Revenue, 04-Matrimonial, 26-Bank, 11-Labour, 17-Juveniles & 09MACT cases were disposed of. A sum of Rs.39, 31,276/- towards criminal
fine and Rs. 2, 01, 62,998/- as revenue were collected in the said Lok
Adalats. Further, a sum of Rs.12,45,000./- was awarded as compensation
in the above Motor Accident Claim Cases.

Permanent Lok Adalats (for Public Utility Services)
During the above quarter, 821 new cases relating to Public Utility
Services were registered in the Thirteen Permanent Lok Adalats, out of
which, 396 no. of cases were settled.

Generating awareness and spreading Legal Literacy:
During the quarter, 281 Legal Literacy/Awareness Programmes were
organized by the field units on different topics including the rights of
women and on Protection of Women from Domestic Violence (PWDV)
Act, Pre-natal Sex Selection and “Pre-Natal Diagnostic Technique (PNDT)
Act” Awareness Camps relating to different welfare and social security
schemes especially those meant for the Senior Citizens were held. Legal
literacy classes in jails on “Plea Bargaining” fundamental duties, and other
topics were held.
Further, all the DLSAs and TLSCs observed International Labour Day
on 1st May, 2016, World Environment Day on 5th June, 2016 and World
Day against Child Labour on 12th June, 2016 by organizing awareness
programmes on the occasions. Total 32,619 persons were benefitted by
attending the said Literacy Camps.

Legal Aid Beneficiaries
Free Legal Aid and assistance was provided to 746 persons comprising
SC- 97, ST- 56, Women-256, Children-06, In-custody-71, General and other
weaker sections of the Society - 260.

Activities of ADR/Mediation Centres:
During the quarter, 701 new cases were referred by different Courts
to the Mediation Centres, and 411 cases ( including previously pending
cases) were disposed of, out of which, 74 cases were disposed of on
successful mediation.
150 / NYAYA DEEP

Victim Compensation Scheme:
During the quarter, 266 applications under Odisha Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2012 were received by the District Legal Services
Authorities, out of which, 68 applications were decided and a sum of
Rs.35, 99,928/- towards compensation was paid to the victims under the
above Scheme.

PUNJAB

Statistical Information with regard to the achievements made
by the Punjab Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh for the
Quarter April, 2016 to June, 2016.
Legal Aid Cases
Number of application received during the quarter
April, 2016 to June, 2016.

2320

Number of Applications disposed of.

1625

Break-up of Beneficiaries:
SC

714

ST

0

Others

435

Women

1505

Children

17

Custody

1667

General

972

Physically Handicapped

6

Total

5316

Legal Literacy Camps/Seminars;
Number of Seminars/Legal Literacy Camps held during the
2506
Quarter April, 2016 to June, 2016.
Number of People who attended the Seminar

1,88,222

151 / NYAYA DEEP

Monthly Lok Adalats
Number of Monthly Lok Adalats held during the Quarter
April, 2016 to June, 2016.
Number of Cases entertained

29850

Number of Cases disposed off

22622

Permanent Lok Adalats for Public Utility Services.
Number of Permanent Lok Adalats (Public Utility Services) set
22
up in the State of Punjab.
Total Number of Cases disposed off in these Lok Adalats during
2478
the Period April, 2016 to June, 2016.

Legal Aid Clinics
As per regulation “National Legal Services Authority (Legal Services
Clinics), Regulations, 2011 Legal Services Clinics are being established to
provide free and Competent Legal Services to weaker sections of society
and to ensure that opportunities for securing Justice are not denied to any
citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities. Till June, 2016, PULSA
has established 338 Legal Aid Clinics in the Rural and Cluster area and
Law Colleges in the State of Punjab.

Legal aid Clubs
As per the directions of NALSA, Legal Literacy Clubs are being
established in Schools and Colleges to impart legal knowledge to students
and to make them aware of their rights and duties. The enlightened
students would be the light house of Legal Literacy. Till June, 2016 PULSA
has established 2258 Legal Literacy Clubs in Schools and Colleges in the
State of Punjab.

Para Legal Volunteer Scheme
As per Para Legal Volunteer Scheme of National Legal Services
Authority, till June, 2016, Punjab Legal Services Authority has imparted
training to 1424 PLVs in the State of Punjab. These PLVs include Advocates,
Teachers and Lecturers of Govt. and Private Schools and Colleges of all
levels, Anganwadi Workers, Private or Government doctors and other
government employees, field level officers of different departments and
152 / NYAYA DEEP

agencies of the State and Union Governments, Students of graduation
and Post-graduation in Law, Education, Social Services and Humanities,
members of NGOs and Clubs, Members of Neighbourhood Groups,
Educated prisoners serving long term sentences in Central Prison and
District Prison, Social Workers and Volunteers, Volunteers of Panchayat
Raj and Municipal institutions, Members of Co-operative Societies,
Members of Trade Unions, etc.

National Lok Adalat
National Lok Adalat were held on 09-04-2016 and 11-06-2016
throughout state of Punjab.

Holding of event against drugs.
As per the directions of National Legal Services Authority, New Delhi
and to provide a launching pad for each of the schemes in the district
an event against drugs was organised in the entire state of punjab on
27.05.2016 under the supereme guidance and supervision of Hon’ble Mr.
Justice S.S. Saron, Judge Punjab and Haryana High Court-Cum Executive
Chairman, Punjab Legal Services Authority.

Mediation Programmes
In the month of May, 2016 an awareness programme was organized
in District Legal Services Authority, Faridkot. This programme was
attended by Law students, lawyers and general public. This programme
was presided over by Secretary, District Legal Services Authority and
well supported by three trained MCPC trainers namely Sh. Gopal
Arora, Additional District & Sessions Judge, Sh. Gurnam Singh Dhillon,
Additional District & Sessions Judge, Smt. Seema Sharma, Adv. Trainer.

SIKKIM

AWARENESS PROGRAMMES
126 nos. of Legal Awareness Programmes were held under the Micro

Legal Literacy Scheme, Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme including programmes on Earth Day (22nd April),
Labour Day/week (1st May), World Environment Day (5th June), World
Day Against Child Labour (12th June) in all the districts by the Judicial
Officers in their capacity as Chairpersons of DLSAs/TLSCs along with

153 / NYAYA DEEP

resource persons comprising of Panel Advocates.
Various subjects on legal rights and benefits to the marginalized and
weaker section of the society, including the women and children, rights
of persons arrested provided by the various provisions contained in the
Constitution of India, Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 Anti Ragging, Drug abuse, Plea Bargaining and facilities
provided under the State/Central Welfare Scheme of the government were
deliberated as well as the seven new scheme of NALSA.

MEETING WITH THE FACULTY MEMBERS OF SIKKIM
UNIVERSITY,
ICFAI
UNIVERSITY
AND
SIKKIM
GOVERNMENT LAW COLLEGE OF EAST DISTRICT
Under the NALSA (Legal Services Clinics in University, Law
College and Other Institutions) Scheme-2013, a meeting with the faculty
members of Sikkim University, ICFAI University and Sikkim Government
Law College of East District was held by Sikkim State Legal Services
Authority on 21.04.2016 and 06.06.2016, chaired by the Hon’ble Executive
Chairperson at the Conference Hall of the Sikkim SLSA.
One of the resolutions taken was to depute students as PLVs in
these Legal Aid Clinics for which it was proposed to train 50 interested
students (10 students from each semester) from the Universities/Sikkim
Government Law College as student Para-Legal Volunteers for which a
Training Programme under the Scheme for PLVs (Revised) & Module
for Orientation-Induction-Refreshers Course for PLV training prescribed
by NALSA for the Student PLV’s is scheduled to be held on 20th & 21st

August, 2016.

These Legal Aid Clinics shall have two student PLV’s available during
the working hours of the Clinic. A sum of Rs.500/- per individual student
PLV shall be paid by the Sikkim SLSA as honorarium. For monitoring the
attendance of the Student PLV’s manning the Legal Aid Clinic, a roster will
be maintained and rotation chart chalked out by the teacher-in-charge.

SENSITIZATION
PROGRAMME
OF
PARA-LEGAL
VOLUNTEERS ON THE NEW SCHEMES OF NALSA
Training of Para-Legal Volunteers on the seven new schemes launched
by NALSA on 7th November, 2015 was held in the Training Hall, Office
154 / NYAYA DEEP

of Sikkim SLSA on 23.04.2016. The inaugural function was chaired by
Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge, High Court of Sikkim
and Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA. Shri K.W. Bhutia, District &
Sessions Judge, East Sikkim at Gangtok and Member Secretary, Sikkim
SLSA and Ld. Senior Advocates Mr. Bhasker Raj Pradhan and Mr. N. Rai
were the Resource Persons for the programme. 25 Nos. of PLVs from the
East, North, South and West Districts were trained.

AWARENESS PROGRAMME CONDUCTED BY DLSA/TLSC
UNDER NEW SCHEMES
NALSA (Legal services to the mentally and Mentally Disabled)
Scheme, 2015.
An awareness programme on the above scheme was conducted by
Secretary, DLSA. West/Ex-Officio Chairpeson, TLSC, /West at Bongton
Secondary School West Sikkim on 24.05.2016. Dr. Kunzang Wangmu
Bhutia, Psychiatrist of District Hospital, Gyalsing. Shri Pujan Kharka, Ms.
Aita Hangma Subba, Panel Advocates and Mr. Sonam Palzor Bhutia, PLV,
were the Resource Persons.

NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and
Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015.
An awareness programme on the above scheme was conducted by
Secretary, DLSA. West/Ex-Officio Chairperson, TLSC, /West at Bongton
Secondary School West Sikkim on 24.05.2016. Dr. Kunzang Wangmu
Bhutia, Psychiatrist of District Hospital, Gyalsing. Shri Pujan Kharka, Ms.
Aita Hangma Subba, Panel and Mr. Sonam Palzor Bhutia, PLV, were the
Resource Persons.

NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual
Exploitation) Scheme, 2015.
An awareness programme on the above scheme was conducted by the
Chairman, DLSA, South at Namchi in the ADR Centre, Namchi on
24.06.2016 Panel Advocate Ms. Prasuna Sharma was the Resource Person.

NALSA (Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganized
Sector) Scheme, 2015.
An awareness programme on the above scheme was conducted by the
155 / NYAYA DEEP

Chairman, DLSA, North in the ADR Centre, Pentok on 28.06.2016 wherein
08 PLVs also attended the said programme. Panel Advocate Mr Sonam
Gyamtso Bhutia was the resource person.

INAUGURATION OF ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE REDRESSAL
CENTRE, EAST SIKKIM AT GANGTOK.
The newly constructed building of Alternative Dispute Redressal
Centre, East Sikkim at Gangtok at District Court Complex, Sichey, East
Sikkim was inaugurated on 25th June, 2016 by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sunil
Kumar Sinha, former Chief Justice, High Court of Sikkim in the presence
of Hon’ble Mr. Justice Satish Kumar Agnihotri, Acting Chief Justice, High
Court of Sikkim and Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge,
High Court of Sikkim SLSA and Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA. The
ADR Centre houses rooms for Lok Adalat, Mediation, Front Office, Room
for Mediators, Litigants and Chamber of Judge, Lok Adalat.

OTHER ACTIVITIES:
Lok Adalats:During the quarter April to June, 2016 the following Lok Adalats at various
forums were held:-

HIGH COURT LOK ADALAT
No. of Lok
Adalat
held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of cases
pending

02

03

NIL

03

NIL

NIL

03

DISTRICT LOK ADALAT (EAST) AT GANGTOK
No. of Lok
Adalat
held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

32

32

173

205

91

18

96

156 / NYAYA DEEP

DISTRICT LOK ADALAT (WEST) AT GYALSHING
No. of
Lok
Adalat
held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

10

25

02

27

21

05

01

DISTRICT LOK ADALAT (NORTH) AT MANGAN
No. of Lok Previous
Adalat
Pending
held
NIL

NIL

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

NIL

NIL

NIL

NIL

NIL

DISTRICT LOK ADALAT (SOUTH) AT NAMCHI
No. of Lok
Adalat
held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

07

04

18

22

11

NIL

11

TALUK LOK ADALAT (SOUTH) AT RAVANGLA
No. of Lok
Adalat held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

17

05

22

27

19

06

02

TALUK LOK ADALAT (WEST) AT GYALSHING
No. of Lok
Adalat held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

11

NIL

10

10

09

NIL

01

157 / NYAYA DEEP

TALUK LOK ADALAT (WEST) AT SORENG
No. of Lok
Adalat held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

05

NIL

20

20

19

NIL

01

TALUK LOK ADALAT (NORTH) AT MANGAN
No. of Lok
Adalat held

Previous
Pending

No. of
cases
received

Total

No. of
cases
settled

No. of
cases
returned

No. of
cases
pending

04

NIL

12

12

04

02

06

LEGAL AID UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE LEGAL SERVICES
AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987
Legal aid was provided to 293 beneficiaries by the Sikkim State Legal
Services Authority during the months April to June, 2016 under section 12
of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
MONTHS

S.C.

S.T.

WOMEN

CHILD

UNDER
TRIAL/
DETAINED
BY
CUSTODY

GENERAL

OTHERS

TOTAL

April to
June, 2016

05

17

91

13

148

19

NIL

293

CASES BEFORE THE MEDIATION CENTRES, EAST
DISTRICT AT GANGTOK AND SOUTH DISTRICT AT
NAMCHI AND WEST DISTRICT AT GYALSHING.

CENTRE

NO. OF
MEDIATIONS
HELD

NO. OF
CASES
TAKEN UP

NO. OF
CASES
SETTLED

NO. OF
CASES
RETURNED

NO. OF
CASES
PENDING

158 / NYAYA DEEP

Mediation
Centre (East)
at District
Court Complex
Sichey Gangtok
Mediation
Centre
(South) at
District Court
Complex,
Namchi, South
Sikkim
Mediation
Centre (West)
at Civil Court
Complex,
Gyalshing,
West Sikkim

32

23

01

09

13

43

23

07

10

06

03

01

NIL

NIL

01

TAMIL NADU
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Satish K.Agnihotri, Judge, High Court Madras and
Executive Chairman of TNSLSA had inaugurated the ADR Building at
Sivagangai in Tamil Nadu on 8.5.2016 and released books on “Important
events on 2015” and “Basics in Law for students” and received by Hon’ble
Mr. Justice P.R.Shivakumar, Judge High Court Madras.
The DLSA, Chennai in association with NGOs in Chennai have
organized a Legal Awareness Programme on “Prevention of Child
Labour”. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Huluvadi G.Ramesh, Judge, High Court,
Madras/Executive Chairman, Tamil Nadu SLSA had released 2 pamphlets
emphasizing Legal Awareness on “Prevention of Child Labour” and
thereafter His Lordship had flagged off, the Rally on “Prevention of
Child Labour” wherein school children and the College students had
participated along with students of home for street children and home
for Rehabilitated Child Labour. The approved NGOs had put up a Photo
Exhibition about their activities on “Child Education, Child Rights”
explicating rescue operation and rehabilitation. In the Programme
Dr.G.Jayachandran, Principal Judge, City Civil Court, Chennai/Chairman,
159 / NYAYA DEEP

Chennai District Legal Services Authority had welcomed the gathering.
The Child Line had made a power point presentation on the need for
prevention of Child Labour, “Oyilattam” on Child Rights and a miming
programme on Rehabilitation of Child Labour and skill Development
Activities was performed by various home run by NGOs.
The Child Line had also screened a short Film on rescue operation of
a Child Labour, while NGO, Nalanthana, in collaboration with TNSLSA
had released an Audio CD, Theme Song “based on Legal Awareness
on “Child Labour”. At the end of the programme Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Huluvadi G.Ramesh, Judge, High Court, Madras/Executive Chairman,
TNSLSA had delivered a special Message on Prevention of Child Rights
and emphasized that “Children on the Streets are begging and all children
should be brought equal”. No Discrimination should be shown. This is
absolute social justice. The preamble of constitution ensures to promote
social justice and to give equal opportunities, real equality has to be
achieved. All Children from nook and corner should be brought to achieve
this. We must eradicate poverty and give education. We must have a goal
to achieve good education. Living condition of our fellow being is the
duty of everyman. Most of the Schemes does not reach remote corner of
the State. We should ensure through these kinds of programmes that they
reach the remote places. NGOs are now faring better.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.Manikumar, Judge, High Court, Madras/
Chairman, High Court Legal Services Committee had appealed to the
NGOs to widen the role and wipe out the Child Labour from the State
and complemented the NGOs for their efforts taken to spread awareness
among masses and stressed for greater co-ordination with the Legal
Services Institutions. Hon’ble Mr. Justice C.T.Selvam and Hon’ble Mr.
Justice M.M.Sundresh, Judges of High Court of Madras were participated
in the function.

Details of Disposal of Monthly National Lok Adalat:
S.No

Month

Number
of Benches

Number of
cases Taken

Number of
cases settled

Amount Awarded

1

April 2016 264

44,656

8,197

Rs.84,34,60,089/-

2

June 2016

76,512

13,369

Rs.128,76,19,701/-

240

160 / NYAYA DEEP

Details of Legal Literacy and awareness Camp conducted:S.No.

Month

Number of Camps
Conducted

Number of applications
Received

1

April 2016

149

345

2

May 2016

128

465

3

June 2016

220

673

TELANGANA
14th All India Meet of State Legal Services Authorities held at
Hyderabad on 9th & 10th April, 2016: The 14th All India Meet of the State
Legal Services Authorities was held at Hyderabad on Saturday, the 9th
April, 2016 and Sunday, the 10th April, 2016. The Meet was inaugurated
by Hon’ble Sri. Justice T.S.Thakur, Chief Justice of India & Patronin-Chief, NALSA in the august presence of Sri K.Chandrashekar Rao,
Hon’ble Chief Minister, State of Telangana, Sri D.V. Sadananda Gowda,
Hon’ble Minister of Law & Justice, Hon’ble Sri. Justice Anil R.Dave,
Judge, Supreme Court of India & Executive Chairman, NALSA, Hon’ble
Sri. Justice N.V. Ramana, Judge, Supreme Court of India, Hon’ble Sri.
Justice Dilip B.Bhosale, Acting Chief Justice, High Court of Judicature
at Hyderabad, Hon’ble Sri. Justice G.Chandraiah, Executive Chairman,
Telangana State Legal Services Authority and Hon’ble Sri. Justice Ramesh
Ranganathan, Executive Chairman, A.P.State Legal Services Authority
who attended the programme.
On this occasion a Website was launched for Telangana State Legal
Services Authority and an Android Mobile App for the State Legal Services
Authorities of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Brochure on seven NALSA
Schemes, 2015 was released.
Legal Literature Booklet for Visually impaired people was released for
distribution to all blind schools in the State of Telangana and the state of
Andhra Pradesh.
Handbook for DISPUTE RESOLVERS UNDER ADR PROCESSES
WITH FAQs edited by Hon’ble Sri Justice A. Ramalingeshwara Rao, Judge,
High Court of Judicature at Hyderabad was also released on this occasion.
Cheques for an amount of Rs. 12 crores were distributed to the
claimants through Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and Patron-in-Chief of
161 / NYAYA DEEP

NALSA in respect of settlement of land acquisition cases (of an extent of
Ac. 489 cents) at pre-litigation stage pertaining to lands at Kommaipalli
village, Khammam district.
Cheque for an amount of Rs. 3 lakhs was distributed to acid attack
victim of Khammam district under Telangana Victim Compensation
Scheme, 2015 through Hon’ble Chief Justice of India and Patron-in-Chief
of NALSA on this occasion.
Making of short films: Telangana State Legal Services Authority got
produced short films in regional languages as part of visibility measures
with the main objective of spreading legal awareness by Audio visual
means viz.
1. Short film on Mediation (titled as, “Maro Parishkaram”)
2. Short film on Workers in Un-organized Sectors focussing on Brick klin
workers (titled as, “Maarpu”)
3. Short film on Victims of Trafficking (titled as, “Melukolupu”)
4. Short film on Handicapped Prisoner (titled as, “Cheyutha”)

Legal Awareness Programme i.e. Nyaya Salahalu live phone-inprogramme in Doordarshan (Yadagiri) is telecasting since 06.04.2016 by
alloting a slot to Telangana State Legal Services Authority for purpose of
spreading legal awareness among the public at large.
Community based Radio Programme was also launched on 04.04.2016
for spreading legal awareness.
State level Convergence Meeting on Juvenile Justice: For effective
implementation of Juvenile Justice System a “State Level Convergence
Meeting on Juvenile Jusitce” was organized in Telangana State upon the
initiation of Hon’ble Sri Justice Ramesh Ranganathan, Judge, High Court
of Judicature at Hyderabad and Chairperson, High Court Committee on
Juvenile Justice on 30.04.2016, at Hotel Mari Gold, Begumpet, Hyderabad.
The Departments of Juvenile Welfare Correctional Services, Police (CID),
UNICEF, Telangana State Legal Services Authority and other stakeholders
of Juvenile Justice Boards, Child Welfare Committees, Police Officials,
District Probation Officers, District Child Protection Offiers, Child Line
Coordinators and Secretaries of District Legal Services Authorities in the
162 / NYAYA DEEP

State of Telangana and the Prl. Magistrates of Juvenile Justice Boards
participated in the said convergence meeting.
Observation of May Day: “May Day” was observed from 1st May to 7th
May, 2016 throughout the State of Telangana and 07 Legal Literacy Camps
were conducted in Telangana State in Industrial Areas, Labour Colonies
and various places appraising the rights of the workers and labourers
under various labour laws and other welfare legislations and about 640
persons have participated in the campaign.
Awareness Programme for Settlement of land acquisition matters
(PLC stage in respect of land at Budavarpet in Karimnagar district) : The
State Government of Telangana has acquired 708.16 gunts of private land
at Bhudavarpet village of Muttaram Mandal of Karimnagar District for
SCCL and passed an Award for payment of compensation at Rs.4.61 lakhs
per acre as per new L.A. & R.R. Act. Aggrieved by this the villagers led by
Hon’ble M.L.A., Manthani met the Member Secretary, TSLSA at Hyderabad
in the month of November, 2015 with a request to intervene and settle the
matter amicably as early as possible. Accordingly TSLSA intervened and
held meetings at Hyderabad. Finally the Member Secretary, TSLSA and
Chairman, DLSA, Karimnagar went to Bhudhavarpet village, conducted
Awareness programme on 21-5-2016 for the farmers whose lands are
under acquisition and also with the senior functionaries of SCCL. Finally,
upon the advice of Member Secretary, TSLSA and Chairman of DLSA,
Karimnagar, the farmers have agreed to receive Rs.10.00 lakhs per acre
with all statutory benefits as compensation whereas SCCL, has agreed to
acquire the remaining land of Ac. 205.00 in phased manner.
State level Convergence Meet on NALSA (Victims of Trafficking
and Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Schemes, 2015 (which is one
of the state project of TSLSA for the year 2016) Telangana State Legal
Services Authority in coordination with Women and Child Development
Department conducted “State Level Convergence Meet on NALSA
(Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme,
2015 on 25th June, 2016 at Thungabadra Conference Hall, Marri Chenna
Reddy Human Resources Development Institute, Hyderabad (one day
programme)”. Hon’ble Sri Justice V. Ramasubramanian, Executive
Chairman, TSLSA has inaugurated the said programme and addressed
the gathering on the occasion and released the brochure on NALSA
(Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme,
163 / NYAYA DEEP

2015, got published by Telangana State Legal Services Authority.
A Booklet on NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and Commercial
Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015 with FAQs was also distributed to the
participants.
Hon’ble Sri Justice V. Ramasubramanian, Executive Chairman, TSLSA
also launched “signature campaign” against Human Trafficking with a
PLEDGE “Human Trafficking is Modern day slavery. We pledge for
a safe world free from commercial sexual exploitation and human
trafficking” with the object of sensitizing various sections of the society.
It is proposed to obtain one lakh signatures in 100 days from all the 10
districts in the State and Signature Campaign Registers were also sent to
all DLSAs in Telangana State for that purpose.
The Secretaries of District Legal Services Authorities in 10 districts
in Telangana State, Special Judges dealing the cases under POCSO Act,
Chief Metropolitan Magistrates of Hyderabad and Secunderabad and
Metropolitan Magistrates of Ranga Reddy district, Panel Lawyers,
Para-Legal Volunteers of both the districts, NGOs, District Programme
Managers of AIDS Control Society, Project Directors of Women & Child
Development Department, other Police Officials, CDPOs etc., have
participated in the said programme.
Awareness Programme on Mediation: On 04.06.2016 Awareness
Programme on Mediation was conducted to 47 Advocates in Metropolitan
Legal Services Authority, Hyderabad to encourage the process of
mediation and the Resource Persons are Smt. R. Vijaya Kamala, Sri S.R.
Kishore Kumar, of Tamilnadu Mediation Centre. Sri K. Venkateshwarlu,
Syed Moosa Khasim, Smt. M. Seetha Devi, Rangareddy Mediation Centre
and also Smt. R.V. Indira Kumari, Hyderabad Mediation Centre.
Legal Awareness Camp on NALSA (Victims of Drug Abuse and
Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015: Legal Awareness Camp was
conducted by City Civil Court Legal Services Authority in coordination
with Amritha Foundation (NGO) on 26.06.2016 at Secunderabad to
enlighten the public on the scheme formulated by NALSA (Legal Services
to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme,
2015.
International Day against Drug Abuse: 20 Legal Literacy Camps
164 / NYAYA DEEP

were conducted on 26.06.2016 on the occasion of “International Day
against Drug Abuse” in the State of Telangana and about 1800 students
were elaborately explained about evil effects of drug menace.
Conducting of National Lok Adalat in the month of June 2016 in
respect of particular category of cases : As per NALSA Calendar and as
per the directions of NALSA, National Lok Adalat in respect of MACT,
Labour and Family Matters and Insurance claims which is to be conducted
on second Saturday in the month of April, 2016 is postponed in view
of the 14th All India Meet held on 9th & 10th April, 2016 and conducted
on 11.06.2016 wherein 2948 cases are settled and Rs. 10,54,49,840/- was
awarded as compensation.
Legal Awareness Programmes / Camps from April to June, 2016 :
247 Legal Literacy camps were conducted on various subjects during the
relevant period in the State of Telangana.

UTTAR PRADESH
During the quarter successful National Lok Adalats were held on 0904-2016 & 14-05-2016 focused on the specific subject matters relating to
Labour & Family matters, MACT and Insurance Claims, besides the regular
civil and criminal matters which can be settled in the Lok Adalat were also
taken up. During the quarter ending June,2016, the 259 Lok Adalats that
were organized, 3,83,102 cases including 1,34,791 Petty Criminal Cases;
27,170 Revenue Cases; 1,831 Civil Cases; 2,673 Matrimonial Disputes;
2,544 Bank Loan Disputes; 9,481 Labour Cases; 683 Motor Accident Claim
Petitions and 2,03,929 other cases were decided. Compensation of Rs.
12, 56, 04,984/- was awarded/paid to the victims/claimants in the Motor
Accident Claim Petitions.
Taking cue from the experiment of Lok Adalats, the UPSLSA has
been regularly organizing ‘Bal Samwad Adalats’ for settling the matters
regarding juveniles in conflict with law, who have been implicated
in criminal matters, which entails punishment up to 7 years for adult
offenders. During the quarter in question i.e. April, 2016 to June, 2016, a
total of 62 matters pertaining to children in conflict with law were settled
through the bal samwad adalats.
During the quarter ending on April to June, 2016 a total of 528 persons
have been provided legal assistance through toll free number facility.
165 / NYAYA DEEP

During the months of April to June, 2016, the DLSAs organized
456 legal awareness camps and thereby benefiting 84,907 persons, who
attended such camps. During this quarter 3,081 persons were provided
free legal aid through DLSAs.
UPSLSA mind has been organizing internship programmes for law
students. From June 1st, 2016 to 30th June, 2016, a month long 12th Para Legal
Training (internship) Programme was conducted, which was inaugurated
by the Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.K. Upadhyaya, Judge, High Court, Lucknow
Bench, Lucknow. A total number of 95 law students from across the nation
participated in this programme. This programme included a talk on ‘The
Challenges before the Justice Delivery System’ delivered by Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Rajan Roy. Interactive sessions were conducted on a wide range
of topics, which included various ADR Mechanism- Concept, Utility and
advantage with emphasis on matrimonial matters; talk on provisions of
JJ Act, 2015; Criminal Justice Administration and major challenges before
the justice dispensation system in India; provisions of the POCSO Act and
PCPNDT Act. To give them a feel of realities, visits to Children Homes and
Observation Homes, Forensic Science Laboratory, District Jail, Nari Bandi
Grih, Child Help Line and Mahila Sarnalaya, Police Station, Cyber Cell
and 1090 Women Power Line etc. were organized. The student’s submitted
Internship Project Reports on topic assigned to them by the UPSLSA at
the end of their internship programme. The interns were also given an
opportunity to give their assessment of this internship programme. We
received excellent feedbacks from them.
In order to give publicity to legal services and institutions, the
officers of UPSLSA delivered talks and interviews on All India Radio/
Doordarshan Lucknow on socially relevant legal topics such as Juvenile
Justice, Domestic Violence, institutional objectives of UPSLSA etc.
Legal Literacy camps were organized by all the DSLAs according to
NALSA calendar such as International Labour Day’ on 1st May, ‘AntiTobacco Day’ on 31st May, World Environment Day’ on 5th June and
‘World Day against Child Labour’ on 12th June. The people gathered on
the occasion were also given legal knowledge on topics such as Motor
Accident Claims, Maintenance, Domestic Violence, Victim Compensation
Scheme, Free Legal Aid Institutions, FIR etc.

166 / NYAYA DEEP

CHANDIGARH

Performance of Lok Adalats and Mediation Center:1. Two National Lok Adalats on 09.04.2016 and 14.05.2016 were
organized in the premises of District Courts Complex, Sector 43,
Chandigarh. On 09.04.2016 total number of 330 cases were settled
and amount of Rs. 13, 32,689/- was settled and on 14.05.2016 total
number of 6606 cases were settled and amount of Rs. 37, 58,320/was settled.
2. During the quarter ending June 2016, Permanent & Continuous
Lok Adalat Settled 12 cases at pre-litigative stage and 06 referred
cases were settled in the District Courts.
3. Permanent Lok Adalat for Public Utility Services disposed of
628 cases and an amount of Rs. 4, 30,892.27/- was awarded as
compensation.
4. Mediation and Conciliation Center functional in the District
Courts Complex, Sector 43, Chandigarh, during the quarter settled
87 cases.
5. Three Daily Lok Adalats established in the premises of Hon’ble
High Court of Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh are functioning
on all working days. These Lok Adalats have settled 317 cases and
an amount of Rs. 3, 55, 97,500/- has been settled as compensation
in Motor Accident Claim Cases.

Legal Awareness Programmes
During the quarter, several Seminars/Legal Awareness camps/
Workshops were organised on various topics and dates at different
venues in Chandigarh. The details are given below:
Awareness programmes on Community Radio station: The resource
persons deputed by the SLSA got recorded programmes on 91.2 Fm
Jyotirgamya Community radio station of Panjab University Chandigarh.
The following programmes were aired on different topics and dates:
1. 24.05.2016: Talk on ‘’How are the Laws made’’ by Ms. Anukriti
Dua Ms. Samiksha Gupta and Pratiba Bhandari
2. 01.06.2016: Talk on Right to freedom of speech and expression by Sh.
167 / NYAYA DEEP

J.K. Kamboj Advocate
3. 08.06.2016: Talk on Behaviour of police and along with Legal
Rights by Sh. Gautam Bhardwaj Advocate and Ms. Anukriti Dua.
4. 20.06.2016: Talk on Victim Compensation scheme by Sh. Amrinder
Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh.

Launching Six NALSA schemes:
Six NALSA schemes are as under:
•

NALSA (Victims Of Trafficking And Commercial Sexual
Exploitation) Scheme, 2015

•

NALSA (Legal Services To The Workers In The Unorganized
Sector) Scheme, 2015

•

NALSA (Child Friendly Legal Services To Children And Their
Protection) Scheme,2015

•

NALSA (Legal Services To The Mentally Ill And Mentally Disabled
Persons) Scheme, 2015

•

NALSA (Effective Implementation Of Poverty Alleviation
Schemes) Scheme, 2015

•

NALSA (Protection And Enforcement Of Tribal Rights) Scheme,
2015

•

NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and
Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015.

An orientation programme was held on 22nd April for launching the
Six NALSA schemes. Mediators, Lawyers, Para-Legal Volunteers and
Nodal Officers from all the departments participated. Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Surya Kant Judge Punjab & Haryana High Court and Executive Chairman
State Legal Services Authority was the Chief Guest on this occasion, who
launched the schemes and requested all the departments to work in
convergence for the successful implementation of the scheme.

International Labour Day on 1st May, 2016
The Authority observed International Labour Day on 1st May, 2016.
On this occasion an awareness Camp was conducted in Govt. Secondary
School, Sec-8, Chandigarh. The people were made aware about their
168 / NYAYA DEEP

Fundamental Duties and the importance of the Labour Day. They were
also told about the working of the Authority by Sh Rajeshwar Singh, Law
Officer. An Awareness Seminar was organized by Para-Legal Volunteers
in Indira Colony and Maloya Colony by Col V.S. Dhillon, Sh Ashwani
Sondhi, Dr Nareshanand. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, SLSA,
U.T., Chandigarh was present on this occasion.
In association with Legal Literacy Club of Govt. Senior Secondary
School, Sec 19, Chandigarh, the Authority organized an Awareness Lecture
at Labor Chowk, Sector 45 Chandigarh. S. Malwinder Singh , Sh. Parminder
Singh Kochar , Sh. Ishmeet Singh , Sh. Gopal Attri and Mrs. Anupam
Singh were present the occasion. Mr Gopal Attri paralegal volunteer and
Mrs. Anupam Singh (Program Officer NSS and Club Incharge ) made
aware the labour about the Public Utility Services and welfare schemes
for labour launched by the Government of India. Paralegal volunteer Mr.
Ishmeet Singh highlighted the schemes for the unorganized workers. NSS
volunteers distributed sweets amongst the labour.
In the evening, a Seminar was organized at Balmiki Dharamshala, Bapu
Dham Colony Sec 26, Chandigarh. The people were told about the various
Schemes, provisions relating to the labour by Sh Sachin Sharma from
Labour department, Chandigarh. Sh. J. K Kamboj, Advocate told them
about various problems being faced and the solutions to their problems.
Sh Gautam Bhardwaj, told them about the working of State Legal Services
Authority and in case the labour Class faces any difficulty, they can
contact the Authority for the redressal of their grievances. The Seminar
was attended by Panel Lawyers, Para-Legal Volunteers, Mediators and
the labour Class of the area. The pamphalets of the Authority in all the
three languages were also distributed among the villagers.

World Hypertension Day on 17.05.2016
D.A.V Senior Secondary School (Lahore) organized an Interactive
Session on World Hypertension Day on 17.05.2016 for the students of
Humanities and Commerce. School Counsellor, Ms. Manisha explained
the students about Hypertension and how stressful situations can be
handled effectively with the help of Relaxation Techniques like Meditation
and Yoga. Ms. Samiksha Gupta from SLSA informed students about Eve
Teasing and Cyber Crime and how students are getting trapped into it and
how SLSA can guide and help the students to deal with such cases with
169 / NYAYA DEEP

provision of free legal aid.
In Shivalik Public School, Sector 41, Chandigarh, Sh. Jatinder Dahiya,
Deputy Director, State AIDS Control Society addressed the students on the
topic ‘’How to cope up with stress and anxiety’’. Similarly programmes
were held in Govt. Sr. Secondary School, Manimajra Town, Chandigarh
a talk on this topic was held by Ms. Anukriti Dua and in Govt. Model
Sr. Secondary School, sector 16, Chandigarh by Sh. Balbir Singh, District
& Session judge, District Court, Chandigarh, Sh. Amrinder Sharma,
Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh along with Sh.
Paras Talwar Advocate who told the students about Stress management.
Another camp was organized in Govt. Sr. secondary School, sector 8,
Chandigarh by Mrs. Kamila Parthi, Prof. from DAV College.

Project ‘’Sneh Milap’’
The District Legal Services Authority organized the Project ‘’Sneh
Milap’’ on 19.05.2016. As per this project inmates of Old Age Home, sector
15, Chandigarh, were taken for a visit to First Steps School, Sector 26,
Chandigarh to interact with young students. It was informed that such
activities including Legal Awareness Camps would be regularly taken
up by District Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh. Sh. Amrinder
Sharma, Secretary, DLSA, Chandigarh along with Sh. Balbir Singh, District
& Session Judge Cum-Chairman, DLSA, Chandigarh was also present on
the occasion.

International Missing Children Day
On 25.05.2016 the District Legal services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh
in association with Anti-Human Trafficking Unit, Chandigarh Police
organized an awareness camp on the ‘’International Missing Children
Day’’ at Kendriya Vidyalaya, Sector 31, Chandigarh to generate awareness
on the topic of Child Labour, Human Trafficking, Begging and about on
missing children. Smt. Anjitha Chepyala, DSP/W&CSU, informed about
the existing legal frame work as well as the activities being conducted
by the Chandigarh Police including details of Muskan, Smile-I, SmileII, initiatives. S.I. Sarabjit Kaur, AHTU, shared the information about
the Unit regarding the exploitation of children against their wishes as
well as the important helpline numbers were told to the students. Sixty
students of L.S. Technology Institute, Sector 31, Chandigarh attended the
said programme. Ms. Mohinder K Kataria and Mr. Kulwant Singh Traffic
170 / NYAYA DEEP

Marshal, Chandigarh Traffic Police attended this programme.

Anti-Tobacco Campaigns
The Authority organised Anti-Tobacco campaigns with association of
Students Legal Literacy Clubs of Govt. Senior Secondary School, Sec 38-W
Chandigarh and Govt. Model Senior Secondary School, Sec 19 Chandigarh
on 30.05.2013.
On this occasion, an awareness campaign was conducted by the
students of the said clubs in Bapu Dham Colony and Palsora. The
residents were told about the side effects of Tobacco/Drug use by Sh.
Muneesh from Narcotics Department, Chandigarh in the presence of
Sh. Amarinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,
Chandigarh and Sh Gautam Bhardwaj, Advocate. They were told to take
pledge to shun the practice of Drug Abuse. The people were also made
aware of the Anti-Drugs Programme of the Government. They were told
to act as representative of the Authority; being the future citizens of a
progressive nation and to create awareness among family, friends and peer
group. Later a rally was flagged off by the students of Govt Sr Secondary
School, Sec 38-W Chandigarh in village Dadumajra showing No Tobacco
signs in the presence of Sh Rajeshwar Singh, Law Officer, Malwinder
Singh Superintendent of the Authority, Sh Ishmeet and Sh Gopal Attri,
Para-Legal Volunteers.
Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary of the Authority said that more
such campaigns would be organised by the Authority in future so as to
create Mass Awareness and the students of the Legal Literacy Clubs would
also be involved along with the Para-Legal Volunteers of the Authority in
such campaigns.

Nukkad Nataks
State Legal Services Authority in collaboration with School Students,
presented three shows of Nukkad Nataks, which are as under:
1. Ramdarbar, on 21.05.2016 on the topic of “Drug Addiction”.
2. Two shows in Ramleela Ground, Dhanas, Chandigarh on 31.05.2016
on the topic of ‘’Depicting the ill effects of use of Tobacco”.
The Authority has video graphed the plays and Nukkad Nataks
on various socio legal issues which are played in the Mobile Van of the
171 / NYAYA DEEP

Authority during the visit to the various villages/Colonies/Schools in
awareness programmes conducted by the Authority.

A four days’ work-shop by the name of YES (Youth
Empowerment and Skills)
The District Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh in collaboration
with the Art of Living organization organized a four day work-shop by the
name of YES (Youth Empowerment and Skills) from 30th May to and 2nd
June. The main aim of this workshop was to transform the marginalized
youth. This programme highlighted on rejuvenating process and activities
to inculcate moral values.

World No Tobacco Day
A function to mark World No Tobacco Day was organised on 31st May,
2016 in Ramleela Ground, Dhanas, Chandigarh. On this occasion, two
Nukkad Nataks were presented depicting the ill effects of use of Tobacco.
It was followed by a sensitization lecture by Ms. Manjit Malhotra who told
the gathering about the harmful effects of the use of tobacco. The main
objective of conducting this programme was to create awareness among the
people about the social, psychological, physical and other harmful effects
from the use of tobacco on one self and on others by passive smoking.
Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, State Legal Services Authority U.T,
Chandigarh and Sh. Amarinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services
Authority, Chandigarh were also present on the said occasion.

Global Day of Parents:
On 01.06.2016 the Global day of Parents was organized in Old Age
Home, sector 43, Chandigarh. The inmates were addressed on various
schemes and topics along with provisions of the Maintenance & Welfare of
Parents and Senior Citizen Act, 2007 by Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary,
District Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh and Sh. Gautam Bhardwaj,
Advocate.

International Day of Innocent Children Victim of aggression:
It was organized in Snehalya, Maloya, Chandigarh on 04.06.2016. In
this programme Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary, DLSA, Chandigarh was
the Resource person and he stressed upon the need to help the innocent
172 / NYAYA DEEP

children who are victim of aggressive.

Celebrated World Environment Day 2016
The Authority in association with Yuvsatta and 92.7 big FM organized
a painting competition on environment day on 05.06.2016 at Balmiki
Dharamshala, Bapudham Colony, sector 26, Chandigarh and Indira
Colony.

Celebrated International Day of Yoga
The Authority celebrated the International Day of Yoga at Model jail
Complex, Chandigarh on 21.06.2016. Hon’ble Mr. Justice M. Jeyapaul
Judge, Pujab & Haryana High Court, Chandigarh and Sh. Balbir Singh,
District & Session Judge Cum-Chairman, DLSA, Chandigarh, Ms. Neerja
Kulwant Kalson, ADJ, Sh. R.K. Jain, ADJ attended the function. The panel
Lawyers and Law officer were also present on the occasion. The inmates of
the jail did the Yoga in the presence of the instructors from Art of Living.

International Day against Child Labour
The Authority celebrated International Day against Child Labour on
13th June, 2016 in Snehalaya, Maloya, Chandigarh in collaboration with
Chandigarh Commission for Protection of Child Rights, Chandigarh. Sh.
Balbir Singh, District & Session Judge cum-Chairman, DLSA, Chandigarh,
Sh. Amarinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services Authority
addressed the gathering on the said date.

Drug Awareness Rally
The Authority arranged a drug awareness rally in co-ordination with
Narcotic Central Bureau, Chandigarh from Rose Garden to Plaza, sector
17, Chandigarh. Children from Snehalaya also participated in the rally.
The rally was flagged off by Inspector General of police. The senior officers
of Chandigarh Administration and the units of NCC also participated in
the rally. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, SLSA, U.T., Chandigarh
and DIG, Narcotics Central Bureau distributed the prizes to the winners of
drawing competition which was organized at Snehalaya.

International Day of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking
The Authority celebrated a week on the occasion of ‘International Day
173 / NYAYA DEEP

of Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking’. In this series, a Seminar on Drug
Abuse was organised on 26nd June 2016 at Snehalya, Maloya, Chandigarh.
On this occasion, Mr. Manish Modi (IO) and Mr. S.K. Acharya (IO),
Narcotics Control Bureau, Chandigarh told general public about the ill
effects of drugs.
The main objective of conducting this programme was to create
awareness among the people about the social, psychological, physical and
other harmful effects from the use of Drugs on others and on one self.
Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, State Legal Services Authority
U.T, Chandigarh Sh. Gautam Bhardwaj, Advocate, Sh. Gopal Attri and Sh.
Ishmeet Singh, Para-Legal Volunteers also addressed the audience on the
said occasion.

Legal Aid
During the quarter, free Legal Aid was provided to 280 beneficiaries
under Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.

Refresher Programmes for the Panel Lawyers and PLVs.
The Authority is regularly conducting Monthly Orientation courses
for the Lawyers/ Para-Legal Volunteers/Mediators in Chandigarh Judicial
Academy as per the directions of National Legal Services Authority, New
Delhi. In these monthly programmes various topics on Socio Legal Issues
etc were taken up for discussion detailed as under:
Date

Topics

Speakers

Participants

22.04.2016

Launching
NALSA Six
Schemes

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Surya
Kant, Executive Chairman,
SLSA, U.T., Chandigarh, Sh.
Lal Chand, Member Secretary,
SLSA, U.T., Chd, Sh. Mahavir
Singh, Member Secretary,
SLSA, U.T., Chandigarh, Mr.
Jatinder Kumar Kamboj and
Ms. Manjit Kaur Sandhu

49

174 / NYAYA DEEP

27.05.2016

NALSA
(Effective
Implementation
of Poverty
Alleviation
Schemes)
Scheme, 2015

Sh. Amrinder Singh, Secretary,
DLSA, U.T., Chandigarh, Sh.
Jatinder Kumar Kamboj
Ms. Manjit Kaur Sandhu

65

DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI
S R . DATE
NO.

SUBJECT

VENUE

1

17.04.2016

Legal Literacy Camp on the subject Community Hall,
of (a) Legal Services Authorities Khutli, Khanvel
Act and (b) Fundamental duties
of the Citizen.

2

02.05.2016

“International Labour Day”

Panchayat
Samarvarni.

Hall,

DAMAN & DIU
Sr. Date
No.

Name of
the Programme

Subjects

Remarks

1.

21/04/2016

Legal
Awareness
Camp

Legal Services Authority Programme on 21/04/16
Act Fundamental duties of at 9:30 a.m. attended by
the citizen
approx 200 persons

2.

07/05/2016

Legal
Literacy
Camp

Labour Laws

3.

10/05/2016

Legal
Awareness
Camp

Provision of Human Programme on 10/05/16
Trafficking
at 9:30 a.m. attended by
Rehabilitation of Victim
approx 300 persons.
Section 370 of IPC

4.

17/06/2016

Legal
Awareness
Rally

Environment and Labour Programme on 17/06/16
Laws
at 9:00 a.m. attended by
500 students and 300
citizens of Daman

Programme on 07/05/16
at 9:30 a.m. attended by
approx 250 Labours and
others.

175 / NYAYA DEEP

5.

18/06/2016

Legal
World Day against Child
Awareness Labour
Programme

Rally on 18/06/16 at
9:00 a.m. attended by
500 students and 300
citizens of Daman

6.

27/07/2016

Legal
Scheme and laws related
Awareness to senior citizens
Programme Rights of Children and
related laws
Beti Bachao Beti Padao
Child Friendly Legal
Services to Children (J J

Drama by Collage
Students.
Programme on 27/07/16
at 9:00 a.m. attended
by 600 students, 10
Senior Citizens and 100
Citizens of Daman.

Act)

DELHI
The Legal Services Programmes/Activities of Delhi State Legal Services
Authority have been divided into four parts viz. Legal Aid, Alternate
Dispute Resolution (ADR), Legal Literacy and Others.

LEGAL AID ACTIVITIES
(i) Visits to Jails, Observation Homes and Children Homes
In terms of the Project started by DSLSA in the year 2013 titled
“Ensuring Expeditious and Effective Legal Services to the Inmates of
Jails and Observation Homes” DSLSA has adopted all the 10 Jails and 04
Observations Homes in Delhi.
Each Jail and Observation Home has been assigned to one of the
Secretary of District Legal Services Authority. They have been directed to
visit the Jail/Observation Home once in a week and to supervise the work
of Legal Services Advocates.
The empanelled Legal Services Advocates of JJBs/CWCs also visit the
respective Observation Homes/Children Homes after the court working
hours once in a week and devote atleast two hours for providing legal
services during such visit. During the visit, they assess the Legal Services
requirement of Children in Conflict with Law and Children in need of Care
and Protection. The Legal Services Advocates on the panel of Shahdara
DLSA pay regular visit to Observation Homes on all working days and
hold moral teaching classes for the inmates.
176 / NYAYA DEEP

In the above said quarter, the data of visits is as under:Name of
the Institution

No. of Visits by
Secretaries of
District
Legal Services
Authorities

No. of Visits by Legal
Services Advocates

Jails

26

828

Observation Homes

11

Total –219
71 Moral Teaching Classes by
Legal Services Advocates on
the panel of Shahdara DLSA
and 148 visits by Legal Services
Advocates on the panel of JJBs

Children Homes

Nil

87

Besides, DSLSA has also appointed two Lady Legal Services Advocates
to visit Children Homes, Observation Homes, Shelter Homes for Girls
located in the Nirmal Chhaya Complex twice a week to provide free legal
aid and services under the domain of the DSLSA, to have interaction with
the inmates & redress their legal grievances and to report back to DSLSA
about the problems faced by the inmates which needs to be addressed. In
the above said quarter, they have made 45 visits to these homes.

(iii)

Beneficiaries of Legal Services

During the quarter April to June, 2016, Delhi State Legal Services Authority
has provided legal aid/assistance to following number of persons:
Category

No. of Legal Services Beneficiaries

Schedule Caste

148

Schedule Tribe

04

Women

2061

Children

50

In custody

3475

General

1408

Sr. Citizens

52

Disabled

16

177 / NYAYA DEEP

Industrial Workmen/Labour

74

Total

7288

Further, in the abovesaid quarter, Delhi State Legal Services Authority
also dealt with the following:No. of traced missing children counselled

575

No. of Victims of Sexual Assault counselled

278

Compensation awarded under Delhi Victim Com- No. of Victims – 468
pensation Scheme, 2011
Amount – Rs. 5,82,45,000/-

II.

ADR ACTIVITIES

1.

Lok Adalat

During the above said quarter, the relevant information regarding the
Lok Adalats organized by DSLSA is as under:-

(i) Monthly National Lok Adalat:In the abovesaid quarter, DSLSA organized Monthly National
Lok Adalat on 9th April & 21st May, 2016. DSLSA organized Lok Adalat
in District Courts, Permanent Lok Adalats, State Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission, District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forums,
Debt Recovery Tribunals & Revenue Courts.
The disposal report is as under:-

Subject/ Nature
of cases

Pre-Litigation

Post-Litigation

Total

Disposal

Settlement/
Fine amt.

Disposal

Settlement/
Fine amt.

Disposal

Settlement/
Fine Amt.

Criminal
Compoundable
Cases

0

0

493

21,38,700

493

21,38,700

138 NI ACT

0

0

484

5,53,74,296

484

5,53,74,296

MACT Cases

0

0

162

4,94,68,800

162

4,94,68,800

178 / NYAYA DEEP

Matrimonial/
Family
Disputes

0

0

76

86,01,000

76

86,01,000

Civil Cases
(Rent, Bank
Recovery,
Easmentary
Rights,
Injunction
Suits, Specific
Performance
Suits etc.

0

0

99

44,65,455

99

44,65,455

Traffic Challans

1,39,572

1,77,620

2,503

8,40,940

1,42,075

10,18,560

Revenue
Cases-Mutation
cases in District
Courts

0

0

50

2,700

50

2,700

Electricity

0

0

121

62,01,116

121

62,01,116

MCD

0

0

624

1,63,430

624

1,63,430

Cantonment
Board Matters

0

0

22

49,200

22

49,200

Railway Claim
Cases

0

0

98

30,200

98

30,200

Arbitration

0

0

108

0

108

0

Plea Bargaining

0

0

1,191

96,27,858

1,191

96,27,858

Telecom

25

1,43,535

0

0

25

1,43,535

Bank Cases

155

6,68,73,096

0

0

155

6,68,73,096

Other Cases

0

0

46

3,15,962

46

3,15,962

DRTs

0

0

16

23,23,94,000

16

23,23,94,000

DC (Revenue)

0

0

23

1,50,000

23

1,50,000

Consumer
Forum

0

0

158

1,70,25,803

158

1,70,25,803

TOTAL

1,39,752

6,71,94,251

6,274

38,68,49,460

1,46,026

45,40,43,711

179 / NYAYA DEEP

(ii) Daily Continuous Lok Adalat:DSLSA has also devised a Mechanism/Protocol for organizing the
Daily Continuous Lok Adalats (DCLAs) in all the 11 Districts. Every
District Legal Services Authority is organising ‘Daily Continuous Lok
Adalat’ on all working days from 4 PM to 6 PM.
The disposal report is as under:Pre-litigation
Category of
cases

Post-litigation

Total

Disposed
of

Settlement
Amount

Disposed
of

Settlement
Amount

Criminal
Compoundable
Offence Cases

0

0

172

24,46,539

172

24,46,539

NI Act Cases
u/s 138

0

0

338

6,09,60,279

338

6,09,60,279

MACT Cases

0

0

34

1,58,89,000

34

1,58,89,000

Matrimonial
Disputes

2

0

4

0

6

0

Other Civil
Cases

1

1,50,000

22

4,05,000

23

5,55,000

Other Cases

0

0

5

9100

5

9,100

Total No. of
Cases Settled

3

1,50,000

575

7,97,09,918

578

7,98,59,918

(iii)

Disposed Settlement
of
Amount

Permanent Lok Adalats:In the above said quarter, total 1058 cases were disposed
of, in which settlement amount was Rs. 5,44,42,552/-.

LEGAL LITERACY ACTIVITIES
Delhi State Legal Services Authority organized Legal Literacy
Programmes at Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Schools,
Colleges, Old Age Homes, Resident Welfare Associations, Jails, Slums
and Rural Areas, Industrial Areas etc. During the above said quarter, the
details of the legal literacy programmes organized are as under:180 / NYAYA DEEP

1.

Legal Literacy Programmes in Community:-

Venue

No. of
Programmes

Topics

Community
(NGOs/Other
Places)

285

Basic Features of Constitution of India,
Understanding distinct ethnic and regional cultural identities of people particularly from North-East, Awareness Programmes for NGOs working for the cause
of Mentally Challenged Persons, Rights
of HIV Patients/Transgenders, Rights of
Sr. Citizens and benefits available to them
under various schemes for them under
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents & Sr.
Citizens Act, 2007, Gender Sensitization,
Labour laws, Child Laws, Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, Sexual Harassment at workplace etc.

2.

Legal Literacy Programmes in Schools:-

Venue

No. of Programmes

Various
Govt. & Pvt.
Schools in
Delhi

528

Topics

Fundamental Rights & Duties under the Constitution of India, Traffic
(including 01 programme Laws & Road Safety, Cyber Laws,
organized by South-East Sexual Harassment at Workplace,
DLSA on 10th May, 2016 at understanding distinct ethnic and
Blind School)
regional cultural identities of people
particularly from North-East, Justice Dispersion System, Right to Education Act, Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, Labour
Laws, environmental laws etc.

181 / NYAYA DEEP

3. Visit of School Students to Courts:Venue

No. of
Visits

Topics

Visit of School
Students to various
District Courts Complexes

45

The DLSAs invited students of 43 different
schools at different dates in a group of 3040 students from each school to observe the
proceedings of courts.
Besides the above, on 2nd April, 2016, the
students from Lady Shri Ram College also
visited to South-East DLSA, Saket as part
of Certificate course on Sexual Harassment
at Workplace and on 27th April, 2016, the
members of Centre for Advocacy and
Research (CFAAR NGO) and students of
Bharti College also visited to South-West
DLSA, Dwarka Courts.

4. Legal Literacy Programmes in Colleges:Date

Venue

Organized by

Topics

19.04.2016

Vivekanand
Mahila Shahdara DLSA
College, Vivek Vihar

Gender
Sensitization with
special emphasis
on Protection
of Women from
Domestic Violence
Act

25.04.2016

Dr. Bhim Rao Ambed- Shahdara DLSA
kar College, Wazirabad
Road

Removing of
discrimination
against people from
North-Eastern States

25.04.2016

Dr. Bhim Rao Ambed- North and
kar College, Wazirabad North-West
Road
DLSAs

Understanding
distinct ethnic and
regional cultural
identities of people
particularly from
North-East

04.04.2016

Shradhanand College, North and
Alipur
North-West
DLSAs

Sexual Harassment
at Workplace

182 / NYAYA DEEP

07.04.2016

CPJ College, Narela

North
and Moot Court
N o r t h - We s t
DLSAs

5. Awareness Programmes at Resident Welfare Associations
(RWAs)
Date

Venue

O r g a n i z e d Topics
by

04.04.2016 &
25.04.2016

G-887, Near Dhobi Ghat,
Jahangirpuri, Delhi on 4th
& 25th
April, at “RWAs

05.04.2016 &
26.04.2016

B-1, House No. 1,
Raghubir Nagar, New
Delhi-27

East DLSA in
association
with “Sewa
Shakti Kendra” (SSK)

06.04.2016 &
27.04.2016

B-58, Gali No-2, PhaseII, Bhagirathi Vihar,
Mustafabad, Delhi

07.04.2016 &
28.04.2016

C-49, Near Suraj Kewal,
New Ashok Nagar, Delhi

08.04.2016 &
29.04.2016

C-6/133, Shri Ram Colony,
Rajiv Nagar, Delhi

09.04.2016 &
30.04.2016

A-970, Gali No-19, Part-IV,
Sonia Vihar, Delhi

06 Programmes in
April, 2016

RWAs in South-West
District

S o u t h - We s t Understanding
DLSA
distinct ethnic and
regional cultural
identities of people
particularly from
North East

09 Programmes in
May, 2016

RWAs in South-West
District

S o u t h - We s t Redressal
DLSA
mechanism for
their complaint
with civic
authorities

Services being
provided by DLSA
& Protection of
Women from
Domestic Violence
Act

183 / NYAYA DEEP

13.06.2016

G-887, Near Dhobi Ghat,
Jahangirpuri

14.06.2016

B-1, House No. 1,
Raghubir Nagar, New
Delhi-27

15.06.2016

B-58, Gali No-2, PhaseII, Bhagirathi Vihar,
Mustafabad, Delhi

16.06.2016

C-49, Near Suraj Kewal,
New Ashok, Nagar, Delhi

18.06.2016

C-6/133, Shri Ram Colony,
Rajiv Nagar, Delhi

East DLSA in
association
with “Sewa
Shakti
Kendra”
(SSK)

Services being
provided by DLSA
& Environment
Sustainability

6. Awareness Programmes at Hospitals
Total 06 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:S. No.

Date

Venue

Organized by

Topics

1

25.04.2016

Psychiatric
Department,
RML Hospital

New Delhi DLSA Rights of Mentally
in association with Ill People
Roshni NGO

2

27.04.2016

All India
Institute
of Medical
Sciences
(AIIMS)

South-East DLSA

Rights of HIV/
AIDS Patients

3

28.04.2016

Safdarjung
Hospital

South-East DLSA

Rights of HIV/
AIDS Patients

4

21.05.2016

Conference
Hall, Fortis
Hospital,
Vasant Kunj

South-East DLSA
in association with
Fortis Hospital,
Vasant Kunj

Medical
Negligence
and Activities
of DSLSA. The
Member Secretary,
DSLSA was the
Resource Person
for the Session
on “Medical
Negligence (Legal
Perspective)”

184 / NYAYA DEEP

5

28.05.2016

All India Insti- South-East DLSA
tute of Ayurveda

Protection of
Women from
Domestic Violence
Act, Sexual
Harassment at
Workplace for
nurses, doctors
and administrative
staff

6

05.06.2016

Institute of Hu- East DLSA
man Behaviour
and Allied Science (IHBAS),
Dilshad Garden

On occasion of
World Environment
Day, Awarenesscum-Sensitization
Programme-cumPlantation Drive
Progarmme was
organized in the
esteemed presence
of High Dignitaries
including the Ld.
District & Sessions
Judge (East), Sh.
Nimesh Desai,
Director (IHBAS),
Secretary, DLSA
Shahdara and many
other judges of
East District on the
importance and
need to protect the
environment and the
hazards of its nonprotection.

7. Awareness Programmes at Old Age/Sr. Citizen Homes
Total 07 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:Date

Venue

Held by

Topic

28.04.2016,
23.05.2016 &
30.06.2016

Aradhna Old Age Home

New Delhi DLSA

29.04.2016,
24.05.2016 &
30.06.2016

Sai Sahara
Home

New Delhi DLSA

Maintenance and
Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens
Act, 2007

Old

Age

185 / NYAYA DEEP

30.04.2016

Sr. Citizen Home in Gautam Nagar Area and
Slum Areas of Badarpur

SouthEast
DLSA

The
Secretary,
South-East DLSA
visited and made
interaction
with
destitute elderly in
Sr. Citizen Home in
Gautam Nagar area
and slum areas of
Badarpur

8. Legal Literacy/Training/Sensitization Programmes for Delhi
Police
Total 85 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:Date

Organized
by

Venue

Topics

19 Legal Literacy
Programmes in
April, 2016

New Delhi
DLSA

Various Police
Stations in New
Delhi District

Safe Guards to protect
rights of accused during
investigation,
Special
Quote: Judgment of
Arnesh Kumar passed
by Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India

04.04.2016

New Delhi
DLSA

Conference Hall, Best Practices in InvesCentral
Office, tigating crime against
DSLSA
women

08.04.2016

Shahdara
DLSA

Central Detective Investigation and filing
Training School, of charge sheet, Judicial
Gaziabad
perspective

19 Programmes
in May, 2016

New Delhi
DLSA

Various Police Sta- POCSO Act
tions in New Delhi
District

04.05.2016

Central
DLSA

DCP Office (Cen- For SHOs and JWOs on
tral)
various issues relating to
Juvenile

12.05.2016

Central
DLSA

DCP Office (North) For SHOs and JWOs on
various issues relating to
Juvenile

186 / NYAYA DEEP

13.05.2016

South-East
DLSA

DCP Office, Sarita
Vihar

For SHOs and JWOs
on various issues
relating to Juvenile. Sh.
Arul Varma, Principal
Magistrate, JJB-III was
the Resource Person.

19.05.2016

New Delhi
DLSA

P.S. Barakhamba
Road

For SHOs and JWOs
on various issues
relating to Juvenile. In
this programme, Sh.
M.P. Singh, Principal
Magistrate, JJB-II and
Secretary, New Delhi
DLSA were the Resource
Person.

27.05.2016

South
DLSA

Saket Courts

For SHOs and JWOs on
various issues relating to
Juvenile

28.05.2016

Karkardooma
Jointly
Courts.
by East,
North-East
& Shahdara
DLSAs

For all JWOs, 02
officers not below the
rank of SI from each
Police Station, 02 ACPs
and Legal services
advocates on MM
panel of all 03 DLSAs.
In this Porgramme,
the Member Secretary,
DSLSA was the Chief
Guest and Principal
Magistrates of JJBs
addressed the gathering
about the functioning of
JJ Laws.

19 Programmes
in June, 2016

New Delhi
DLSA

Legal Literacy classes
on the topics - Missing
children and victims
of rape-Guidelines and
Judicial directions

06.06.2016

South-West DCP Office
DLSA

Various Police
Stations in New
Delhi District

Training/Sensitization
Programme for JWOs.
Sh. M.P. Singh, Principal
Magistrate, JJB-II was
the Resource Person.

187 / NYAYA DEEP

24.06.2016

North-East
DLSA

Specialized
Training Centre,
P.S. Rajender
Nagar

How to tender evidence,
conduct of witness
before court, art of
cross-examination, nonproduction of victim/
prime witnesses’ result
thereof

15 Programmes
on 25.06.2016

Shahdara
DLSA

Various Police
Stations in
Shahdara District

Missing Children and
victim of rape-guidelines
and judicial directions

25.06.2016
27.06.2016

Jointly by
Central
and West
DLSAs

Tis Hazari Courts

Victim of rapeGuidelines and Judicial
Directions

Jointly by
Central
and West
DLSAs

DCP Office

Training/Sensistization
Programme for SHOs
and JWOs

30.06.2016

&

Besides the above, the Secretary, North-East DLSA also delivered
lecture to 53rd batch of DANICS Probationers on 23rd May, 2016 and to
IAS (2014), Probationers on 24th May, 2016 as guest faculty on the topic of
DLSA(Constitutional Roles and functions, Legal Aids and Schemes, Case
studies/success stories) at Directorate of Training: Union Territory Civil
Services, Behind Karkardooma Courts, Delhi. On 31st May, also invited
IAS (2014) Officers (trainees) to visit the office of DLSA (North- East) to
enrich them and give brief about the functioning of DSLSA and DLSAs.

9. Awareness Programmes at Jails
Total 32 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:No. of Programmes

Organized by

Topics

28 (10 in April, 09 in South DLSA in Jail
May and 09 in June)
No. 4
01
01

Legal Procedure,
Right of Bail, PleaBargaining and
High
Court
Legal General Awareness
Services Committee
East DLSA on 30.05.2016 Plea-Bargaining
at Jail No. 9

188 / NYAYA DEEP

01

01

Jointly by North and
North-West DLSAs on
08.06.2016 in Jail No. 2

Rights of HIV
Positive persons
and drug
de-addiction

Jointly by Shahdara,
North and North-West
DLSAs on 24th June,
2016 in Jail No. 2

Oil Painting
Competition

10. Delhi University Community Radio (DUCR) Programmes
Total 04 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:Date

Organized by

Topics

06.04.2016

South DLSA

Arrest, bail, remand and Jail -Overview as
per Cr. PC, 1973

06.04.2016

South-West DLSA

RTI Act, 2005

05.04.2016

North DLSA

Juvenile Justice Act

05.04.2016

North-West DLSA

Role and Activities of DSLSA (as per Legal
Services Authorities Act)

11. Radio Programmes at Apna Radio, IIMC
Total 07 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:Date

Held by

Topic

08.04.2016
22.04.2016

Legal Services Advo- Sexual Harassment at workplace
cates on the panel of Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
South DLSA
and Sr. Citizens Act, 2007

29.04.2016

Traffic Laws

16.05.2016

Dowry Prohibition

23.05.2016

Labour Laws

15.06.2016

Dealing with rape victims

20.06.2016

Environment

12. Legal Awareness Programme on TV
Date

Detail of the Programme

Topic

23.04.2016

The Secretary, West DLSA visited to Consumer
Doordarshan Kendra for recording for Protection
the Nyaya Manch Programme

189 / NYAYA DEEP

13. Awareness Programmes for Labourers/Industrial Workers
S . Date
No.
1
21.04.2016
2

28.04.2016

3

29.04.2016

4

29.04.2016

5

30.04.2016

6

30.04.2016

7

30.04.2016

8

12.05.2016

Held by

Venue

West DLSA

Mianwali Nagar Indus- Labour Laws
trial Area
Auditorium, NDMC
Role of Legal
Convention Centre,
Institutions in
Sansad Marg, New
Labour Issues,
Delhi
Resolution of
Industrial Disputes
through Industrial
Dispute Act, 1947,
Legal rights of the
women-worker
at work place and
Prevention of Sexual
Harassment at
Workplace.

Central Office,
DSLSA
Sh. Dharmesh
Sharma, Member
Secretary and Sh.
Sanjeev Jain, Special
Secretary, DSLSA,
Dr. Rajender Dhar,
Addl. Labour
Commissioner,
Delhi, Sh. Manoj
Dwivedi, Advocate,
Ms. Jyoti Kler,
Secretary, Central
DLSA and Ms.
Monika Saroha,
Secretary, New Delhi
DLSA were the
Resource Persons.
West DLSA
Mayapuri Industrial
Area
South-West DLSA
Construction Site at
Bharat Vihar, Kakrola
Village, Najafgarh
North DLSA
Wazirpur Industrial
Area
North DLSA
Lawrance Road
Industrial Area
South-East DLSA
Unorganized sector in
Mohan Cooperative
Area at Badarpur
A-10, Mandoli
Shahdara DLSA
Industrial Area, near
in association
Shivani Dharmkanta,
with Delhi RWAs
Federation and CKG Delhi,
Foundation

Topic

Labour Laws, Rights
of Industrial Daily
Wages Labourers
and workers of
organized sectors
and other services
provided by District
Legal Services
Authorities

Awareness
Programme for
Organized and
Unorganized
workers about
their rights and
entitlements under
various welfare
schemes

190 / NYAYA DEEP

9

14.05.2016

Shahdara DLSA

Geeta Satsang Bhawan,
Sarojani Park, Shastri
Nagar, Delhi

10

23.05.2016

North-West DLSA

Wazirpur and Lawrance
Road Industrial Areas

11

24.05.2016

North DLSA

Under Construction Site
at Paschim Vihar, Ring
Road

12

28.05.2016

North DLSA

Narela Industrial Area

13

08.06.2016

North DLSA

Lampur Village

14

10.06.2016

South-West DLSA

15

12.06.2016

North DLSA

16

12.06.2016

South-West DLSA

17

30.06.2016

North DLSA

18

30.06.2016

North DLSA

Construction site at
Kakrola
Narela Village and
Narela Industrial Area
Construction site at
Mahavir Vihar, Sector-1,
Dwarka
Lawrance Road
Industrial Area
Wazirpur Industrial
Area

Labour Law with
special emphasis to
women labourers
and workers
Labour Laws, Rights
of Industrial Daily
Wages Labourers
and workers of
organized sectors
and other services
provided by District
Legal Services
Authorities
Labour Laws and
different welfare
schemes available
for them
Awareness
Programme for
Organized and
Unorganized
workers about
their rights and
entitlements under
various welfare
schemes
Labour Laws, Rights
of Industrial Daily
Wages Labourers
and workers of
organized sectors
and other services
provided by District
Legal Services
Authorities

191 / NYAYA DEEP

14. Awareness Programmes in Slums/Rural Areas
Total 27 Programmes were organized and the detail is as under:S . Date
N.
1
07.04.2016

Held by

Venue

Topic

West DLSA in
co-ordination
with Care
Village
Foundation
(Adolescent
Counselling
Centre)
North-East
DLSA

Balaji Chowk,
JJ Colony,
Bakkarwala
Village, Mundka

Celebration of
World Health Day

Nirmana Ext.
House No. 5,
Gali No. 1, Kuan
Wali Gali, Gamri
Bhajanpura,
Delhi-53
JJ Camp, Anand
Vihar
Sanjay Gandhi JJ
Camp, Chanakya
Puri

General Awareness
and Activities of
DSLSA and DLSAs

2

18.04.2016

3

18.04.2016

Shahdara DLSA

4

19.04.2016

5

21.04.2016

New Delhi
DLSA in
collaboration
with P.S.
Chanakya Puri
Shahdara DLSA

6

23.04.2016

Shahdara DLSA

G-3/54, Sunder
Nagri, Near
St. Stephen
Dispensary
20, Vigyan Lok

Rights of HIV
Patients
Protection of
Children from
Sexual Offences Act
and Juvenile Justice
Act
For NGOs
working for the
cause of Mentally
Challenged People
Gender
Sensitization with
special emphasis
on Protection
of Women from
Domestic Violence
Act and Sexual
Harassment at
Workplace

192 / NYAYA DEEP

7

25.04.2016

South-East
DLSA

P.S. Okhla
Industrial Area

For Community
Women

8

26.04.2016

Central DLSA

Burari Village

9

26.04.2016

Central DLSA

10
11

27.04.2016
29.04.2016

Central DLSA
Central DLSA

12

16.05.2016

Shahdara DLSA

Mukundpur
Village
Burari Village
Mukundpur
Village
JJ Camp, Anand
Vihar, near
Vivekanand
School

Rights of HIV
Patients
Maintenance and
Welfare of Parents
& Sr. Citizens Act
Rights of HIV
Patients
General Awareness
and Services
provided by DLSA

13
14
15
16

20.05.2016
20.05.2016
20.05.2016
24.05.2016

North DLSA
North DLSA
North DLSA
Central DLSA

17

28.05.2016

Central DLSA

18

02.06.2016

19

05.06.2016

New DLSA in
Bhanwar Singh
association with camp (Cluster
P.S. Vasant Vihar area) near P.S.
Vasant Vihar
North DLSA
Narela Village

20

12.06.2016

North-East
DLSA

Narela Village
Lampur Village
Banker Village
Mukundpur
Village
Burari Village

At Bhajanpura
Red Light, near
Labour Chowk

General Awareness
and Services
provided by DLSA
Awareness
Programmes for
RWAs pertaining
to redressal
mechanism for their
complaint with
civic authorities
Labour Laws

Environment Laws
On occasion of
World Day against
Child Labour,
Legal Awareness
Programmes
for children and
spread awareness
about the law, legal
consequences and
their legal rights.

193 / NYAYA DEEP

21

12.06.2016

North-East
DLSA

22
23

12.06.2016
12.06.2016

Shahdara DLSA
North DLSA

24

13.06.2016

Shahdara DLSA

25

14.06.2016

Shahdara DLSA

26

18.06.2016

Shahdara DLSA

27

23.06.2016

Shahdara DLSA

Community
Centre, Gamdi
Road, Near
Tikona Park,
Gamdi
Connaught Place
Narela Village
and Narela
Industrial Areas
G-3/54, Sunder
Nagri
JJ Camp, Anand

General Awareness
and Services
provided by DLSA

Child Rights and
Domestic Violence,
sensitization on
various child
labour related laws
etc.

Vihar
Gandhi
Ashram, Ram
Mandir, Samaj
Kalyan Vibhag,
Trilokpuri
Gaddha Colony,
Harsh Vihar

15. Training Programmes for Legal Services Advocates
S . Date
No.
1.
01.04.2016

Organized for

Topics

Resource Persons

Legal Services • An overview of
Juvenile Justice
Advocates
of
(Care & Protection
JJB-III and Proof Children) Act,
bation Officers
2015
• Understanding
Juvenile Criminal
Jurisprudence
• Key issues and
challenges
• Enquiry into age
in the context
of Section 15 of
Juvenile Justice Act
• Role and
Responsibilities of
Probation Officers
• Do’s and Don’ts for
Probation Officers

The Member
Secretary and the
Special Secretary,
DSLSA, Ms.
Anuradha Shukla
Bhardwaj, Ld.
ASJ, Sh. Shahbaz
Khan Shervani,
Programme Coordinator, Haq
Centre for Child
Rights were the
Resource Persons.

194 / NYAYA DEEP

2

14.05.2016

Legal Services
Advocates
of
JJBs

3

29.06.2016

Newly
appointed
Legal Services
Counsellors

Juvenile Justice
Act

Ms. Geetanjli
Goel, Ld. AD&SJ
and Sh. M.P.
Singh, Principal
Magistrate,
JJB -I were the
Resource Persons.
Role of Counsellors Sh. Dharmesh
Sharma, Member
in Legal Aid and
Secretary and
Techniques of
Sh. Sanjeev Jain,
Communication
Special Secretary,
Skills
DSLSA

(ii) Organized by District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs)
S. No.

Date

Organized by

Topics

1

23.04.2016

2
3

25.04.2016
25.04.2016

4

27.04.2016

5

28.04.2016

6

30.04.2016

7

09.05.2016

8
9
10

09.05.2016
14.05.2016
16.05.2016

Jointly by North- Cognizance
of
Offences
East and Shahdara by Magistrate and Power
DLSAs
Under Section 156 (3) Code of
Criminal Procedure
New Delhi DLSA
Sentencing
Jointly by North and Execution of Decree
North-West DLSAs
Jointly by South and Arguments on Sentencing
South-East DLSAs
with emphasis on Probation
Central DLSA
Functioning of One Stop
Centre -Tier-II
Jointly by NorthOrder 37
East and Shahdara
DLSAs
Jointly by North- How to Tender Evidence,
East and Shahdara Conduct of witness before
DLSAs
Court, Art of Examination
in chief and preparation for
cross examination and Nonproduction of victim/prime
witness and result thereof
South-West DLSA
Bail
East DLSA
Labour Laws
Jointly by South and Collection,
storage
and
South-East DLSAs
Presentation of electronic
data. In this programme, the
Member Secretary, DSLSA
was the Resource Person

195 / NYAYA DEEP

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

18.05.2016
20.05.2016

South-West DLSA
South-West DLSA

Law of Injunction
Sentencing with emphasis on
Probation
24.05.2016
East DLSA
Various Guidelines issued by
NALSA & DSLSA
25.05.2016
Jointly by Central Arguments on Sentencing
and West DLSAs
with Special Emphasis on
Probation
26.05.2016
Jointly by North- Professional
Ethics
for
East and Shahdara Lawyers
DLSAs
27.05.2016
New Delhi DLSA
Art of Examination
28.05.2016
Jointly by North and Mediation
North-West DLSAs
02.06.2016
Shahdara DLSA
Basic training regarding
Awareness Programmes in
community.
04.06.2016
Shahdara DLSA
Basic training regarding
Awareness Programmes in
community.
09.06.2016
Jointly by North and Sentencing Policy
North-West DLSAs
09.06.2016
East DLSA
DRC Act
25.06.2016 Jointly by Central Victim of rape- Guidelines
&
and West DLSAs
and Judicial Directions
27.06.2016

16. Other Programmes:S . Date
No.
1
07.04.2016

Name
of
Programme
Blood
Donation
Camp

Details of the programme

Organized by

Organized on the occasion North & Northof World Health Day
West DLSA
in association
with Indian Red
Cross Society
and Rohini Bar
Association

Venue
Rohini Courts
Complex

196 / NYAYA DEEP

2

11.04.2016

Training
Programme
for PLVs on
the working
of DSLSA

3.

20.04.2016

One Day
Symposium
on Juvenile
Justice
(Care and
Protection
of Children)
Act, 2015

4

20.04.2016

Mega Legal
Awareness
Camp

Also
distributed
Certificates and I-Cards
to 57 PLVs of Centre for
Advocacy and Research
(CFAR),
Optimum
Resource
Development
Agency (ORDA) & Naz
Foundation trained on 19th
& 20th November, 2015
Hon’ble
Mr.
Justice
B.D.
Ahmed,
Judge,
High Court of Delhi &
Executive
Chairman,
DSLSA, Hon’ble Mr.
Justice S. Ravindra Bhat,
Judge, High Court of
Delhi, Hon’ble Ms. Justice
Mukta Gupta, Judge,
High Court of Delhi, Prof.
B.T. Kaul, Chairperson,
Delhi Judicial Academy,
Sh. Sidharth Luthra, Sr.
Advocate, Dr. Shekhar
Sheshadri, HOD, Dept.
of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, NIMHANS,
Ms. Bharti Ali, CoFounder, Haq Centre for
Child Rights, Sh. Anant
Asthana,
Advocate,
Sh. Dharmesh Sharma,
Member
Secretary,
DSLSA,
Sh.
Dinesh
Kumar Sharma, Director
(Academics), DJA, Sh.
Bhuwan Ribhu, Child
Rights Activist, Bachpan
Bachao Andolan were the
Resource Persons.
General Awareness and
Activities of DSLSA &
DLSAs. Around 4000
persons attended the said
camp.

DSLSA

Conference
Hall, Central
Office, DSLSA

DSLSA
in Seminar Hall,
association with Saket Courts
Delhi
Judicial
Academy

Shahdara DLSA
in collaboration
with Yamuna Par
Jain Samaj

Yamuna
Sports
Complex

197 / NYAYA DEEP

5

21.04.2016

6.

22.04.2016

7.

28.04.2016

8.

29.04.2016

9.

17.05.2016

Legal
Literacy
Programme
for PLVs
Legal
Awareness
Programme
for Lawyers

Functioning of SouthWest DLSA

South-West
DLSA

South-West
DLSA

Legal Services
Authorities Act,
1987 and Schemes of
NALSA & DSLSA. In
this programme, the
Member Secretary
and Special Secretary,
DSLSA were the
resource persons
Sexual Harassment at
Workplace

Central office,
DSLSA

Delhi Bar
Association,
Tis Hazari

Legal
Literacy
Programme
for Women
Court Staff
Seminar
The Special Secretary,
on “Legal
DSLSA attended the
Awareness of programme as a
Consumers”
Resource Person and
gave brief review about
working of DSLSA,
entitlement for free legal
aid and how aggressively
DSLSA is involved in
spreading awareness
in masses. The Ld.
Officer also spoke about
mediation and other ADR
methods.

New Delhi DLSA

Conference
Hall, Central
Office, DSLSA

Dignity
Restoration
and Grievance
Settlement

India Habitat
Centre, Lodhi
Road

Panel
Discussion
on
“Visibility of
Homophobia
and
Transphobia
in India”

Lawyers’
Collective

The Member Secretary,
DSLSA attended the said
programme.

Association
(Dignity India) in
association with
DSLSA and Delhi
Management
Association

India
International
Centre

198 / NYAYA DEEP

10.

27.05.2016

National
Consultation
towards
Preventing
Trafficking
in Persons in
India
Legal
Literacy
Programme
on the
occasion of
World No
Tobacco Day

11.

31.05.2016

12.

04.06.2016

Say No to
Pollution
and AntiTobacco

13.

04.06.2016

Celebration
of World
Environment
Day

14.

21.06.2016

Celebration
of
International
Yoga Day

The Member Secretary,
DSLSA was the Guest
of Honour and also
delivered lecture on
Trafficking for Sexual
Exploitation.

Bachpan Bachao
Andolan (NGO)

Legal Literacy Programme East DLSA
for children, their parents
and staff to draw attention
to the widespread
prevalence of tobacco use
and negative health effects
and also on POCSO Act,
RTE Act, Child Labour
Laws and Fundamental
Duties
Organized a programme
DSLSA in
to celebrate “World No
association with
Tobacco Day”. Ms.
Bhagidari Jan
Sahyog
Monika Saroha, Secretary,
New Delhi DLSA
Samiti
attended the programme
on behalf of DSLSA.
South-East DLSA
South-East DLSA
celebrated World
Environment Day with
all the Judicial Officers
of South-East District.
On this occasion, the
Secretary, South-East
DLSA also delivered
lecture on the topic “How
to preserve and protect
the Environment”
Yoga Camp from 6.00
East DLSA in
am onwards followed
association
by a Legal Awareness
with Samrasta
Programme. The event
Foundation
was attended by around
150 persons.

Constitution
Club of India,
Rafi Marg,
New Delhi

Sanskar
Ashram
Children
Home,
Dilshad
Garden

Constitution
Club of India

Saket Courts
Complex

Importance of
International
Yoga day,
services being
provided and
Section 125
Cr. PC

199 / NYAYA DEEP

IV. OTHER ACTIVITIES
•

Visit of Registrar from Lahore High Court:On 16th May, 2016, the Registrar from Lahore High Court visited the
Central Office, DSLSA. The Registrar was briefed about the working of
DSLSA and also taken to High Court of Delhi, High Court Arbitration
& Mediation Centre and Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee.

•

Summer Internship Programme 2016:DSLSA started its Summer Internship Programme, 2016 from 1st June
2016 for law students of various law schools, colleges or universities
from all over India. 109 students divided into 10 groups did their
internship with DSLSA from 1st June to 21st June, 2016. On 1st June,
an Orientation programme was organized for them at Conference
Hall, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi. During the abovesaid period, they
were taken to Tihar Jail, Child Welfare Committees, Children Homes,
Observation Homes, P.S. Mandir Marg, Gender Resource Centres,
Special Police Unit for Women and Children; Nanakpura, Supreme
Court and Supreme Court Legal Services Committee, High Court
and High Court Legal Services Committee, Mediation Centre, Family
Courts, Juvenile Justice Boards, various MM Courts and POCSO
Courts at District Courts Complexes, SPYM, IHBAS, Centre for
Advocacy and Research for first hand exposure.

•

Visits of Students Referred by NALSA:In the captioned period, total 77 students (13 students from 6th- 9th
May, 2016; 16 students from 20th May – 3rd June, 2016; 26 students
from 14th – 27th June, 2016 and 22 students from 23rd June-5th July, 2016)
referred by NALSA interned with DSLSA. Orientation Programmes
were conducted for each batch at Central Office of DSLSA at Patiala
House Courts. The Officers of DSLSA delivered lectures on Legal
Services Laws, functioning and activities of DSLSA. Thereafter the
documentary “Nyaya Ki Aur” was also shown to the interns. The
Secretary, New Delhi District Legal Services Authority also made them
aware about the working of “Front Office”. During the above said
period, the interns were taken to various Child Welfare Committees;
Permanent Lok Adalats; Juvenile Justice Boards; Observation Homes,
200 / NYAYA DEEP

Police Stations, Special Police Unit for Women & Children; Nanakpura;
Tihar and Rohini Jail for first hand exposure. The interns also visited
Mediation Centres, Family Courts and various MM Courts and
POCSO Courts at District Courts Complexes to watch and observe the
working, proceedings and functioning of the office.

LAKSHADWEEP
1. 19.01.2016 – Legal Awareness Programme and formation of Legal
Litrecy Club at Government Girls Higher Secondary School, Kavaratti,
80 Students participated.
2. 21.01.2016- Legal Awareness Camp and formation of Legal Literacy
Club combined with NSS at Government Senior Secondary School,
Kavaratti.
3. 25.03.2016- 27.03.2016- Legal awareness Camp and interaction sessions
at Suheli Island for Local fishermen combined with Indian Cost Guard
in the Subject Costal Security Laws and Lakshadweep Administration
Schemes for Fishermen. 116 Fishermen participated.
4. Legal Awareness programme at Agatti Island in the presence of
Hon’ble Executive Chairman Shri Thottathil B Radhakrishnan in the
Subject New 7 Schemes of NALSA and POCSO Act. 187 participated
5. Legal Awareness Programme for Ex-Service men combined with
Armed Force Tribunal, Kochi in the subject their rights and duties. 70
Ex-Service men participated.
6. 4 days training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers on 29, 30, 1, and
July 2016
******

201 / NYAYA DEEP

News From States
(July, 2016 to September, 2016)

Andhra Pradesh
LOK ADALAT
During the quarter, National Lok Adalats were conducted in July,
August and September, 2016 and a total number of 27,515 cases pending
in Courts were settled thereby reducing the pendency to that extent. In
addition, 14,205 pre litigation cases were also settled, and succeeded in
preventing of filing of such cases in Courts. Thus a total number of 41,720
cases were settled through National Lok Adalats held in July, August
and September, 2016 and a sum of Rs.82, 30, 46,298/- was awarded as
compensation. In 1,512 cases, other services were provided by the DLSAs
and MLSCs and resolved the disputes during the National Lok Adalat.
During the quarter, regular Lok Adalats have been conducted and a
total number of 7742 cases were settled out of which 6580 are pending
cases and the remaining are pre-litigation cases.

MEDIATION
The concept of Mediation is gaining momentum and the referral of
cases and settlement of cases through Mediation is encouraging. During
this quarter 203 cases were settled through Mediation.
Refresher Training on Mediation was conducted on 15th 16th and
th
17 July 2016 at Vijayawada, Krishna district Andhra Pradesh. Fourteen
advocate Mediators of Krishna, Kadapa, Chittoor, Guntur, East Godavari,
Visakhapatnam and West Godavari districts, who have completed
more than 10 successful mediations have participated in the training
programme. Sri M.W.Chandwani and Sri S.P.Korhale, have imparted
training. Smt.K.Bhagya Laxmi and Sri P.Srinivasa Rao, TOTs, have also
been nominated by MCPC to impart training.

LEGAL AID

During the quarter, a total number of 1,493 persons were provided
legal aid out of which 390 are women, 77 are children, and 1,026 from all
categories.

202 / NYAYA DEEP

LEGAL AWARENESS / LEGAL LITERACY ACTIVITIES
During the quarter, a total number of 1659 Legal Literacy Camps were
conducted wherein about 1, 82,892 persons have participated.
On 30th July, 2016, the State Legal Services Authority instructed all
the DLSAs and MLSCs to conduct Special Awareness Campaign for
the benefit of women more particularly victims of trafficking, on the
occasion of observance of World Day against Trafficking in persons.
Accordingly, Awareness programmes were conducted in various districts
in coordination with HELP NGO.

NALSA (LEGAL SERVICES TO THE VICTIMS OF DRUG
ABUSE AND ERADICATION OF DRUG MENACE) SCHEME,
2015.
A programme was conducted at Guntur on 16-7-2016 on NALSA (Legal
Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace),
Scheme, 2015. The Hon’ble Executive Chairman and Member Secretary,
APSLSA and the Chairman DLSA, Guntur district, have participated.
Professors, Doctors, and other legal services functionaries appraised the
participants of the ill effects of drug abuse, and the measures to be taken
for protection of the youth therefrom. (Photos are enclosed).
NALSA
(EFFECTIVE
IMPLEMENTATION
ALLEVIATION) SCHEME, 2015:

OF

POVERTY

A programme was conducted at Kurnool on 24-09-2016 on NALSA
(Effective Implementation of Poverty Alleviation Scheme), 2015. The
Hon’ble Executive Chairman and the Member Secretary of APSLSA and
the Chairman, DLSA Kurnool district and Secretaries of some of the
districts have participated. The Professors, Government Officials have
explained the participants about the above NALSA Scheme and also
about the Poverty Alleviation Schemes introduced by State and Central
Governments.
During the period, 8 programmes were telecasted in Doordarshan on
NALSA new Schemes, 13 programmes were telecast in ETV-2, on Land
Laws, Consumer Rights, Women Related Laws, Domestic Violence Acts,
Property Rights, Hindu Adoption Laws, Lok Adalat. In All India Radio 8
programmes were broad casted on Motor Accident Claims, Child Labour,
203 / NYAYA DEEP

Property Rights, SARFAESI Act, Cyber Laws, Domestic Violence, Women
related laws. Legal Awareness programmes are being conducted regularly
by various legal services institutions focussing on different topics and
covering villages, tribal areas, hamlets etc.

TRAINING PROGRAMMES:
The legal services institutions in the State have organized different
legal services programmes like awareness programmes. The Sensitization
programmes etc., for different stakeholders as per the State Plan of Action
and Calendar of Activities.
Awareness programmes have also been conducted on the topics chosen
in the State Project for the year 2016-17. Special Awareness programmes
were also organized by different legal services institutions on the focused
subjects chosen.
As per schedule given by the State Legal Services Authority, panel
lawyers training programmes have been conducted in various districts
through the master trainers. During the quarter, a total number of 5
training programmes have been conducted for the panel lawyers through
the master trainers wherein 216 panel lawyers have participated. The
details of the programmed are as follows:
Sl.No.

Date

Name of the District

Number of panel
lawyers imparted
training

1

2nd-3rd July, 2016

Kadapa

38

2

30 -31st July, 2016

Krishna at Vijayawada

43

th

3

6 -7 August, 2016

Kurnool

43

4

27th-28th August,
2016

Nellore

31

5

3rd-4th September,
2016

Prakasam

61

th

th

Total

216

MISCELLANEOUS
Victim Compensation Scheme
During this period Budget of Rs.2,20,00,000/- was distributed among 13
DLSAs towards Victim Compensation as per
Andhra Pradesh Victim
204 / NYAYA DEEP

Compensation Scheme 2015 r/w Section 357A Cr.P.C.
STATISTICS
Number of Lok Adalats

2,564

Number pending cases settled

6,580

Number of Pre-litigation cases settled

1,162

Total number of cases settled

7,742

Settlement Amount

Rs.71,59,35,331/-

Number of pending cases settled in National Lok Adalat

27,515

Number of pre-litigation cases settled in National Lok
Adalat

14,205

Settlement amount in cases settled in National Lok Adalat

Rs.82,30,46,298/-

Number of cases settled in PLAPUS

466

Number of cases settled through Mediation

203

Number of persons provided legal aid and advice

1,493

Number of Legal Literacy Camps conducted

1,658

ARUNACHAL PRADESH
Lok Adalat
Lok Adalat was conducted on 13th August 2016 and 10th September
2016 for Money Suit, Bank Matter, Criminal Cases & maintenance as a part
of the Monthly Lok Adalat along with the rest of the country and disposed
off 264 cases with Settlement amount of Rs 3,43,34,958/Legal Awareness Programmes
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority as a part of
its awareness programme under the Legal Services Authority Act 1987
participated in the Apatani’s Dree Festival at Papu Nallah, Itanagar from 1st
to 5th July 2016 by organizing a five days Legal Awareness Camp Cum Free
Legal Counselling at the Dree Festival Ground. During the five days Legal
Services Camp, the State Authority posted 3 to 4 Legal Aid Advocates on
daily basis at the said stall along with Para-Legal Volunteers and wherein
a total of nearly 551 (Five Hundred Fifty One) visitors visited.
205 / NYAYA DEEP

Further, during the said camp, the State Authority in collaboration
with the Capital Complex Dree Festival Celebration Committee 2016 also
organized a Debate competition on the topic,’’ Drug Addiction: Has the
Society Fail to Curve the Menace (For and against)? ‘’ for the students
from class XII to University with the cash prize of Rs 7,000/-, Rs 5,000/and Rs 3,000/- for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd prize winner respectively. During five
days Dree Festival the Authority also screened its maiden documentary
film ‘’Apne Ajnabee”, a film on racial discrimination of the North-Eastern
people in the mainland India.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority organized
a one day free legal awareness camp and counselling at Oju Mission,
Naharalagun on 6th August 2016 to create awareness among poor and
needy people about their rights and duties. Besides on the spot counselling,
pamphlets containing information on legal rights were distributed among
people present on the occasion.
APSLSA Member Secretary Budi Habung and other staff of APSLSA
also participated in the blood donation camp organized by WHL team
& Arunachal Vivekananda Yuva Shakti at Oju Mission. All the voluntary
donors & other participants were informed about the role & function of
APSLSA and how they can avail the services of the State Legal Services
Authority.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority in collaboration
with Ramakrishna Mission Hospital, Itanagar and Arunachal Vivekananda
Yuva Shakti, an NGO organized one day legal aid services cum health camp
at District Jail premise at Jully, Itanagar on 12th August 2016 benefitting
altogether 138 inmates. Among others, APSLSA Member Secretary Budi
Habung, SP (Prison) Nabam Gungte and RKMH Assistant Secretary
Swami Veda Vidyananda addressed the inmates and enlightened them on
various issues concerning legal aid and personal health.
A legal awareness camp was held under the chairman of CJM cum
Civil Judge (Sr. Division) cum DLSA, Member Secretary, Tage Halley at
SFS College, Yeggo on 13th August 2016. In his inaugural address, Halley
spoke about access to justice for all under Legal Service Authority Act,
1987. He said that it is important to know fundamental legal parameters
as responsible citizens. During the technical session, advocates Rikge
Romin dwelt on fundamental rights and duties in India while, advocate
206 / NYAYA DEEP

Gekar Angu elaborated on Para-Legal Volunteers scheme. Other resource
persons covered topics like Arunachal Pradesh Victims Compensation
Scheme 2011, Rights of Consumer and Plea Bargaining.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority in collaboration
with Arunachal Vivekananda Yuva Sakti, State Blood Transfusion Council
and Guwahati High Court Itanagar Permanent Bench Bar Associstion
organised a one day legal awareness camp cum voluntary Blood donation
camp at the High Court premises, Nahargalun in cooperation with the
Ramakrishna Mission Hospital, Itanagar, on the occasion of the 70th
Independence Day on 15th August 2016. The Arunachal Pradesh State
legal Services Authority and the Itanagar Bench Bar Association were also
felicitated on the occasion. During the camp, a total of 54 Units of bloods
were collected.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority in collaboration
with Arunachal Vivekananda Yuva Shakti and The NSS Unit of VKV,
Nirjuli conducted a one day Legal Literacy Class cum Awareness Camp
on Voluntary Blood Donation at the VKV School Nirjuli on 2nd September
2016 for the Class 11 and
12 and NSS Students. During the programme, Shri Budi Habung,
Member Secretary, APSLSA presented a talk on Legal Services, Legal Aid,
Legal Aid Clinic and the concept of Lok Adalats. Shri Dani Belo delivered
a talk on POCSO Act and Right to Education (RTE), etc.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority in collaboration
with Arunachal Vivekananda Yuva Shakti (AVYS) in continuation of its
Legal Awareness Programme conducted a one day Legal Literacy Class
cum Awareness Camp on Voluntary Blood Donation at the RKM Hospital
Auditorium Itanagar on 3rd September 2016 for the Class 11 and 12 of
Eklavya Public School, Itanagar totalling more than 100 numbers and the
AVYS volunteers.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority had setup a
Free Legal Awareness Camp cum Legal Counselling stall at the Solung
festival ground on the occasion of 3 days Solung festival of the Adi
Community at Itanagar from 1st to 3rd September 2016. The visitors were
provided with brochures on subject such as: Arunachal Pradesh Victim
Compensation Scheme, Para-Legal Volunteers Scheme, Legal Aid Clinic,
207 / NYAYA DEEP

Lok Adalat, Women’s Right to Protect From Domestic Violence, Child
Right, Fundamental Right, Access to Justice for All Under Legal Services
Authority Act, 1987 and Plea Bargaining.
Legal Aid Counsels and Para-Legal Volunteers who were engaged
in the stall had highlighted the importance of various topics of laws and
provided legal counselling, at the same time they had given awareness
about the role and functions of the Legal Services Authority and free
Legal aid available to the visitors. About 250 persons visited the stall and
benefitted.
The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority had participated
in the 50th Mega Solung Festival Celebration at Pasighat wherein a Legal
Services stall was setup with 6 Legal Aid Advocates everyday attending the
stall and providing on the spot counselling and aid regarding availability
of free legal aid services, scheme and activities available for the citizens in
the state.
As a part of the awareness, brochures on subject such as: Arunachal
Pradesh Victim Compensation Scheme, Para-Legal Volunteers Scheme,
Legal Aid Clinic, Lok Adalat, Women’s Right to Protect From Domestic
Violence , Child Right, Fundamental Right, Access to Justice for All Under
Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 and Plea Bargaining were distributed
to nearly 1469 registered visitors who had visited the stall during the 5
days festival and a documentary film titled “Apne Ajnabe’’ a film dealing
with racial discrimination of North- Eastern people in mainland India and
produced by the State Authority was screened for the public.
In all, 36 Panchayats members and GBs took parts in a day long
awareness camp conducted by the District Legal Services Authority,
Yingkiong at circuit house on 24th August 2016. DLSA Member Secretary
and JMFC cum Civil Judge, Habung Tangu who was the resource person
on the occasion, spoke about various Acts like Access to Justice for all
under Legal Service Authority Act, 1987, the person with disabilities(
Equal opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act 1995.
Other resource persons covered topics on Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act 2005, Rights to Information Act 2005, Arunachal
Pradesh Victim Compensation Scheme 2011 and Consumer Protection Act
1986. Legal brochures were also distributed to the participants.

208 / NYAYA DEEP

A day long Legal Awareness camp for PRI members, public leaders
and GBs was conducted at Sibum Community Hall on 27th September 2016
by District Legal Services Authority, Yingkiong. JMFC cum Civil Judge
and DLSA Member Secretary, Habung Tangu, who was the resources
person on the occasion, spoke about various services available under
District Legal Services Authority, proceeding under CPC and Cr.P.C.
Resource persons covered topics like; Assam frontier( Administration of
Justice) Regulation Act 1945, Arunachal Pradesh Victims Compensation
Scheme 2011, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act 1985,
Wildlife Act/Forest Act6 and Rights of Consumer, Protection Of Women
From Domestic Violence Act 2005 and Section 125 0f Cr.P.C and Rights to
Information Act 2005.
Training Programme
{{ The Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, Itanagar
organized a one Day Orientation cum Induction Training for ParaLegal Volunteers on 28th August 2016 in which around 56 members
of Arunachal Vivekanda Yuva Shakti and others at Don Bosco Youth
Centre attended among others which included Smti Jawepulu Chai
District and Sessions Judge Yupia, Smti Mary Kamsi Judicial Magistrate
First Class Yupia, Shri Budi Habung, Member Secretary, Arunachal
Padesh State Legal Services Authority, Miss M. Tingkhatra, chairperson
APSCW, Shri Amrit Taba, Asst. Contoller, Legal Metrology Dept, Miss
Nani Mamung, Asst. professor, ALA, Shri Sunil Mow, Advocate,
Shri Dani Belo, Dy. Secy. Law & Judicial & OSD, APSLSA and Smti
Nani Modi, Asst. Project Coordinator. During the day long training
the participants were imparted talks on Legal Services/ Lok Adalat/
Legal Clinics and Role of Para-Legal Volunteers by Shri Budi Habung
Member Secretary, talk on Human Trafficking and Child Rights by Shri
Sunil Mow, Advocate, Talk on Domestic Violence/Sexual Harassment
of Woman by Miss M. Tingkhatra, Chairperson State Commission for
Women, Talk on Consumer Rights and Remedies by Shri Amrit Taba
Consumer Protection Officer Papum Pare, Talk on Drug Abuse/ Law
and punishment under NDPS by Miss Nani Mamung Assistant Prof.
ALA and talk on RTI, Right to Education and Victim Compensation
by Shri Dani Belo, OSD APSLSA.
{{ On 8th September 2016 one day induction cum orientation training
programme was conducted for the Advocates of Pasighat & Yingkiong.
209 / NYAYA DEEP

Altogether 30 Advocates were imparted on one day training. The
resource persons including- Shri Budi Habung, Member Secretary,
Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority, Shri Gote Mega,
District & Session Judge, Pasighat, Shri Hirendra Kashyap, Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Yupia, Shri Tonning Pertin, Advocate.
Miscellaneous Activities
Arunachal Pradesh State Legal Services Authority team during
inspection to mental health center on 23rd September 2016 found some of
the patients were reportedly abandoned by their relatives and decided
to make an effort for their early rehabilitation and adaptation in their
parental homes. The team – Member Secretary Shri Budi Habung, Shri
Dani Belo, OSD and Project Coordinator Miss Rosy Taba, accompanied
by psychiatrist Dr N. A. Namchoom Ete and Dr Jatang Katang inspected
ward, facilities available for mentally ill and disabled undergoing
treatment and interacted with 8 indoor patients, including UTPs. The
State Legal Services Authority took up for identification of the family of
the abandoned patient.

ASSAM
Legal Aid Beneficiaries
S.
No

Categories

Providing
Panel Advocate

1

Scheduled Caste

24

2

Scheduled Tribe

3

Women

4

Advice/
* Other
Counselling Services (Pl.
specify)

Total

11

Nil

35

44

20

01

65

46

151

11

208

Children

03

Nil

Nil

03

5

In Custody

158

03

Nil

161

6

Persons with disability

01

116

10

127

7

Industrial Workmen

Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil

8

Transgender

Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil

9

Victims of Trafficking
in Human beings or
begar

Nil

Nil

Nil

Nil

210 / NYAYA DEEP

10

Victims of Mass Disaster, Violence, Flood,
Draught, Earthquake
and Industrial Disaster

Nil

210

20

230

11

General (Persons whose annual income does
not exceed the prescribed limit)

47

11

01

59

12

Others

28

Nil

1084

1112

TOTAL

351

522

1127

2000

Lok Adalats
DISPOSAL OF CASES IN LOK ADALATS AND NATIONAL LOK
ADALAT
Pre-Litigation Cases

Pending Cases

Total

Taken
up

Disposed of

Settlement
Amount.

Taken
up

Disposed of

Settlement
Amount.

Electricity,
Water,
Telephone,
Public
Utility
Disputes,
Revenue
(MNLA)

17182

3065

22503980

36

20

83763

17218

3085

22587743

Banking
matters,
U/s 138,
N.I. Act,
Recovery
suits
(MNLA)

36621

4483

241937942

1885

154

16453253

38506

4637

258391195

Criminal
Compoundable
Matters
(MNLA)

350

86

198839

6096

1543

244100

6446

1629

442939

M.V.,EXCISE,COTPA (MLA)

NIL

NIL

NIL

1762

1178

90400

1762

1178

90400

54153

7634

264640761

9779

2895

16871516

63932

10529

43335592

Subject

TOTAL

Taken
up

Disposed of

Settlement
Amount.

211 / NYAYA DEEP

1. Number of Monthly Lok Adalat (MLA) held during the period: 01
2. Number of Monthly National Lok Adalat (MNLA) held during the
period: 03

MEDIATION
Month

No. of Referrals

Settled

July, 2016

218

67

August,2016

211

69

September , 2016

173

61

Total

602

197

LEGAL AWARENESS ACTIVITIES
A total of 695 Awareness activities programmes were organized by
DLSAs out of which there were 56,295 beneficiaries. Some of the topics
on which such programmes were organized included POCSO, Beneficial
Schemes of the Govt., JJB, CWC, Tribal Rights, Women Empowerment,
Domestic Violence, Legal Literacy classes in Jails, Fundamental rights,
Fundamental Duties, Anti-Ragging, Right to Education, Human Rights,
NALSA Schemes etc.

TRAINING PROGRAMMES
Training Programme for Legal Services Lawyers of Zone-II districts
(Sonitpur, Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Darrang & Udalguri) organized by
DLSA, Sonitpur on 30-31 July, 2016 at Sonitpur, Assam. The programme
was attended by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hrishikesh Roy, Judge, Gauhati High
Court, Guwahati & Executive Chairman, Assam State Legal Services
Authority and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Arup Kumar Goswami, Judge, Gauhati
High Court, Guwahati and other 250 participants.
Training Programme for Legal Services Lawyers of Zone-III districts
(Kamrup, Nagaon, Morigaon, Nalbari & Barpeta) organized by DLSA,
Kamrup on 10th & 11th September, 2016 at Guwahati, Kamrup (M), Assam.
The programme was attended by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hrishikesh Roy,
Judge, Gauhati High Court, Guwahati & Executive Chairman, Assam
State Legal Services Authority, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ujjal Bhuyan, Judge,
Gauhati High Court, Guwahati, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Suman Shyam, Judge,
212 / NYAYA DEEP

Gauhati High Court, Guwahati and Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Rumi Kumari
Phukan, Judge, Gauhati High Court, Guwahati and other lawyers.
The Assam State Legal Services Authority in association with North
East Network (NGO), Guwahati organized a training programme for
Empanelled Lawyers on violence against women and new laws on 24th and
25th September (Saturday & Sunday), 2016 at Guwahati. Total participants:
50 lawyers.
Induction training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs) in
the month of July, 2016.
Training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs) on NALSA
Schemes in the month of August, 2016.
Refresher training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs), held
in the month of September, 2016.
Refresher training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs) on
NALSA Schemes held in the month of
September, 2016.
Basic training programme for Para-Legal Volunteers (PLVs) held in
the month of September, 2016.
One day refresher training programme for the Members of Juvenile
Justice Board , Child Welfare Committee, Special
Juvenile Police Unit and Probation Officers.

MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
The 3rd Meet of DLSA Secretaries was organized by DLSA, Jorhat
in association with ASLSA on 23rd July, 2016 at the Assam Agricultural
University Campus, Jorhat. The programme was graced by Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Hrishikesh Roy, Judge, Gauhati High Court, Guwahati & Executive
Chairman, Assam State Legal Services Authority.
On 29th July, 2016, a team comprising of Sri Mridul Kr. Saikia, Member
Secretary (i/c), ASLSA, Sri K.Hazarika, Secretary, DLSA, Kamrup and Sri
Dipu Barman, Secretary, DLSA, Tinsukia along with two (02) Doctors from
Gauhati Medical College and Hospital visited Shree Bhagwan Mahaveer
Viklang Sahayata Samiti, Jaipur, Rajasthan to have a first-hand experience
on various aspects innately connected to providing prosthetic limbs and
213 / NYAYA DEEP

assistive devices to the beneficiaries. During the visit, a MoU was signed
between ASLSA and Shree Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti,
Jaipur, Rajasthan to initiate a programme for providing prosthetic limbs
and assistive devices to the differently abled people in Assam.
A programme has been taken up by ASLSA to provide prosthetic
and assistive devices to the differently abled persons in the state of
Assam. The programme will be carried out in association with Shree
Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti (BMVSS), Jaipur, Rajasthan
and a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has already been signed
between ASLSA and BMVSS on 29th July, 2016 in this regard. Discussion
is underway with Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India,
Guwahati office (ALIMCO) for providing tricycles, wheel chairs, smart
phones, smart canes etc. for distributing it to the beneficiaries in the afore
said programme. The names and addresses of more than 30,000 people
have already been identified for providing prosthetic and assistive
devices. ASLSA has already persuaded the Government of Assam to
provide logistical support to carry out this programme with the help and
cooperation of the Social Welfare Department of the State.

‘REACH OUT AND RESPOND’ programme of Assam SLSA
MATTER: The wife of one Shri Hitesh Baruah, resident of Darrang
district, approached the Guwahati High Court to facilitate treatment for
her mentally ill husband. The Hon’ble Guwahati High Court then referred
the matter to ASLSA for doing the needful.
STEP TAKEN BY SLSA/DLSA: Step was immediately taken to provide
required medical treatment to the patient and after carrying out all the
formalities the person was sent to LGB Regional Institute of Mental
Health, Tezpur, escorted by his wife, the Police and one Staff Member of
DLSA, Darrang, Assam.
MATTER: Smti. Moushumi, a young lady with mental illness was left
on the roads of Guwahati city by some unscrupulous persons with no one
to care for her. She bore signs of severe physical abuse.
STEP TAKEN BY SLSA/DLSA: Smti. Moushumi, a mentally ill lady
was left on the road by some unscrupulous persons near Dighalipukhuri,
Guwahati on 28.08.2016. The girl was spotted by the Member Secretary,
ASLSA, who with the help of Latasil Police Station, Guwahati rescued
the lady and sent her to the Shelter Home run by the NGO Ashadeep ,
214 / NYAYA DEEP

Guwahati for treatment / rehabilitation and if possible for integration with
her family.
MATTER: Smti. Lalremtling Hmar of Leiri village near Halflong lost
her leg in an accident.
STEP TAKEN BY SLSA/DLSA: As a prelude to the actual programme
of providing prosthetic limbs and assistive devices to the differently abled
persons of the State, ASLSA is proud to inform that we have provided a
prosthetic leg to Smti. Lalremtling Hmar of Leiri village near Halflong,
Dima Hasao District. The girl lost her left leg in an accident and the incident
was brought to the notice of ASLSA by an Indian Army unit posted there.
She was brought to Guwahati from her native village near Halflong, Dima
Hasao district of Assam and provided a prosthetic leg by ASLSA with the
help of Shree Bhagwan Mahaveer Viklang Sahayata Samiti, Guwahati
Branch on 23.09.2016
MATTER: Relief provided to 1600 families affected by flood in the State
of Assam with the fund provided by the Supreme Court Bar Association,
New Delhi.
STEP TAKEN BY SLSA/DLSA: Assam State Legal Services Authority in
association with DLSA, Dibrugarh, Sivasagar, Jorhat, Dhemaji, Lakhimpur
and Dhubri distributed relief materials to the flood affected people of the
aforesaid districts on 7th, 12th & 19th August 2016 with the fund of Rs.
30,00,000/- (Rupees thirty lakhs) only provided by the Supreme Court Bar
Association, New Delhi.

BIHAR
Legal Aid/Services
Total number of beneficiaries in this quarter were 893 and amount of
court fee exempted was Rs.752570/-

Lok Adalats
DLSAs have disposed of cases through Continuous Lok Adalat, and
National Lok Adalat.
Disposal through National Lok Adalat- 47173

215 / NYAYA DEEP

Disposal through Continuous Lok Adalat- 257

Mediation
Mediation Awareness Programme is being organized on every last
Saturday of the month by DLSAs. Altogether 108 Mediation Awareness
Programme have been organized and 126 Mediation Cases have been
disposed of.

Legal Awareness Activities
In the light of direction of NALSA and under supervision of BSLSA, all
the DLSAs have organized 808 Legal Awareness camps and 39139 Persons
attended on different topics.
Bihar State Legal Services Authority has organized one Day
Awareness and Sensitization on 14.8.2016 at Gaya. In the said Programme
Panel Lawyers, Trained PLVs on the issues of Children from different
Blocks of Gaya, Judicial Officers, DSP Headquarters (Nodal Officers of
Juvenile Police Unit) Assistant Director, Child Protection, Social Worker
members of Juvenile Justice Board and Members of CWC of Gaya and
other stake holders of District Administration responsible to implement
laws and schemes relating to Children were invited as participants in
the programme. High level committee has been constituted u/s 16(2) of
Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015. BSLSA has been
directed to monitor the functioning of JJBs and JJBs have been directed to
dispose of at least 30 petty cases per month.
Two day’s Orientation Programme of Para-Legal Volunteers on the
subject PWDVA - 2005, Dowry Prohibition Act-1961, Prohibition of Child
Marriage Act-2006 and Sexual Harassment of Women at work place Act2013 in which one PLV from each Block of Bihar participated. Total 431
PLVs had participated from 18.07.16 to 30.08.16.

Training Programmes
Two days Training Programme of Secretary, DLSAs of Bihar was
organized on 30th & 31st July 2016 in which DLSA Secretaries were
imparted training on the provisions relating to Panel Lawyers, PLVs,
Remand Lawyers, Mediation, UTRC, Victim Compensation Scheme and
Organization and Reference to Lok Adalat.
216 / NYAYA DEEP

CHANDIGARH
I.

Performance of Lok Adalats and Mediation Center:-

Two National Lok Adalats on 09.07.2016, 13.08.2016 and 10.09.2016
were organized in the premises of District Courts Complex, Sector 43,
Chandigarh, Permanent Lok Adalat (Public Utility Services), Chandigarh
and Debts Recovery Tribunal–I, Chandigarh . On 09.07.2016 total number
of 7049 cases were settled and amount of Rs. 14,27,283/- was settled and
on 13.08.2016 total number of 7220 cases were settled and amount of Rs.
4,35,47,640/- was settled and on 10.09.2016 total number of 2079 cases were
settled and amount of Rs. 2,43,60,159/- was settled.
1. During the quarter ending September 2016, Permanent &
Continuous Lok Adalat Settled 10 cases at pre-litigative stage and
04 referred cases were settled in the District Courts.
2. Permanent Lok Adalat for Public Utility Services disposed of
498 cases and an amount of Rs. 8, 36,806/- was awarded as
compensation.
3. Mediation and Conciliation Centre functioning in the District
Courts Complex, Sector 43, Chandigarh, settled 81 cases during
this quarter.
4. Three Daily Lok Adalats established in the premises of Hon’ble
High Court of Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh settled 453
cases and an amount of Rs. 7,43,55,000/- has been disbursed as
compensation in Motor Accident Claim Cases, during this quarter.
II.

Legal Awareness Programmes

During the quarter, the Authority organized several Seminars/Legal
Awareness camps/Workshops on various topics and dates at different
venues in Chandigarh. The details are given below:
1. Awareness programmes on Community Radio station
The resource persons deputed by the Authority got recorded
programmes on 91.2 Fm Jyotirgamya Community radio station of Panjab
University Chandigarh. The following programmes were aired on
different topics and dates:
1. 09.07.2016: Talk on Ragging by Sh. Jatinder Kumar Kamboj,
Advocate
2. 15.07.2016: Talk on people with disability Act by Ms. Vijayta
Sharma, Advocate.
217 / NYAYA DEEP

3. 23.07.2016: Talk on amendment in Child & Labour Act by Sh.
Jagtar Kureel, Advocate
4. 06.08.2016:
Talk on Motor Vehicle Act Amendments by Sh.
Naveen Sharma, Advocate
5. 13.08.2016:
Talk Rights of Transgender by Sh. Jatinder Kumar
Kamboj, Advocate.
6. 20.08.2016:
Talk on Section 124A IPC, Sedition by Sh. Jagtar
Kureel, Advocate.

2. Legal Literacy Camps in Schools of Chandigarh:
Total 37 legal literacy camps were organized by State Legal Services
Authority, U.T, Chandigarh in different schools of Chandigarh. In these
camps /classes, the subjects of discussion primarily included Fundamental
Duties, Juvenile Justice, Rights of Women and Children, Rights of Specially
Abled persons, Rights of Senior Citizens, E-Courts, Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, Sexual harassment at work places,
Mediation, Lok Adalats, Drug Abuse, Improvement of Literacy and Life
Skills and Empowerment of Children and Women of the disadvantaged
sections of society. Para-Legal Volunteers, Panel Lawyers and Law
students interning with Authority were speakers in these camps.
3. One day workshop:
The Authority organized a One day workshop in association with
Humsafar Trust, Mumbai and Chandigarh State Aids Control Society on
the “Rights Of Transgender and Gender Identity” on 23rd July 2016 in
Convention Hall of Chandigarh Judicial Academy, Sector-43, Chandigarh.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Surya Kant, Judge, High Court of Punjab and Haryana
and Executive Chairman, State Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh
was the Chief Guest. The main aim for organizing this Workshop was
the effective implementation of NALSA Scheme i.e. NALSA (Victims
of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015 and
sensitizing persons about rights of Transgenders.
4. Anti-Drug Campaign:
The Authority organized an ‘Anti-Drug Campaign’ in Government
High School, Hallomajra, Chandigarh on 26.07.2016. Sh. Balbir Singh,
218 / NYAYA DEEP

District & Session Judge-cum-Chairman, District Legal Services Authority,
U.T., Chandigarh and Sh. Amarinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal
Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh inaugurated the Anti-Drug Club. The
main aim of organizing this Campaign was the effective implementation
of NALSA Scheme i.e. NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims of Drug
Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015.
5. Drug Awareness Rally:
The Authority arranged a drug awareness rally in co-ordination with
Narcotic Control Bureau, Chandigarh from Rose Garden to Plaza, Sector
17, Chandigarh. Children from Snehalaya also participated in the rally.
The rally was flagged off by Inspector General of Police. The senior officers
of Chandigarh Administration and the units of NCC also participated in
the rally. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, SLSA, U.T., Chandigarh
and Sh. Kaushibh Sharma, Jonal Director, DIG, Narcotics Central Bureau
distributed the prizes to the winners of drawing competition which was
organized at Snehalaya.
6. Tiranga Yatra:
The Authority organised a Tiranga Yatra in association with students
of Govt. School, Sector 19, Chandigarh on 16.08.2016 .The students walked
by raising slogans of Jai Hind and before commencing the Tiranga Yatra,
the students were addressed on important legal issues by Sh. Gautam
Bharadwaj, Advocate and Sh. Ishmeet Singh,PLV
7. 70th Independence Day:
The Authority in collaboration with team ‘Samasya Samadhan’ on
the occasion of 70th Independence Day organized a function ‘Ek Sham
Saheedon Ke Naam’ in Indira Colony, Manimajra, U.T., Chandigarh.
The Children of Hamari Pathshala, Govt. School and colony presented a
Nukkad Natak on ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padao’ and bad effects of drugs and
alcohol. The gathering was asked to support the residents to make the
colony clean and free from drugs, alcohol and crime. The prizes were
distributed to participants. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, State
Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh also spoke about the Right to
Education and told the audience to work for clean and drug free country.

219 / NYAYA DEEP

8. One Day Workshop:
The Authority organized One Day Workshop in association with
University Institute of Legal Studies, Panjab University, Chandigarh
on the ‘Issues pertaining to Child Friendly Legal Services with Specific
Impetus to Juvenile Justice Act, 2015’ in Convention Hall of Chandigarh
Judicial Academy, Sector-43, Chandigarh on 27th August, 2016. Hon’ble
Mr. Justice Surya Kant, Judge, High Court of Punjab and Haryana and
Executive Chairman, State Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh
was the Chief Guest. The main aim of organizing this workshop was the
effective implementation of NALSA Scheme i.e. NALSA (Child Friendly
Legal Services to Children & their Protection Scheme), 2015 and to make
aware the gathering about this Scheme and to work in convergence for
its implementation. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, SLSA, U.T.,
Chandigarh, Sh. Balbir Singh, District & Session Judge Cum-Chairman,
DLSA, Chandigarh, Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary, DLSA, Chandigarh,
officers of Police, Social Welfare, Education and Health departments,
Panel Lawyers, Para-Legal Volunteers, Mediators were also present on
the occasion.
9. Awareness Marathon:
On 02.09.2016, a run for awareness was conducted by the Authority
in association with the University Institute of Legal Studies, Panjab
University, Chandigarh. The run was organized for creating awareness
about Free Legal Aid which is being provided by the Legal Aid Clinic
established at UILS, Panjab University, Chandigarh. The faculty and
around 250 volunteers from the Department participated in the awareness
run. Sh. Balbir Singh, learned District & Sessions Judge, Chandigarh,
Sh. Amarinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,
Chandigarh and Sh. V.K. Kapoor, IPS (Retd), Chief Coordinator (NALSA
Schemes) were also present on the said occasion.
10. Awareness Marathon at Mani Majra:The Authority in association with Shri Akal Ji Sahai Ik Jot Mission and
Saint Hari Public School, Mani Majra, U.T., Chandigarh, organized Mani
Majra Marathon, which was an awareness Marathon, so that awareness
on various pertinent issues including the role and responsibility of the
Authority can be highlighted. A programme was thereafter, organized
and the winners were awarded with Medals and certificates.
220 / NYAYA DEEP

11. Inauguration of Legal Literacy Club:
The District Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh inaugurated a
student’s Legal Literacy Club in Government Model Senior Secondary
School, Sector 33, Chandigarh on 09.09.2016.The Legal Literacy Club
perform various functions for awareness on legal topics by conducting
debates, essay and drawing competitions.
12. Inaugurated 29th Students Legal Literacy Club
The Authority inaugurated its 29th Students Legal Literacy Club
at Government Senior Secondary School, Village Khudda Ali Sher,
Chandigarh on 15.09.2016. The same has been started by the Authority
alongwith the NSS Cell, Chandigarh. Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member
Secretary, Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services
Authority, Chandigarh and Mrs Harjinder Kaur, Club Incharge and the
Principal were present on the said occasion.
13. One Day Workshop
The Authority organized a Workshop in association with Narcotics
Control Bureau (NCB), Chandigarh Zone on the ‘Issues pertaining to
Drug Abuse & Eradication of Drug Menace with specific reference to
Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985’ in Convention
Hall of Chandigarh Judicial Academy, Sector-43, Chandigarh on
24th September, 2016. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Surya Kant, Judge, High
Court of Punjab and Haryana and Executive Chairman, State
Legal Services Authority, U.T., Chandigarh was the Chief Guest.
The Workshop was attended by Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary,
State Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh Sh. Kaushibh Sharma, DIG,
Zonal Director, NCB, Chandigarh, Sh. Balbir Singh, Distt & Session
Judge-cum-Chairman, District Legal Services Authority, Chandigarh
and Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary, District Legal Services Authority,
Chandigarh and by officers from several departments of Chandigarh
Administration including Police, Social Welfare, Education, Health, Legal
Services Panel Lawyers, Para-Legal Volunteers, Mediators and Incharges
of Legal Literacy Clubs of school and colleges of Chandigarh, Welfare
Officers from Juvenile Police Units and Officials from Anti Human
Trafficking Unit.

221 / NYAYA DEEP

14. Legal Aid:During the quarter, free Legal Aid was provided to 211 beneficiaries
under Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
15. Refresher Programmes for the Panel Lawyers and PLVs.
The Authority is regularly conducting Monthly Orientation courses
for the Lawyers/ Para-Legal Volunteers/Mediators in Chandigarh Judicial
Academy as per the directions of National Legal Services Authority, New
Delhi. In these monthly programmes various topics on Socio Legal Issues
etc. were taken up for discussion as detailed below:
Date

Topic

Speakers

29.07.2016

Domestic Violence

Mr. Jatinder
Kamboj

12.08.2016

Victim Compensation Sh. Amrinder Sharma, 20
Secretary, DLSA, U.T.,
Chandigarh.

26.08.2016

Cyber Crime

15.09.2016

Juvenile Justice (Care Mr. Jatinder Kumar 19
and protection Act Kamboj and Ms. Manjit
2015), Prisoners
Kaur Sandhu

29.09.2016

Senior Citizen
Parents Act

III.

Participants
Kumar 49

Mr. Jatinder Kumar 31
Kamboj, Sh. Amrinder Sharma, Secretary,
DLSA, U.T., Chandigarh.

and Ms. Manjit Kaur Sandhu

41

Visits to Model Jail Chandigarh:

Sh. Mahavir Singh, Member Secretary, State Legal Services Authority,
U.T. Chandigarh and Sh. Balbir Singh, District & Session Judge CumChairman, DLSA, Chandigarh regularly visited the Model Jail, Chandigarh
during the quarter to monitor the legal aid services to the jail inmates. Sh.
Rajeshwar Singh, Law Officer also visited Model Jail, Burail, Sector 45,
Chandigarh once a week and interacted with the inmates of each barrack.
Free legal aid is also provided to unrepresented inmates.
Every day Advocates interact with the inmates of each barrack and
provide free legal aid to unrepresented inmates. A total 61 visits were
made to Model Jail, Chandigarh during the quarter.
222 / NYAYA DEEP

CHHATTISGARH
S.No.

Heads

Activities

1

Legal Aid/
Services

*From July to Sep. 2016 :- Legal aid provided to 994
persons and legal advice provided to 8902 persons total
no. of benefitted persons 9896.
*In the said period 1805 legal literacy /awareness camps
are organized.

2

Lok Adalat

National Lok Adalat :As per direction of NASA in the month of July on 9.7.16
National Lok Adalat held for Electricity/Water/ Telephone/
Public Utility services matter, in the month of August on
13.8.16 National Lok Adalat held for Bank Matters, in the
month of September on 10.9.16 on Traffic/Petty/Municipal
cases.
During the said period 3 national lok adalat held on which
4446 pre-litigation cases, 2144 court pending cases total
6950 cases were settled.
Lok Adalat :During the said period 255 lok adalats are held on which
14027 cases are taken up and 2023 cases are settled and
Rs. 67632151/- awarded, total no. of benefitted persons
through lok adalat are 2883.
Permanent Lok Adalat (PU):- During the said period 277
sittings of permanent lok adalat are held and 29 cases are
settled.
Pension Lok Adalat: - During the said period 27 pension
lok adalat are held and 9 cases are settled.

3

Mediation

In the Chhattisgarh state 28 mediation Centres are
working. During the said period total 449 cases are
referred to the mediation center and 173 cases are settled
through mediation process.

4

Legal
Awareness
Activities

REGIONAL CONFERENCE :- As per directions of
NALSA the two-days regional conference of State Legal
Services authorities East Region including Chhattisgarh,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Orrisa, W. Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar,
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand was
organized on 3-4 September, 2016 at Chhattisgarh High
Court Auditorium, Bilaspur on the subject “Effective
Implementation of Legal Services Programme : Challenges
and Way forward”

223 / NYAYA DEEP

S.No.

Heads

Activities
In the above regional conference Hon’ble Executive
Chairman, NALSA, Hon’ble Chief Justice/Patron-inChief, CGSLSA, Hon’ble Executive Chairman of above
mentioned State legal services authorities, Member
Secretary and Director of NALSA, Member Secretary of
above mentioned State legal services authorities were
present.
WORKSHOP ON TRIBAL RIGHTS: - On 10th September,
2016 One-Day workshop on the subject “protection and
enforcement of Tribal Rights” was jointly organized by
CGSLSA & DLSA Raipur at DLSA Raipur. Hon’ble Mr.
Justice T.S. Thakur, The Chief Justice/ Patron –in-Chief,
NALSA was chief guest and conclave also includes the
agust presence of Hon’ble Justice Shri A.M. Sapre, Judge
Supreme Court of India, Hon’ble Dr. Raman Singh Chief
Minister C.G.State, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Deepak Gupta,
Chief Justice/Patron-in-Chief, CGSLSA, Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Pritinker Diwaker, Executive Chairman, CGSLSA,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Goutam Bhaduri, Chairman, HCLSC.
SHORT FILMS FESTIVAL :- On 17-18 September,
2016 two days short film competition “Shoot for legal
awareness” programme was jointly organized by
CGSLSA & DLSA Raipur with the collaboration of State
Women Commission C.G., Child Protection Commission,
UNICEF, Cultural Department Govt. of C.G. at Auditorium
J.N. Medical College, Raipur. In this competition film
producer from all over India including Chhattisgarh state
were participated. In the competition 80 short films were
displayed out of them 3 short films selected as super Class
and 5 short films selected as best class.
Hon’ble The Chief Justice/Patron-in-child, CGSLSA and
Hon’ble Executive Chairman, CGSLSA distributed prize
to selected films. Rs. 1 lakh awarded to each super class
films and Rs. 20 thousand awarded to each best class films.

5

Training
gramme

Pro-

During July to Sep. 2016, 21 PLVs Training Programme
organized in the State and 305 PLVs were trained.

6

Miscellaneous
Activities

Jail Visit :- On 4th August, 2016 Member Secretary, Dy.
Secretary of CGSLSA and Secretary DLSA Bilaspur visited
Central Jail, Bilaspur and meet to prisoners. The visiting
officers provide Legal Awareness and rights of prisoners
to jail inmates.
During July-Sep. 2016 -Secretaries of DLSAs have visited
to Jail, JJB, Child Home, Shelter Home, and Observation
Home etc. under their jurisdiction in time to time.

224 / NYAYA DEEP

DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI
Sr.
No.

Heads

2.
4.

5.

Training
Programmes

Activities
July 2016

August 2016

September 2016

Lok Adalats

09.07.2016

13.08.2016

10.09.2016

Legal
Awareness
Activities

“Scheme &
Laws related
to Senior
Citizens,
Rights of
Children &
related laws,
Beti Bachao
Beti Padhao,
Child Friendly
Legal Services
to children
(Juvenile
Justice Act)”
on 30.07.2016
at Community
Hall, Naroli.
--

“Rights of
prisoners &
provision
of Bail, Plea
Bargaining”
on 31.08.2016
at Sub – Jail,
Silvassa.

“NALSA
Schemes, Right
to Education,
Rights to Women,
Transgender –
Legal Problems
& Solutions,
ADR Methods
and its benefits,
Fundamental
Duties of the
Citizens” on
27.09.2016 at
Community Hall,
Dadra.

--

One day
Orientation
Training for
newly selected
Para-legal
Volunteers on
10.09.2016 at
Consumer Forum
Hall, District
Court Complex,
Silvassa.

DAMAN & DIU (July-Sept 2016)
Sr.
No.

Heads

Activities

1.

Legal Aid /
Services

2.

Lok Adalats

09.07.2016

3.

Mediation

7 Cases Referred

July 2016

August 2016

September 2016

2

1

1

1 Case
Compromised

13.08.2016
02 Cases
Referred
Nil

10.09.2016
02 Cases
Referred
Nil

225 / NYAYA DEEP

4.

Legal Awareness “Scheme & Laws
Activities
related to Senior
Citizens, Rights
of Children &
related laws,
Beti Bachao
Beti Padhao,
Child Friendly
Legal Services
to children
(Juvenile
Justice Act)” on
27.07.2016 at Koli
Patel Samaj Hall,
Nani Daman.

“NALSA
Schemes,
Right to
Education,
Rights to
Women, on
23.08.2016
at Koli Patel
Samaj Hall,
Nani Daman.

(1)
“Rights of
prisoners &
provision
of Bail, Plea
Bargaining” on
03.09.2016 at
Sub – Jail, Moti
Daman.
(2)
“ Transgender –
Legal Problems
& Solutions,
ADR Methods
and its benefits,
Fundamental
Duties of the
Citizens”
on 20.09.2016
at Machhi
Mahajan School
Hall, Nani
Daman.

DELHI
S.
No.
1.

Heads

Activities

Legal
Aid/ Court annexed
Services
Beneficiaries

Legal

Services

8653

No. of Traced Missing Children
Counselled

627

No. of victims of sexual assault
counselled

78

Compensation granted under Delhi No. of victims – 588 and
Victims Compensation Scheme, 2011 amount of Compensation – 7,74,05,502/No. of cases recommended by Under258
Trial Review Committee for granting
Bail
Legal Services Beneficiaries at Legal
Services Clinics

16,601

226 / NYAYA DEEP

2.

Lok Adalats

Type of Lok Adalat

Monthly National Lok
Adalat

3.

Mediation

No. of
cases
disposed of
8338

Amount in crores

602

6.31 crore

40.10 crore

Daily Continuous Lok
Adalat
Permanent Lok Adalat

1857

9.53 crore

Total

10,797

55.94 crore

No. of cases settled at :Crime against Women Cells at Krishna Nagar, Maurya Enclave
and Nanakpura - 89
Pre-FIR Matrimonial Cases at Police Station Rohini Sector-3 - 21
Pending Cases before Registrar, Trade Marks at Central Office
- 20

4.

5.

Total cases settled - 130
Legal Aware- Total number of Legal Literacy Programmes in Schools, Colness Activi- leges, Jails, Observation Homes, Old Age Homes, Police Staties
tions, NGOs, Industrial Areas, Community etc. - 1520
Training Programmes

No. of Training/Sensitization Programmes conducted for the
following are as under:Legal Services Advocates – 35
Mediators- 01
Advocates of Rape Crisis Cell of Delhi
Commission for women- 02
Stakeholders of Child Welfare Committees - 02
Public Prosecutors - 06
Total46

6.

Misc. Activi- Para Legal Training Programmes
ties
First programme was organized for students of Jamia Millia
Islamia from 31st August – 3rd September, 2016 and trained
124 students as PLVs and 2nd Programme for students of Guru
Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Dwarka from 6th – 7th
September, 2016 and trained 129 students as PLVs

227 / NYAYA DEEP

Para Legal Training Programmes
During the abovesaid period, DSLSA organized 02 Para Legal Training
Programmes.
First programme was organized for students of Jamia Millia Islamia
from 31st August – 3rd September, 2016 and trained 124 students as PLVs
and 2nd Programme for students of Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University, Dwarka from 6th – 7th September, 2016 and trained 129
students as PLVs. The topics of the training programmes were:
Introduction to Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 & Legal Aid
Programmes and Activities of DSLSA, Justice System, Adjudicatory and
non-Adjudicatory Mechanisms
An Overview of Fundamental Rights & Duties under Constitution of
India and Duties of PLVs
An overview of Civil Law & Courts, Law relating to possession,
injunction
POCSO Act, 2012 and PC&PNDT Act, 1994
Contract Labour, Industrial Disputes, Shops and Establishment and
Factories Act, Employees Provident Fund and Misc. Provisions Act
Effective Communication and Interpersonal Skills
Matrimonial Laws, Laws of Inheritance, adoption, Maintenance,
Dowry Prohibition Act etc.
RTI Act, 2005 & Consumer Protection Act, 1986, etc.

Certificate Course for students of Lakshmibai College, Delhi
University:DSLSA conducted a Legal Awareness Course for the students of
Lakshmibai College, University of Delhi w.e.f. 12th August, 2016. In this
regard, on 21st July, a Brief Introduction of the Programme was held by
Secretaries of Central and West DLSAs. DSLSA also prepared a calendar
for the said programme, which is as under:

228 / NYAYA DEEP

S.
No.

Date

Time

Topic

Resource Person

1

12.08.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Rights against
domestic violence and
the working of the
Dowry Prohibition act

Ms. Jyoti Kler,
Secretary,
Central DLSA

2

19.08.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Matrimonial Laws

Ms. Shailender
Kaur,
Incharge,
Mediation
Centre,
Karkardooma

3

26.08.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Understanding
the working of the
criminal justice system

Sh. Dharmender
Rana, Addl.
Secretary,
DSLSA

4

29.08.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Sexual Offences
against women : Legal
Redressal

Sh. Dharmesh
Sharma,
Member
Secretary,
DSLSA

5

05.09.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Rights of lesbians,
gays, bisexuals
and transgenders
under the Indian
Laws and prevailing
international trends

Ms. Anjali
Gopalan,
Executive
Director, Naz
Foundation

6

09.09.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Basis framework of the
Indian Constitution
and its relevance for
citizens: Prevailing
gender inequalities, a
reality check

Sh. Naveen
Gupta,
Secretary, West
DLSA

7

16.09.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Property rights for
Women

Sh. Sanjeev
Jain, Special
Secretary,
DSLSA

8

19.09.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

Right against sexual
harassment at
workplace: Legal
framework

Sh. Naveen
Kumar Kashyap,
Secretary,
North-East
DLSA

229 / NYAYA DEEP

9

10

23.09.2016

03.10.2016

3.00 – 4.30 PM

3.00 – 4.30 PM

The working of the
Right to Information
Act: An effective tool
to secure fundamental
rights

Sh. Venkatesh
Nayak,

Labour Laws
governing rights of
working women

Ms. Raavi
Birbal, Advocate

Commonwealth
Human Rights
Initiative

Felicitation of PLVs of Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) and Legal Literacy
Programme for the students of JMI:On 17th August, 2016, the Special Secretary and Addl. Secretary, DSLSA
held a talk at Faculty of Law, JMI on the topic ‘Equality before Law’
followed by felicitation of 09 Para-Legal Volunteers/students of JMI and
gave them books and Certificates of Appreciation for their participation in
the Project/Survey of Manual Scavenging in Delhi. On this occasion, the
Ld. Officers of DSLSA also spread legal awareness on the topic of “AntiRagging” and also made the students aware about the activities of DSLSA.
On 22-23 August, 2016, DSLSA in association with Bachpan Bachao
Andolan (BBA) under the aegis of NALSA, organized a National
Workshop on Rehabilitation of Missing and Trafficked Children. The
programme was inaugurated by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India and Sh.
Kailash Satyarthi, Nobel Peace Laureate on 22nd August, New Delh. On
23rd August, the workshop was organized at Constitution Club of India.

GOA
Sr.
No.

Heads

Activities

1

Legal Aid/
Services

1) S.C. /S.T. : 04
2) Women : 112
3) Custody : 103
4) General : 67
TOTAL : : 286

2

Lok Adalats

Types of Lok
Adalat

Matter
Places

Matter
Settled

Compensation/
Settlement
Amount

National Lok
Adalat

4731

1078

2,11,78,497/-

230 / NYAYA DEEP

Permanent Lok
Adalat
Permanent Lok
Adalat UPUS
Total:
3

Mediation

Cases Referred
39

4

Opening
Balance (208)
Legal
Awareness
Activities

5

Miscellaneous
Activities

360

122

9,33,900/-

207

16

30,461/-

5297

1216

2,21,12,858/-

Cases
Settled
2

Cases not
settled
177

Cases Pending
68

During the Period from July, 2016 to September, 2016 the SLSA/
District Legal Services Authority and Taluka Legal Services
Committees in the State conducted 40 Legal Awareness camps
conducted on various topics as follows:
1) NALSA (Legal Services to the workers in the Unorganized
Sector) Scheme, 2015
2) NALSA (Child Friendly Legal Services to Children and their
Protection Scheme, 2015.
3) NALSA (Protection and Enforcement of Tribal Rights) Scheme,
2015.
4) NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and
Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015.
5) Right to Education Act.
6) Road Safety Weeks.
7) Provisions of the POCSO Act
8) Protection of Water Resources, etc.
About 4411 persons were benefited with this programmes.
The Secretary, DLSA, North had conducted programme on Goa
Doordsarshan to create awareness on the Scheme of NALSA
(Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of
Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015 in the month of August, 2016 and on
the subject Legal Aid in the month of September, 2016
The Authority in co-ordination with Students of Salgaocar Law
College carried out street play at Kadamba Bus Stand, Panaji,
Market area Panaji on the NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims
of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015 in
the month of August, 2016.

HARYANA (July-Sept 2016)
Sr. No. Type of Lok Adalat
1

No. of Lok Adalats held [including daily Lok Adalat in
each cases]

18472

231 / NYAYA DEEP

2

No. of cases taken up

177982

3

No. of cases settled

69176

4

No. of cases settled in Lok
Adalats/Special Lok Adalats

19004

5

No. of cases settled by PLA (PUS)

11712

6
7

No. of persons benefited through legal aid
Legal literacy Camps held

2600
5320

8

No. of benefited persons in camps

9

Number of applications disposed of under Victim
81
Compensation Scheme
Amount of compensation disbursed under Victim 10596000
Compensation Scheme
Awareness through Community Radios, all India radios
48
and through Doordarshan

10
11

1908616

LOK ADALATS
Monthly National Lok Adalat held on 9.7.2016, 13.8.2016 and 10.9.2016
on Electricity/Water/Telephone Public Utility Services, Banking matters,
Recovery suits and Criminal Compoundable matters across the State of
Haryana. In the said Lok Adalat, 10415 cases were settled. Pre-litigation
cases as well as pending cases were settled involving an amount of Rs
187010720. /-

MEDIATION

Mediation Centres are functional in all the 21 Districts of Haryana and
17 Sub Divisions. From July to September 2016, 2536 cases are referred
to these Mediation Centres, out of which 524 cases have been settled
through Mediation. As per directions passed in Civil Appeal No.1794 of
2013 (Arising out of special Leave Petition (Civil) No.4782 of 2007) titled
as Srinivas Rao vs. D.A.Deepa, Pre-litigation Mediation desks have been
set up in all the Mediation Centres to deal with matrimonial disputes,
before they reach the court. During the quarter July to September, 2016,
1614 cases were referred to these Pre-litigation desks/clinics, out of which
256 were settled by them.

LEGAL AWARENESS ACTIVITIES
Orientation Programme for Police

DLSA, Panchkula organized an orientation programme from
15.09.2016 to 20.09.2016 for the lady police officers and officials of Mahila
232 / NYAYA DEEP

Thana, MDC, Panchkula. It was organized primarily to apprise police
about important provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure including
law on arrest and search. Interactive sessions were also held during the
said orientation programme.
Fundamental Duties
During the period from July to September, 2016 various camps
were held across the state of Haryana to spread awareness about the
Fundamental Duties.
Legal Literacy Activities
The Legal Literacy Camps for the officials working at Grass Root Level
are organized with an objective to apprise officials about the concept of
legal services. Such camps were organized by District Legal Services
Authorities Palwal on 16.7.2016, Panchkula and Panipat on 27.8.2016 and
Rewari on 3.9.2016 and Rohtak on 17.9.2016.
Camps for Villagers
Legal awareness camps were held at different villages in the state of
Haryana from July 2016 to September 2016.These awareness camps were
organized on Sundays or Holidays.
Road Safety Campaign
As per the report titled “Road Accidents in India-2015” published
by Ministry of Road Transports and Highways, the total number of road
accidents increased by 2.5 per cent from 4,89,400 in 2014 to 5,01,423 in
2015.The total number of persons killed in road accidents increased by 4.6
per cent from 1,39,671 in 2014 to 1,46,133 in 2015. Road accident injuries
have also increased by 1.4 per cent from 4, 93,474 in 2014 to 5, and 00,279
in 2015. The severity of road accidents, measured in terms of number of
persons killed per 100 accidents has increased from 28.5 in 2014 to 29.1
in 2015. The report further states that 1,374 accidents and 400 deaths take
place every day on Indian roads.
Keeping in view all these aspects, Haryana SLSA launched “One Life”:
Road Safety Awareness Campaign. It was launched on 23.07.2016 at the
Administrative Office of Haryana SLSA at Panchkula by Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal, Judge, Punjab and Haryana High Court and
Executive Chairman, Haryana SLSA. District Legal Services Authorities in
all the 21 Districts of Haryana State carried out the Campaign successfully
from 23.07.2016 to 29.07.2016. All the aspects related to road safety were
233 / NYAYA DEEP

covered. Cycle rallies were also carried out to spread awareness about road
safety. Skits and Nukkad Nataks were also performed to spread awareness
about road safety. About 619 awareness camps were held across the State
of Haryana under the said project.
Legal Literacy Camp
A legal awareness camp was organized at Mango Mela, Pinjore by
DLSA, Panchkula, from 02.07.2016 to 03.07.2016 to impart legal awareness
to the public. The said camp was visited by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay
Kumar Mittal, Judge, Punjab & Haryana High Court, Chandigarh and
Executive Chairman, Haryana SLSA, Panchkula. The banners regarding
the Fundamental Duties, enshrined in the Constitution of India, beneficial
provisions regarding the Senior Citizens and various latest schemes of
NALSA were displayed in the said camp. Separate Corners were setup for
displaying literature, paintings, banners, and collage reflecting activities
of DLSA, Panchkula, Mediation, Lok Adalat and different laws. The
banners giving information regarding the Monthly National Lok Adalats
and the persons entitled to free legal aid were also displayed at prominent
places in the Stall. A total of 547 persons including senior citizens, school
students, persons belonging to the weaker and marginalized sections of
the society visited the stall put up by the DLSA, Panchkula during the said
Mela where about 3000 pamphlets and booklets were distributed.
Awareness on Independence Day
On the occasion of Independence Day, DLSAs, under the aegis of
Haryana SLSA, held various awareness camps across the State of Haryana.
In the said camps, apart from explaining laws relating to women, senior
citizens etc., People were told about the importance of Fundamental
Duties envisaged in the Constitution of India.
Awareness camp at College
DLSA, Ambala organized an awareness camp for the students of Arya
Girls College, Ambala Cantt. In the said awareness programme, college
students were apprised about the laws relating to women. They were
also informed about the concept of free legal aid. Students were told that
women are entitled to free legal aid under Section 12 of the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 read with Section 19 of the Haryana SLSA Rules,
1996.

234 / NYAYA DEEP

Awareness camp at Villages
DLSA, Kaithal organized various legal awareness camps in the months
of August and September, 2016. The idea behind organizing camps at these
villages was to reach out to the people living in the remotest area and make
them aware about the functions of the Legal Services Authorities. The
villagers were explained in detail the concept of legal aid. This apart, the
rights under various laws were explained in a comprehensible language
to the villagers.
Awareness through Legal Literacy wheels
In the months of August and September, 2016, legal awareness camps
were held through two legal literacy vehicles in the districts of Ambala,
Panchkula, Mewat and Sirsa. 39 camps were organized in the rural areas
in Ambala. 25 legal awareness camps were held in district Sirsa. 25 legal
awareness camps were held in Panchkula and 31 legal awareness camps
were held in district Mewat. People were apprised of the various important
laws. The concept of free legal aid also explained to them during the said
campaign.
TRAINING PROGRAMME
Training programmes were organized for the panel lawyers of various
District Legal Services Authorities and Sub-Divisional Legal Services
Committees as per the following schedule:Sr.
No.

District

Date
9th & 10th July and 23rd & 24th July, 2016

1.

Hissar and Fatehabad

2.

Rewari, Kosli and Narnaul 13th & 14th August, 2016, 20th & 21st
Mohindergarh
August, 2016

3.

Jhajjar, Bahadurgarh
Rohtak Meham

and 10th & 11th September, 2016, 24th & 25th
September, 2016

The programmes were organized with an objective to enhance skills
of the panel lawyers so that quality legal services are rendered to the
weaker and marginalized sections of the society. The programmes were
conducted by the master trainers. In the said programmes, training was
imparted as per the schedule provided by NALSA in Training Module
Part-1.The training programmes were conducted by the Master Trainers.
235 / NYAYA DEEP

Various methods of teaching were used in the said programme such as
lecture method, group discussion, quiz method etc. Haryana SLSA has
prepared a calendar for organizing such training programmes for panel
lawyers in all the Districts of Haryana.

MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
a. To effectively and meaningfully implement of NALSA (Child Friendly
Legal Services to Children and their Protection) Scheme, 2015, a
programme was conducted on 27.7.2016 at Narnaul. 222 Children
aged between 6-14 years were identified by doing survey of the entire
district of Mohindergarh who were not going to School. In Panchkula
district 133 children aged between 6-14 years were identified who
were not going to School. The matter was taken up with the Education
Department for their admission and in pursuant to the efforts more
than 100 students have been admitted in schools.
b. To effectively and meaningfully implement of NALSA (Legal Services
to the Mentally Ill and Mentally Disabled Persons) Scheme, 2015,
a programme/seminar was conducted on 29.08.2016 at Faridabad. 314
mentally ill person were identified, benefits of pension provided to 73
persons, benefits of Nirmaya Insurance Policy provided to 71 persons
and guardianship certificates were arranged to issue 24 persons.
c.

To effectively and meaningfully implement of NALSA (Legal
Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of D r u
g M e n a c e) S c h e m e, 2 0 1 5, a programme was organized on
30.9.2016 in the Auditorium of Vivekananda Senior Secondary School,
Sirsa which was attended by School children, teachers and chemists of
district Sirsa. The Secretary, DLSA, Sirsa highlighted the objective of
the scheme and also steps taken by DLSA, Sirsa on the issue of Drug
abuse. The participants shared their practical experiences, highlighted
programme and gave suggestions as to how the drug menace can be
tackled.

ADR Centre at Ambala
ADR Centre of Ambala was inaugurated on 30.7.2016 by Hon’ble Mr.
Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal Executive Chairman, Haryana SLSA. Hon’ble
Mr. Justice Rajesh Bindal and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Daya Chaudhary also
graced the occasion. The ADR Centre, Ambala comprises of Front office
as contemplated under the NALSA (Free and Competent Legal Services)
Regulations 2010, Mediation Cabins, Permanent Lok Adalat (public utility
Services), Multipurpose Conference Hall, office of Secretary, District Legal
236 / NYAYA DEEP

Services etc. Public can avail themselves of the services of Free Legal Aid,
Lok Adalat, Mediation etc. Under one roof at the new Centre. It is the 17th
ADR Centre in the State of Haryana.
7th State Level Annual Function, Kurukshetra University.
The State Level Annual Function of Students Legal Literacy Mission
was held in the Auditorium of Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra on
18.09.2016. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jagdish Singh Khehar, Judge, Supreme
Court of India was the Chief Guest and the function was inaugurated by
Hon’ble Mr. Manohar Lal, Chief Minister, Haryana. Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Shiavax Jal Vazifdar, Chief Justice, High Court of Punjab & Haryana,
Patron-in-Chief, Haryana SLSA presided over the function.
Hon’ble Chief Minister in his speech expressed his view that income
ceiling under Section 12 (h) of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
should be increased from Rs.1,50,000/- to Rs.3,00,000/- per annum for
availing free legal services so that a large number of people in need of legal
services might be benefited. He also threw light on socio-legal problems
being faced today by the society.
His Lordship detailed each and every category of persons who are
entitled to get free legal aid services under the Legal Services Authorities
Act, 1987. All the winning students of Schools and Colleges at State Level
in all the categories were awarded with certificates.
A short film “(Kartvya Nibhana Hai)” on Fundamental Duties which
is got prepared by Haryana SLSA was released by Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Jagdish Singh Khehar. The same was also shown during the Annual
Function of Students Legal Literacy Mission held on 18.09.2016 and
received applause and appreciation from the audience. Haryana SLSA
is intending to distribute around 5000 copies of this film in Schools and
Colleges of Haryana.
Educative presentations made by the students reflected the socio-legal
problems which the society is facing today, and the need to tackle the said
problems.
Visit to DLSAs
On 19.8.2016 and 20.8.2016, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Kumar Mittal,
Judge, High Court of Punjab & Haryana, Chandigarh and Executive
237 / NYAYA DEEP

Chairman, Haryana SLSA visited DLSAs at Faridabad, Gurgaon, Mewat,
Palwal, Jhajjar and Rohtak to take stock of the various legal aid programmes
under taken by these Authorities. His lordship interacted with the panel
advocates. Front offices were also visited, and the registers kept in the
Front Offices were also seen by His Lordship.

HIMACHAL PRADESH
Lok Adalats
299 Quarterly Lok Adalats were organised during the period of July
to September, 2016 in which 1415 cases were disposed of in the State of
Himachal Pradesh.
3 National Lok Adalats were organized during the period of July 2016
to September, 2016 in which 28631 cases were disposed of in the State of
Himachal Pradesh.
3 Mobile Lok Adalat were conducted during the period in which 28
cases were referred amicably.
During the period 34 cases were disposed of in Permanent Lok Adalat
(Public utility Services).

Mediation
During the quarter, 516 cases were referred by the different courts for
Mediation throughout State, out of which 120 cases were settled.

Awareness-cum-Legal Literacy Camps
During the period, 430 Legal Literacy Camps were organized by
DLSAs/Sub Divisional Legal Services Committees on different topics
including the rights of women, Children and Senior Citizen, Right to
Information, Consumer issues, different Welfare and Social security
Schemes of the State and Central Government and various other topics
as per schedule approved by this Authority. In total 33412 persons were
benefited.
8 Awareness Camps were organized in the State/Regional fairs during
the period by setting up stalls. The stalls were visited by 2638 number of
persons who were apprised about the various beneficial Schemes of the
State and NALSA.
238 / NYAYA DEEP

The Multi Utility Mobile Van was sent to International Minjar Fair at
Chamba during July, 2016. DLSA, Chamba set up a stall and organised
various programme for dissemination of legal awareness through dramas
and skits which were followed by panel discussion.
In order to sensitize Long term and undertrial prisoners about their
Legal rights, 25 Legal Awareness Camps were organized in the Jails. In
total, 1530 prisoners were apprised about their legal rights/free legal
services available to them.
The Secretaries, DLSAs organized Awareness Camps in Juvenile
Home during the period and sensitized the inmates about their rights.
Authorities were also sensitized about child issues.
A programme on Drug Menace was organized on 10.8.2016 in New
Auditorium, High Court of H.P. The programme was inaugurated by
Hon’ble Chief Justice and Patron-in Chief, HPLSA in the presence of
Hon’ble Judges of High Court of Himachal Pradesh, Advocate General
to the Government of Himachal Pradesh, Assistant Solicitor General,
Government of India, Deputy Commissioner, Shimla, Senior Advocates
High Court of Himachal Pradesh, President of Bar Association and Bar
Members. The programme was attended by 530 students of various
schools, teachers, and social workers. Skits and cultural programmes
were organized to convey message about ill effects of consuming Tobacco,
Drugs and other substances.
An awareness programme for the worker of unorganized sector was
organized at Municipal Committee, Hall, Solan on 28.6.2016 by DLSA,
Solan on New Schemes of NALSA i.e NALSA (Legal Services to the
Worker in the Unorganized Sector) Scheme, 2015. About 200 participants
attended the programme.
The DLSAs organized 10 camps for construction/Industrial workers
at the sites in which Workers were apprised of the welfare schemes of
Central and State Government. They were also explained the procedure
of getting themselves registered for the benefits under Welfare Scheme.
Construction/Industrial Workers were also apprised of NALSA (Legal
Services to the workers in the Unorganized Sector) Scheme, 2015.
4 Awareness Camps to spread awareness against ill effects of Drug
were organized in the various schools by DLSAs in the State of H.P.
during the period. Valuable information was given to the students and
239 / NYAYA DEEP

teachers about the ill effects of Drugs. About 2863 students attended said
programmes.

Training Programmes
Training programmes were organized for the Panel Lawyers of
DLSA, Kinnaur at Rampur Bushehar on 2nd and 3rd July, 2016. In the said
programme, training was imparted as the per Training Module Part-I
provided by NALSA with a view to enhance skills of the Panel Lawyers so
that quality Legal Services are rendered to the weaker and marginalized
sections of society.
During the period, training programme was organized for the Panel
Lawyers and Para-Legal Volunteers by Secretaries, DLSAs in the State of
H.P. under new schemes of NALSA, where it was emphasized to render
quality services to marginalized sections of society.

Other Activities
Broad casting of “Kanoon Ki Baat” in All India Radio.
During the quarter, 13 Radio talks on “Kanoon Ki Baat” were aired on
Monday from 8:30 AM to 8:50 AM. The viewers were sensitized about the
Labour Law, Crime and Punishment, Mediation, Civil Court Procedure
etc. by Judicial Officers and Advocates
Lessons-in-Law
During the period 207 Schools were covered in the State of H.P.
by teaching “Lessons-in-Law/Kanooni Path” by Judicial Officers and
Advocates. 23755 students were taught Lessons-in-Law/Kanooni Path.
Afforestation Programme
Afforestation programme was organized in Schools and Colleges
of State of Himachal Pradesh in the month of July, 2016 in which 2453
students of 103954 Schools/Colleges participated and 114153 saplings
were planted.
Legal Services Clinics in Jails
Legal Services Clinics in jails have been established in all District Jail/
Sub jails in the State of H.P. These Clinics are manned by the PLVs (Long
Term Prisoners) and Retainer Lawyers. They sit in such clinics on every
240 / NYAYA DEEP

Wednesday for whole day. 249 persons were benefited in these clinics
w.e.f. 1.7.2016 to 30.9.2016.
Front Offices
42 front offices have been established one in High Court and rest in
all the DLSAs and Sub Divisional Legal Services Committees. The front
offices are manned by the Retainer Lawyers and Para-Legal Volunteers
who are providing Legal Services to the litigants and general public. 698
numbers of persons were benefited.
Village Legal Care and Support Centre
The H.P. State Legal Services Authority is implementing the Para Legal
Volunteer Scheme introduced by the NALSA, New Delhi. At present 893
Village Legal Care and Support Centres are functional in State of H.P. and
are being manned by Retainer Lawyers and Para-Legal Volunteers.
Jail Inspections
Periodical Jail inspections were conducted by the Member Secretary
and the Chairmen DLSAs in compliance of the judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court in writ petition(C) No.559 of 1994 cases titled as R.D.
Upadhyay Vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Others, AIR 2006 S.C., 1946.
Besides Legal Aid Counsel also visited jails every week to render necessary
legal assistance.
Visit to Children, BAL /Balika Ashrams and Observation Homes
During this period, 45 visits/ inspections of Observation/Children
Homes, Nari Niiketan etc. were conducted by Sub Divisional Legal
Services Committees and DLSAs, where children/ inmates were informed
of their legal rights including other valuable information. Authorities of
Homes/Ashram were sensitized to be more careful about hygiene and
other issues of Children/inmates.
JHARKHAND
A Conclave on Mediation in the State of Jharkhand to deliberate
upon the present status of mediation as also the way forward was
organised by the Jharkhand State Legal Services Authority.
241 / NYAYA DEEP

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Anil R. Dave, Judge, Supreme Court of India and
Executive Chairman, NALSA appreciated the work done in the field
of mediation in the State of Jharkhand. His Lordship encouraged the
Mediators of the State of Jharkhand present over there to work hard.
His Lordship shared the experience of His Lordship’s earlier visit to the
State and louded the efforts made by the Patron-in-Chief and Executive
Chairman, JHALSA.
His Lordship further said that the Mediation is a good thing and both
parties are happy here and it settles relationship. His Lordship shared one
experience where the dispute between brother and sister was resolved
through mediation amicably. His Lordship noted that Mediators are
helping the judges in disposal of cases and mediators should know the
human psychology.
242 / NYAYA DEEP

In his address, Hon’ble Mr. Justice A.K. Sikri, Judge, Supreme Court
of India said that :
• I am a trained mediator. It is my firm belief that mediation under
most of the circumstances is best method of dispute resolution. It
is best method of doing justice.
• His Lordship shared experience to establish mediation is an art of
finding solution no one can refuse.
• His Lordship further shared experience to establish as to how
Mediation is Magic which unites hearts, relationship and human
beings.
• His Lordship further shared experience as to how it is time and
cost efficient method of dispute resolution.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Virender Singh, Chief Justice, High Court of
Jharkhand-cum-Patron-in-Chief, JHALSA said in
His Lordship address that :
• One of parametre to ascertain the success of Justice Delivery
System is to know as to how quickly the matters are disposed of.
• Mediation plays very important role in disposal of cases.
• Let us understand the mediation from a different angle. When we
talk of mediation we must try to know the root cause of problem,
where is shoe pinching.
• Trained mediators have a knack of mediation and Mediation is
required.
• So far as the success rate of mediation in the State of Jharkhand is
concerned, as Patron-in-Chief, JHALSA, I am satisfied. The success
rate is really satisfying.
• Through Mediation we have been able to dispose of many-many
cases of commercial disputes & many other types of disputes.
In his welcome-address, Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N. Patel, Judge,
High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman, JHALSA, said that:
• Today is first visit of Hon’ble Chief Justice of India in this JHALSA
premises. His Lordship has taken several initiatives like ‘Kanoon
ki Baat’ on TV/Radio, visit of PLVs on Sundays and Wednesdays to
Legal Services Clinics and 7 Schemes of NALSA to ensure Access
to Justice for all.
• As Executive Chairman, NALSA My Lord Justice Anil R. Dave
has given a new meaning to Legal Aid in criminal matters by
introducing the concept of Remand Advocate and His Lordship
has approved the deputation of Remand Advocate in all Criminal
Courts.
• This is first visit of My Lord Justice A.K. Sikri, Judge, Supreme
Court of India to this JHALSA premises.
243 / NYAYA DEEP

•

Success rate of Jharkhand High Court Mediation Centre is 67% &
Ranchi Mediation Centre is 64%.
• Success rate of 17th Batch of Expert Mediators is 58% and that of
overall state is 50%.09
Mediators who received the Trophy and Certificate of Commendation
for Outstanding work in Mediation in the State of Jharkhand in 2015-16:
Sri Rajesh Das, Mediator , Jamshedpur Mediation Centre ( Success
Rate - 82.69% ), Ms. Urmila Sharma, Mediator, Giridih Mediation Centre
( Success Rate - 80 % ), Sri T. B. Kar, Mediator, Jamshedpur Mediation
Centre ( Success Rate - 69.11% ), Ms. Anita Choudhary, Mediator, Deoghar
Mediation Centre ( Success Rate - 66.66% ), Sri Nukumuddin Sk, Mediator,
Pakur Mediation Centre( Success Rate - 65.71% ), Ms. Reena Dey, Mediator,
Godda Mediation Centre ( Success Rate - 63.63% ), Sri Suman Srivastava,
Mediator, Randhi and High Court Mediation Centre ( Success Rate 68.75% ), Mr. Naseem Ansari, Mediator, Lohardagga Mediation Centre,
Ms. Anita Verma, Mediator, Khunti Mediation Centre
Training Programme of Staff of DLSA/SDLSC and HCLSC on
JHALSA Online Legal Services Case & Data Management System on
28th-29th August 2016
Jharkhand SLSA organised two days training for the staffs of High
Court Legal Services Committee, DLSAs, Sub Divisional LSCs on JHALSA
Online Legal Services Case & Data Management System. JHALSA Online
Legal Services Case & Data Management System is a Online software
launched by JHALSA with a view to bring uniformity in maintaining
of Statistical data with respect to Legal Services Activities by all DLSA/
SDLSC of Jharkhand. During the two days training the staffs were make
familiar with this new online system and provide them technical training
for maintain the Legal Services Cases and data online. Hon’ble Mr. Justice
D.N.Patel, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman,
JHALSA, Sri A.K.Rai, Member Secretary, JHALSA, Sri Santosh Kumar,
Secretary, HCLSC and Sri Satyakam Priyadarshi, Deputy Secretary,
JHALSA addressed the participants during the training programme.

Relief provided by District Disaster Management Core
Group, DLSA Sahibganj to the Flood Victims
This year the flood caused huge devastation to the person, properties
and cattles in the district of Sahibganj. The suffering of the people cannot
be narrated in words. Sec- 12 (e) of Legal Services Authority Act 1987
requires the legal services activity during time of disaster and His Lordship
Hon’ble Mr. Justice D. N. Patel, Hon’ble Executive Chairman, JHALSA
immediately provided for essential relief in form of food and medicine,
to the flood victims. The relief work was undertaken on mission-mode by
District Disaster Mangangment Core Group of DLSA Sahibganj. Under
the direct supervision of his Lordship the Secretary and Chairman of
DLSA alongwith members of district Bar.
244 / NYAYA DEEP

20 Hrs. Refresher Training Programme for Mediators
at Ranchi, Chibasa, deoghar and Daltonganj at Palamau
The Trained Trainers nominated by MCPC namely Sri Madhusudan
Ganguly, Sri L.K.Giri, Ms. Manisha Rani of Mediation Centre, Ranchi and
Sri Rajesh Das and Sri T.B.Kar of Mediation Centre, Jamshedpur imparted
training to the participants during the three days training programme.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N.Patel, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand &
Executive Chairman, JHALSA addressed the participants and outlined to
the importance of such training.
Jharkhand State Legal Services Authority under the aegis of Mediation
and Conciliation Project Committee (MCPC), Supreme Court of India
organised
20 Hours Refresher Training Programme as follows:
13th to 15th September, 2016

17th to 19th September, 2016

Nyaya Sadan,
JHALSA, Ranchi

Ranchi, Jamtara,
Garhwa and
Khunti

Civil Court
Seraikella

Seraikella and
Chaibasa

Civil Court Dumka

Dumka and
Pakur

Civil Court
Palamau

Lohardaga and
Palamau

Civil Court
Deoghar

Deoghar,
Godda, Giridih

Civil Court
Jamshedpur

Jamshedpur,
Gumla and
Sahibganj

The said Refresher Training Programme was organised as per the
direction of Hon’ble MCPC, Supreme Court of India. The participants
of the said training programme were Advocate Mediators & Expert
Mediators.

245 / NYAYA DEEP

Plenary Meeting of Legal Services Institutions
at Deoghar on 23rd of September
Santhal Pragana Region comprises of six districts namely Deoghar,
Dumka, Sahibganj, Godda, Pakur and Jamtara. His Lordship Hon’ble
Executive Chairman, JHALSA viewed and have such meeting to accelerate
the legal services activities in the state of Jharkhand. This was first of such
plenary Meeting at Regional level.
Topic- Role of Legal Services Authorities in Socio - Legal matters
such as witchcraft atrocities, child labour, child marriage & trafficking.
P.M. - Address including PPT on Child labour & Trafficking by
P.M.S.P. Deoghar
3.20 P.M.

Speaker - Sri A.K. Rai, Member Secretary on withchcraft

3.40 P.M.

Atrocities and steps taken by JHALSA (Power Point
presentation)

3.40 P.M.

Speaker- President of Deoghar District BAR Association

4.00 P.M.

on the topic - Role of Legal Services Authorities in socio
- legal matters.

Tea

4.00 P.M.- 4.30 P.M.
Valedictory Session (4.30 P.M.- 5.25 P.M.)

4.30 P.M.- 4.40 P.M.

Address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.
Chandrashekhar, Judge, High Court of
Jharkhand

4.40 P.M.- 4.50 P.M.

Address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Aparesh
Kumar Singh, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand

4.50 P.M.- 5.00 P.M.

Address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice H.C.
Mishra, Judge, High Court of Jharkhand &
Administrative Judge, Deoghar Judgeship

5.00 P.M.- 5.10 P.M.

Address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice D. N. Patel,
Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive
Chairman, JHALSA

5.10 P.M.

Keynote address by Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Virender Singh, Chief Justice, High Court of
Jharkhand-cum-Patron in chief,JHALSA
246 / NYAYA DEEP

Vote of Thanks by Member Secretary, JHALSA
BAL LOK ADALAT
organised throughout the State of Jharkhand by Jharkhand State Legal
Services Authority on the 30th Day of September, 2016 (Friday)
Proper care, protection and development of children are the pious
duty of every civilisation. In our country several lacs children are under
difficult circumstances who need proper care, protection, development,
treatment, social re-integration by adopting a child friendly approach.
Rehabilitation is the call of the hour. In the Juvenile Justice Boards across
the State of Jharkhand about 4000 cases are pending. Juvenile Justice
(Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015 is came into effect from 15th
of January, 2016 provides that the enquiry should be completed within a
period of 4 months from the date of first production of the child before the
Board and this period may be extended for a maximum period of 2 more
months [Section 14 (2)]
Section 28 of the J.J. Act, 2015 requires sitting of Child Welfare
Committee for at least 20 days in a month and it has authority to decide
cases for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation
of children in need of care and protection. Section 36 of the Act provides
that the Child Welfare Committee shall pass final order within 4 months
of first production of the child.
It is clear that the law mandates disposal of matter relating to children
on an early date. Therefore, His Lordship Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N. Patel,
Judge, High Court of Jharkhand and Executive Chairman, JHALSA
viewed to hold first Bal Lok Adalat on 30th of September, 2016 across the
State of Jharkhand to dispose of the matters relating to children in conflict
with law and children in need of care and protection.
The Bal Lok Adalat was inaugurated by Hon’ble Mr. Justice DN Patel,
Executive Chairman, Jharkhand State Legal Services Authority through
Video Conferencing and the said lok adalat is first of its kind in the State
of Jharkhand. The disposal figure is as follows:
Matters of JJB disposed : 331 Matters of CWC disposed : 575

247 / NYAYA DEEP

KARNATAKA
Lok Adalats
Details of Monthly National Lok Adalat Organized and Cases settled

Sl.
No.

Monthly
National
Lok Adalat
conducted
on

Nature
of cases

1.

09-07-2016

2.

3.

No. of cases disposed of in

Settlement
Amount

Pending
cases

Pre- litigation cases

Total

Electricity/
Water/
Telephone/
Public Utility
disputes

10,845

5,85,882

5,96,727

1,16,32,08,179/-

13-08-2016

Bank Matters:
u/s 138 NI
Act, Recovery
suits

19,724

41,268

60,992

62,68,53,393/-

10-09-2016

Criminal
Compoundable Matters

19,541

89,983

1,09,524

36,52,90,514/-

Details of Regular Lok Adalats Organized and Cases settled
Sl.
No.

Regular Lok AdaNo. of cases disposed off in
lat held during the Pending Pre- litigaTotal
month of
tion cases
cases

in MVC Cases

Settlement Amount
in LAC Cases

1.

July-2016

15,675

11,223

26,898

9,15,66,811/-

39,35,082/-

2.

August-2016

19,275

4,721

23,996

13,55,61,616/-

53,95,000/-

2.

September-2016

19,174

40,292

59,466

10,71,31,473/-

73,95,490/-

Permanent Lok Adalat: 1,468 cases were disposed of by seven
Permanent Lok Adalats, in which settlement amount was Rs.9,85,40,345/-/-

Details of Cases Settled by PLA under Different Categories
Mediation Centres & ADR Centres:
Total 534 Cases were settled in the 28 District Mediation & ADR Centres.
248 / NYAYA DEEP

Free Legal Aid and Advice:
During the quarter July to September 2016, Karnataka State Legal
Services Authority has provided Legal Aid to a total of 1306 persons &
Advices to 9,648 people.
Free Legal Advice given: During the quarter, free legal advice was
provided to 3,323 persons in CDPO, 2,398 persons were benefitted in
Village Legal Care Support Centers, 7,011 persons were benefitted in
Legal Aid Clinics, 1,073 Under Trial Prisoners were provided free legal
aid.
Legal Literacy/Legal Awareness Camps: During the quarter July to
September 2016, 2,059 programmes were organized by all District Legal
Services Authorities and Taluka Legal Services Committees in the State. In
which 3, 03,320 beneficiaries were empowered on various aspects of Law.

KERALA
LEGAL AID/SERVICES
“Ooril Oru Dhinam”- Visit to Tribal area at Vazhachal and Adalat
DLSA Thrissur conducted an Adalat, coordinated by the Kudumbasree,
on 25.08.2016 in the tribal area of Athirappilly and Vazhachal Division. All
the tribal people in the division attended Adalat for presenting various
issues relating to drinking water and toilet, non-availability of Transport
service, opportunity for education, unemployment, lack of Medical
facility, non-availability of government funds under special schemes etc.
The MLA, District Collector and officers of the Government attended the
programme.
•

DLSA Secretary and MLA Chalakudy visited the interior areas
situated about 20 kms from Vazhachal Forest Office on 29.08.2016 with
the help of Police and Forest Officials to reinstate the Tribal people
migrated from “Mukkumpuzha” in Vazhachal Forest Division to
some other places. Para-Legal Volunteers with the help of Promoters
were deployed to interact with Tribal people and discuss the problems
faced by them.

•

The Secretary, DLSA Thodupuzha inspected the Old Age Home and
complaints of the inmates were taken into consideration and a suo
moto PLP was registered. Complaints on lack of living conditions were
249 / NYAYA DEEP

addressed. 25 nos. of bed and pillows procured through sponsorship
were distributed to the inmates.
•

On the basis of news in a local daily and a PLP filed by a PLV, the
issue regarding waste management and traffic system of Muttom
Panchayat, under DLSA Thodupuzha was solved.

•

Encroachment into the Government Land: At TLSC, Devikulam,
a PLP mooted by a PLV on the encroachment into the property of
Government Primary Health Centre by a private party was considered
and the problem was solved in the Adalat.

•

At the instance and initiative of DLSA, Thrissur the children’s home at
Thrissur was electrified and renovated and fans were installed in all
rooms by the PWD.

6. ADALAT AT THE MENTAL HEALTH CENTRE:
DLSA, Kozhikode conducted discharge Adalats on all Fridays in
Mental Health Centre and Ashabhavan through which about 100 inmates
from MHC and 20 persons from Asha Bhavan could be rehabilitated
7. LEGAL AID TO TRIBES OF NAIKKUPPA COLONY:
As a part of the implementation the two NALSA Schemes, 2015 namely
poverty alleviation and tribal development, Chairman and Secretary
of DLSA Wayanad visited Naikkuppa Adivasi colony situated about 3
kms into the forest along with the project officer of poverty Alleviation
Department, Forest officials, all the elected members of Pulpally
Panchayath , Deputy Director of Panchayath Kalpetta , discussed with the
tribes and gathered information in an attempt to solve their problems. On
1st September 2016 DLSA conducted an Adalath of the pre-litigation cases
of the incomplete houses of Adivasis.
8. TRANSIT OF BANGLADESHI WOMEN- VICTIMS OF SEX
TRAFFICKING
KeLSA took up the issue of four Bangladeshi women, who were
allegedly trapped in sex trafficking and not allowed to go to Bangladesh,
on the ground that investigation was not complete in one case and trial was
not over in the case of the other three women, with the help from NaLSA,
SLSA, Karnataka and the Kerala Police. The trial was expedited, and with
support from the SLSA, Karnataka, DLSAs Kozhikode and Manjeri. DLSA,
Kozhikode coordinated the legal and other formalities with Court, District
Collector, Police Chief, FRRO and Social Justice Department. As a result
250 / NYAYA DEEP

all the four Bangladesh Nationals reached their home country safely.
9. PREVENTION OF CHILD TRAFFICKING AND CHILD LABOUR
District Legal Services Authority, Kannur intervened in the issue of
Child Trafficking and Child Labour at Panoor, on receipt of information
from “Janakeeya Samithy” that the Police did not conduct investigation
though a specific incident of Child Trafficking and Child Labour was
brought to their notice. The Secretary, District Legal Services Authority
conducted an enquiry as directed by KeLSA and pursuant to it, the
Hon’ble Executive Chairman issued directives to the District Collector,
Superintendent of Police and the District Social Justice Officer for necessary
action. The problem could be solved to a large extent by the intervention
of KeLSA and further activities against Child Trafficking are in progress.
10. VISIT TO EDAMALAKKUDY TRIBAL SETTLEMENT
Based on a paper report regarding non receipt of ration articles at
Edamalakkudy Tribal Settlement area in Idukki District, the Member
Secretary, KeLSA intervened and issued direction to the Secretary DLSA
Thodupuzha to do the needful. The Chairman and the Secretary of DLSA
along with the Government Officials visited Edamalakkudy on 26.07.2016,
collected petitions from the inhabitants on distribution of ration articles,
lack of transport facilities, and the working of the Panchayat and conducted
an Adalat on 10.08.2016 at Taluk Legal Services Committee Devikulam.
Almost all the existing problems were solved and awards were passed.
11. LEGAL AID TO CHOLANAIKAN AADIVASI COMMUNITY
As directed by KeLSA based on a report in a newspaper, DLSA
Wayanad took up the issue of lack of shelter, food and clothing to
Cholanaikan Aadivasi community of Parappan Para Aadivasi colony,
where 13 families consisting of 54 members are living. Ration Card was
distributed to all the families within a week and solved their problems in
getting food grains, cloth etc.
12. LEGAL AID TO THE INJURED 7 YEAR OLD BOY AND HIS
MOTHER :
who suffered very serious injuries and heavy property damage, when
the water tank of the public water supply scheme was collapsed over their
family house at Kaithacode, near Puthoor. DLSA Kollam intervened in
the matter and the authorities were alerted for medical assistance and
rehabilitation. Legal aid was provided to file a pre-litigation petition,
251 / NYAYA DEEP

as the family alleged that there was some inadequacy on the side of the
authorities in meeting the medical expenses as assured earlier.
DETAILS OF LEGAL AID BENEFICIARIES:
During the period from July to September 2016, 18148 persons were
given free legal aid throughout the State. The Category wise details of legal
aid beneficiaries for the period from July to September are given below.
Category

No. of Legal Aid beneficiaries(July
–September 2016)

Scheduled Caste

596

Scheduled Tribe

130

Women

5930

Children

92

In custody

3535

General

7865

Total

18148

LOK ADALAT
The National Lok Adalat was organized on 09.07.2016, 13.8.2016 and
10.9.2016 on the respective topics throughout the State. In three National
Lok Adalats 16227 cases were disposed and award for Rs. 76,57,67,416/was passed.
DETAILS OF CASES DISPOSED IN NATIONAL LOK ADALATS
No. of cases disposed (both pending matters and PLPs
JULY TO SEPTEMBER

Court pending matters

5261

PLP matters

10966

Total

16227

Award Amount
Rs.76,57,67,416/-

In addition to the National Lok Adalat, 449 regular weekly Adalats
were also conducted on different topics during July, August and September
2016. In the weekly Adalats total 8437 cases were settled throughout the
State and Awards were passed for Rs.407193485/-

252 / NYAYA DEEP

DETAILS OF CASES DISPOSED IN LOK ADALATS
No. of cases disposed (both
pending matters and PLPs
JULY TO SEPTEMBER

Court pending matters

3666

PLP matters

4771

Total

8437

Award Amount

Rs.40,71,93,485/-

VIRTUAL/VISUAL LOK ADALAT
Telecast of televised version of Lok Adalat, ‘Kathayillithu Jeevitham”
and ‘Jeevitham Sakshi’ continues in Amrita and Kairali Television
respectively with the support of KeLSA to spread the message of peace
and harmony in family through conciliation.

PERMANENT LOK ADALATS
Details of cases settled by permanent lok adalats at Thiruvananthapuram,
Ernakulam and Kozhikode.
July to
September
A.

No. of cases pending at the beginning of the quarter

674

B.

No. of cases received during the quarter

195

C.

No. of cases disposed during the period

93

D.

Total Amount

40,01,772

MEDIATION
Activities of Kerala State Mediation and Conciliation Centre
[Mediation monitoring committee, High Court of Kerala] for the period
from July 2016 to September 2016.
Regional Training Programme on Mediation to the selected mediators
of Thiruvananthapuram and Kollam was held at Thiruvananthapuram on
16th July 2016. Similar training programme was held at Alappuzha for the
selected Mediators of Alappuzha, Kottayam and Idukki Districts on 24th
September, 2016.
253 / NYAYA DEEP

Mediation Awareness Programme to litigant public and other
stake holders was conducted at Manjeri on 20th August, 2016. Around
250 participants participated in the awareness programme. Hon’ble
Mr. Justice Antony Dominic, President and the Hon’ble Mr. Justice A.
Muhamed Mustaque, member of Board of Governors, KSMCC, attended
the programme. Mediator trainers of KSMCC addressed the participants.

DETAILS OF CASES SETTLED THROUGH MEIDIATION
July to
September
A No. of cases pending at the beginning of the month

4487

B No. of cases received during the period

10113

C No. of cases settled during the period

2695

D No. of cases not settled

4520

E No. of cases pending at the end of the month

5698

TRAINING PROGRAMMES
Induction Training to the panel lawyers was given in four districts.
Master Trainers, Member Secretary and the Secretary, DLSAs conducted
the classes. 604 Panel Lawyers attended the programme.
Two PLV Training were conducted during the quarter for 2days .101
PLVs attended the training.
One training for 170 social science teachers was conducted
One training for 300 ST promoters was conducted
LEGAL LITERACY AND LEGAL AWARENESS
LEGAL AWARENESS THROUGH RADIO AND TELEVISION
• A two minute capsule programme on ‘Constitutional values’ in AIR
Kochi FM, one hour phone-in-programme named ‘Hello Akashavani’
continued through AIR, Kochi.
• The monthly once live phone-in-programme, “Samoohyapadom”,
focusing on socio- legal issues continued in “Doordarshan Malayalam”
channel.

254 / NYAYA DEEP

2. LEGAL LITERACY PROGRAMMES AT SCHOOL & COLLEGE
LEVEL
• Niyamapadam’ (in vernacular language) and ‘Lessons in law’ (in
English) books on legal literacy were distributed for CBSE Students.
•

The preliminary rounds of Quiz competition on ‘Lessons in Law”
for students of higher secondary school at the School Level and Taluk
Level were conducted.

3. As part of Love Kottayam Project, the first phase of classes at Vaikom
Taluk and in one municipality was conducted. Ward level classes are
in progress.
1. The Social Studies Teachers were given orientation classes on
Niyamapadom and Lessons in Law
5. In order to prohibit ragging in educational institutions AntiRagging campaigns were conducted by DLSAs in various colleges.
For this purpose a panel was constituted consisting of Secretary
DLSA and a Police officer not below the rank of a DYSP to address
the students.
6. 1033 Legal Awareness classes were conducted throughout the State
during the quarter for the Students of Schools and Professional
Colleges, Kudumba Sree Members, Govt. Officials, Senior
Citizens, Parent Teacher’s Associations, prisoners etc on various
subjects such as Legal Services Authorities Act, Constitution of
India, Human Rights, Cyber Law, prevention of domestic Violence
, Women Empowerment, Anti- Ragging, Sexual Harassment of
Women at work place,“Sthreeyum Niyamavum”, mediation,
Juvenile Justice, Child Labour, Duties and Responsibilities to
Children, Mental Health Act, Guardian and Wards Act, Senior
Citizens Act, Child Trafficking and POCSO Act.
7. DLSA Kozhikode organized the first phase of ‘Balaraksha Yathra’
which is expedition for child protection, in association with Child
line involving Panchayat President, members, staff of health
department, teachers, parents, police officials, etc The 2nd phase
of Balarakha yatra is ongoing . An interim report concerning the
safety and security of the children noticed during the programme
was submitted to the Collector. The Collector has assured to take
up the matter with various Head of departments.
8. 10000 legal awareness classes are in progress in Wayanad district
in association with Kudumabsree Mission and Integrated Tribal
255 / NYAYA DEEP

Development Project in 3300 tribal colonies.
9. LEGAL AWARENESS PROGRAMME WAS CONDUCTED
AT URIYAMPETTY TRIBAL HAMLET by the District Legal
Services Authority, Ernakulam in association with the Taluk Legal
Services Committee, Kothamangalam on 11.9.2016 to effectuate
and publicize the NALSA Scheme, 2015 for implementing Tribal
Rights.
10. Kerala State Legal Services Authority in association with District
Legal Services Authority Ernakulam launched the NALSA (Legal
Services to the Workers in the Unorganized Sector) Scheme, 2015
on 25.8.2016.
11. NALSA (Effective Implementation of Poverty Alleviation) Scheme
2015 and Protection and Enforcement of Tribal Rights Scheme
2015 was launched on 16.7.16 in Wayanad district. Now in order
to implement the scheme steps have been initiated for getting
regularity, permanency and reach.
12. NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual
Exploitation) Scheme, 2015 was launched in Kottayam district on
03.9.2016.
13. The Kerala State Legal Services Authority in association with
Cultural Academy for Peace, Ernakulam organized a workshop
on Empowerment and Justice for survivors of violence against
Women and Children on 20.8.2016.
14. DLSA Palakkad organized a Seminar on Explosives Act, for
Revenue, Police, and Devaswam Officials, Fire Works Licensees
and their staff, with an objective and technical aspects for handling
the explosives. Hon’ble Executive Chairman issued a direction to
all DLSAs to conduct similar programmes in the light of frequent
fire tragedies occurred in the State.
15. District legal Services Authority Thodupuzha launched a
programme named “Law Mission 2016” on 01.08.2016 - with a
vision of Legally Oriented Literal District. As a first step of the
programme, Thodupuzha Municipality is selected to become a
complete Legal Literal Municipality.
16. NIYAMA JYOTHI: DLSA, Kannur introduced a project named
Niyama Jyothi to form ward/division level bodies to assist Taluk
Legal Services Committees to organise and take part in Legal
Services Activities. DLSA, Kannur has also introduced a project to
achieve total legal literacy in the District with the help of Niyama
256 / NYAYA DEEP

Jyothi Units. The legal Literacy Mission has already been launched
in the District and the work to achieve total Legal literacy is in
progress.
17. Kerala State Legal Services Authority in association with AntiCorruption People’s Movement conducted an Adalat on 23.8.2016
on pending applications and complaints in all Government
Offices in the Kanayannoor Taluk and the Corporation of Kochi.
18. CONFERENCE OF SECRETARY, DLSAs: The Kerala State Legal
Services Authority convened a Conference on 7.9.2016 of Secretary,
District Legal Services Authorities on National Trust Act, 1999
and also to streamline Legal Services activities in the State. Opted
members of District Local Level Committee in providing legal
support.
19. EMPOWERMENT OF TRANSGENDER COMMUNITY:
A. DLSA Manjeri has organized a programme on 15.8.2016 for the
empowerment of marginalized transgender community. The
representatives from the transgender community shared the
problems being faced by them.
B. DLSA Manjeri in association with Voluntary health services, multicountry South Asia diva project Chennai and in consultation
with Kerala State Aids Control Society organized a workshop
for Advocates on the issues affecting transgender community on
30.9.2016.
MISCELLANEOUS – GENERAL ASSISTANCE TO THE PUBLIC
As per the directions of the Chairman, Kerala State Legal Services
Authority, based on a newspaper report many landless inmates are
living in the Parakode KIP Canal Puramboke at Adoor, Secretary
DLSA, Pathanamthitta visited there on 11.07.2016. A meeting of
Revenue Divisional Officer, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Secretary,
Municipality, Tahasildar, Executive Engineer (KIP), Executive Engineer
(KSEB), Assistant Executive Engineer (Water Authority) and 10 family
members of Parakode Puramboke was conducted and discussed the issues.
10 PLPs are pending before DLSA. An amicable solution is expected soon.
PEST INFECTION: A serious pest infection, which affected the
health of public at large, was reported in an area of 28 Hectors plot at
Mualayakunnu in Pampady Panchayath in Kottayam District. DLSA
intervened and managed the situation.
257 / NYAYA DEEP

RESUMPTION OF BUS SERVICE: Timely interference by the DLSA,
Kasaragod resulted in resuming the bus service in Seethangoli Vidyanagar
bus route to make useable the road.
RESCUE OF AN OLD COUPLE BY A PLV: On 25.6.2016, Sri. Ajayan
M., Para Legal Volunteer found an aged couple, aged 80 years and 75 years,
respectively and abandoned by the children, residing in a temporary hut
made of plastic sheets, in Ward No.3 of Dharmadam Grama Panchayat in
Kannur District. They were leading a miserable life in the rainy season.
Sri. Ajayan M. brought the matter to the attention of public and also the
Police. The children arranged a rented house for the parents and monthly
maintenance.
DLSA Wayanad has taken an active role for the solution in man-animal
conflict and the destruction of the cultivation by wild animals by providing
proper guidance to the people including public interest litigation.
Thousands of acres of tribal and other lands were put in disuse on
account of wild animal invasion. Now discussions are going on with Forest
Departments, Revenue, Panchayath Authorities, Agricultural Department,
Agricultural University and RARS how to reap profit out from these lands
by using all the scientific methods of cultivation. Veterinary University
and Veterinary Unit also are giving support to this. The net effect of the
scheme is that we can rejuvenate cultivation in thousands of acres of land
especially a major portion is tribal land.
Women empowerment day was observed throughout the State by
organizing befitting programmes along with legal awareness classes on
Women related laws, cybercrimes etc.
In view of a newspaper report about the pitiable living conditions
of tribal people in Achancovil, a meeting of all the authorities concerned
was convened by DLSA Kollam at Punalur. With the co-operation of
the District Child Line and the Child Welfare Committee initial reports
were collected and authorities concerned were alerted for addressing the
problems.

258 / NYAYA DEEP

Lakshadweep
July to September 2016
Sl.No

Heads

Activities

1.

Legal Aid/ Services

NIL

2.

Lok Adalat

55 taken up
36 Disposed

3.

Mediation

NIL

4.

Legal Awareness Activities

5

5.

Training Programme

2

6.

Miscellaneous Activities

NIL

MANIPUR
Sl.
No.
1

Heads
Legal Aid/
Services

2

Lok Adalats

3

Mediation

Activities
During the period from July to September, 2016, Manipur
State Legal Services Authority has provided Legal Aid in the
form of Panel Advocates to 52 Applicants which includes
17 UTPs, 22 Women, 6 persons having annual income less
than Rs. 1 lakh, 3 disabled persons, 2 children and 2 persons
belonging to Schedule Tribe community.
National Lok Adalats were organized by Manipur State Legal
Services Authority in association with District Legal Services
Authorities on 9.07.2016, 13.08.2016 & 10.09.2016 at all the
districts of Manipur for settlement of various types of cases.
In the National Lok Adalats held during this period, a total
number of 1550 cases were disposed of and an amount of
Rs. 2, 76, 00,576/- (Rupees two crores seventy six lakhs five
hundred and seventy six) only was settled.
During this period, 5(five) cases of Mediation has been
referred to Mediators for conducting Mediation. However,
none of them could be settled.

259 / NYAYA DEEP

4

Legal Awareness Activities

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

5

Training Programmes

(i)

During the period, Manipur State Legal Services Authority in association with DLSAs and various NGOs,
local clubs/organisations have organised a total of
198 Legal Literacy/ Legal Awareness Programmes in
different parts of the State to spread awareness to the
masses on various aspects of laws, welfare schemes of
the State/Central Government and Schemes of NALSA
etc. Live Phone-in-Programme was also organised at
2(two) channels of AIR, Imphal on third Monday of
every month.
As a part of Legal Literacy Programme at School/
Colleges, Manipur State Legal Services Authority in
association with DLSAs & All Manipur Govt. Higher
Secondary Lecturers’ Association has conducted Essay
Writing/ Painting Competitions at various School/
Colleges on the topics “Fundamental Rights & duties
of Indian Citizen under the Constitution of India,
Child Labour etc.
To spread legal awareness to the general public in
an entertaining way, Manipur State Legal Services
Authority organised many Street Plays at various
parts Churachandpur, Ukhrul, Bishnupur & Thoubal
Districts on important legal issues like child labour,
RTE, drug abuse, domestic violence, Juvenile Justice
etc.
Manipur State Legal Services Authority in association
with Department of Social Welfare, Govt. of Manipur &
Manipur Judicial Academy organised a 3-Days Training
Programme for the members of JJBs, CWCs, SJPUs &
Legal Cum Probation Officers from 23rd-25th July, 2016
at the Auditorium, High Court of Manipur. Prof. Joydip
Majumdar, Director, JPISC, Kolkata and Ms. Aparna Bhat,
Advocate as Resource Persons deliberated on various
provisions of JJ Act and procedures of CNCP & CCL etc.

(ii) Manipur State Legal Services Authority in association
with Manipur Commission for Protection of Child
Rights organised a 2-Days Training Programme for the
functionaries of District Child Protection Units of the
State on 24th – 25th September, 2016 at the Auditorium,
High Court of Manipur. Dr. D.K. Saikia, Deputy Director,
NIPCCD as Resource Person deliberated on the topics “Role
& responsibilities of DCPOs, POs & LPOs” & “Monitoring,
supervision of CCIs & Secretarial services by DCPUs”.
(ii) During this period, Manipur SLSA organised 4(four)
Training Programmes for PLVs and 1(one) Training
Programme for Remand Advocates/Jail Visiting Lawyers
along with Jail visiting PLVs to impart training on
“Standard Operating Procedure for Representation of
persons in custody” provided by NALSA.

260 / NYAYA DEEP

6

Miscellaneous
Activities

(i) During this quarter, Manipur SLSA opened 2 (two) new
Legal Aid Clinics viz. (1) Legal Aid Clinic, Mini Secretariat
Complex, Ukhrul District opened on 23.07.2016 & (2) Legal
Aid Clinic, Kumbi College, Bishnupur District opened on
13.08.2016. Both the Legal Aid Clinics were inaugurated by
Hon’ble Executive Chairman, MASLSA.
(ii) Manipur SLSA in association with SAATHII (NGO)
organised an Inter-Departmental Workshop to discuss
the issues of Transgender/ Implementation of guidelines
of Hon’ble Supreme Court on the issue of Transgender
Rights” etc on 11.08.2016 at the High Court of Manipur.
Representatives from various Government Departments/
Stakeholders attended the function.
(iii) In view of some reported cases of Human Trafficking in
the State, Manipur SLSA under the direction of Hon’ble
Executive Chairman organised a Mass Rally followed by a
“Consultation Programme and Poster Campaign” to fight
against “Human Trafficking” in the State on 21.08.2016 at
Moreh, a Town bordering Myanmar. Representatives of
various Government Departments including Police, NGOs,
CWCs participated in the Consultative Meet. Hon’ble Mr.
Justice N. Kotiswar Singh, Executive Chairman, MASLSA
deliberated on NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and
Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015.
(iv) Special Cells under NALSA (Legal Services to the
Workers in the Unorganized Sector) Scheme, 2015 has
been constituted and the team is actively working for
spreading awareness about the welfare schemes for
unorganized workers’ and providing necessary legal
aid to the unorganized workers. Booklet on “Manipur
Building and other Construction Workers’ Welfare
Scheme, 2015” has been printed and distributed to
spread awareness to the unorganized workers.
(v) “Observation and Children Home Committee” have
been constituted in all the Districts under NALSA (Child
Friendly Legal Services to Children and their Protection)
Scheme, 2015 to visit & inspect the Homes in the state.
(vi) “Special Units” Under NALSA (Legal Services to the
Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace)
Scheme, 2015 been constituted for two districts. Poster
Campaigns are also organized to fight against “Drug
Abuse”.
(vii) Manipur SLSA observed “World Population Day”
and “World Hepatitis Day” on 11.7.2016 and 28.7.2016
respectively.
(viii) Manipur SLSA in association with All Manipur Bar
Association & High Court Bar Association of Manipur
organised a Mass Rally followed by a “Consultation
Programme” to highlight the impact, loss & injury
caused to the general public by Bandhs/Blockades/
General Strikes/Public Curfews” etc on 19.9.2016 at
Khwairamband Bazar, Imphal.

261 / NYAYA DEEP

MEGHALAYA (JULY to SEPTEMBER, 2016)
LOK ADALAT
A total Nos of 262 were posted for the National Lok Adalat on
Electricity/Water/Telephone and Public Utility Disputes held on the 9th
July, 2016 out of which 107 cases were settled both for Pending and PreLitigation. The total amount settled was 6, 53,755/A total Nos of 3496 banking matters were posted both pending and
Pre-Litigation cases for the National Lok Adalat on the 13-08-2016 out of
which 462 cases were settled. The total amount settled was ` 1, 27, 07,968/Performance of the Bank in r/o pending cases & Pre-Litigation cases
Sl.No

Name of the Bank

Total No. of cases
disposed of

Total settlement
amount (`)

1.

State Bank of India

201

49,16,645

2.

United Bank of India

18

1,02,038

3.

Vijaya bank

1

90,000

4.

UCO Bank

3

1,07,806

5.

Meghalaya Cooperative
Apex Bank

7

1,28,770

6.

Meghalaya Rural Bank

28

4,33,329

7.

Union Bank of India

1

1,600

8.

Canara Bank

1

9.

N I Act

1

20,00,000

10.

Housing Department

3

1,46,141

Total

264

79,26,329

Performance of the Bank in r/o pre-litigative cases
1.

State Bank of India

187

28,67,198

2.

Union Bank Of India

2

13,00,000

3.

Canara Bank

2

43,262

4.

Bank of India

4

2,70,000

5.

Indian Overseas Bank

2

2,20,000

6.

Central Bank of India

1

81,179

7.

State Bank of India

187

28,67,198

Total

198

47,81,639

262 / NYAYA DEEP

NATIONAL LOK ADALAT ON CRIMINAL COMPOUNDABLE
MATTERS: 10-09-2016
A total Nos of 486 were posted for the National Lok Adalat on Criminal
Compoundable cases held on the 10th September, 2016 out of which 178
cases were settled for pending cases only. The total amount settled was ` 1,
45,200/- (Rupees One Lakh forty five thousand Two hundred) only. The %
of cases settled to the cases posted was 36.62%

LEGAL LITERACY-CUM-AWARENESS PROGRAMME
Awareness Programmes including Legal Literacy Campaign, Legal Literacy
Classes in Schools and Colleges, Legal
Literacy Campaign for women & children, Legal Awareness Programmes in
Jails etc.

Year

Nos. of Programmes

July to September,
2016

25 nos.

LOK ADALATS
Year

July to
September,
2016

Nos.
of Lok
Adalat
held

Cases
taken
up including
MACT

MACT
cases
taken
up

Cases
disposed
off including
MACT

MACT
cases
disposed
off

MACT
compensation
paid/
Awarded

27

4244

Nil

747

Nil

Nil

Amount settled during
the Lok
Adalat

`
1,35,06,923/-

MEDIATION
Year

Nos. of cases received

Nos. of cases settled

July to September, 2016

16 nos.

1 no.

LEGAL AID BENEFICIARIES:

Year

Categories

Providing Advice/
Panel Ad- Counselvocate
ling

Other
Services
(Pl.
specify)

Total

263 / NYAYA DEEP

Scheduled Caste

5

-

-

5

Scheduled Tribe

117

-

-

117

Women

30

-

-

30

Children

135

-

-

135

In Custody

86

-

-

86

Persons with disability

-

-

-

-

Industrial Workmen

-

-

-

-

Transgender
July
Victims of Trafficking
To Septemin Human being or
ber, 2016
beggar

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Victims of Mass
Disaster, Violence,
Flood, Draught,
Earthquake and Industrial Disaster

-

-

-

-

General (Persons
whose annual income
does not exceed the
prescribed limit

23

-

-

Others

-

-

-

23

Total

396

-

-

396

Job cards/ Epic cards/ Identity cards/ license/ Affidavits/ Birth Certificate/
etc.:
Apart from helping the common people in attaining the various cards
as mentioned on page 1 no.1, other cards like ration cards, Kissan credit
card were also helped by the PLVs to attain.

Legal Care & Support Centres:
The PLV’s has helped some houses in getting electricity, helped
handicaps, helped applications for fisheries, Basin Development, PHE
matters, registration for land ownership, NREGS scheme, Opening of
Bank Account, Chief Minister Scheme, widow grant scheme, animal
husbandry etc.

264 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Aid Counsel:
The PLV’s engaged in District Jails has helped some UTP’s in attaining
legal aid counsels.

HIV People:
One PLV has played a major role with drug abuse and with the people
living with HIV+, by giving counseling to almost a majority of them. He
also provides training on 20.09.2016 and 21.09.2016 to ASHA’s and ANM
of East Khasi Hills, at the “One day District Level TOT on Mainstreaming
HIV& AIDS for ANM, East Khasi Hills District’ organized by MACS and
RH & FW on the topic “fighting stigma & discrimination”.

Other activities:
The other activities performed by the PLV’s are like helping the people
whose houses that were caught on fire.
Attended Shelter Homes.
Visited Mental Hospital.
Attended Mobile Lok Adalats and various mobile legal literacy
campaigns.
Helped the security guards to attain their pending salaries.

Release of Jail Inmates under section 436 A
Year

No. of Inmates released under section
436 A

July, 2016 to September, 2016

Nil

MADHYA PRADESH (July to September, 2016)
Legal Aid/Services
Month

Legal Aid

Legal Advice

Grand Total

Total Expenditure

July

1130

3603

4733

726315

265 / NYAYA DEEP

August

971

3215

4186

301575

September

1677

3206

4883

463885

Lok Adalat (July to September, 2016)
Type of Lok
Adalat

No. of
Lok Adalat
Held on

Total
Taken up
cases

Total
Disposed
of cases

Total
Benefitted
persons

Total
Settlement
Amount

Monthly National
Lok Adalat

3

708363

112683

119281

1457989595

Permanent &
continuous

545

31408

4563

7837

300690159

Permanent Lok
Adalat for Public

108

2904

1070

1114

226340

MNREGA

17

132

35

63

0

Jail

12

20

13

21

-

Mobile Lok
Adalat

74

2124

521

948

305000

Plea Bargaining

-

22

15

15

-

Total-

759

747673

118900

129279

1759211094

Mediation (July to September, 2016)
Months

Opening
Balance
Of
Month

No. of
cases
referred
during
the
month

Total
no. of
cases

Success
Full
Settled
Cases

Unsuccessful
Settled
Cases

Total
Considered
Cases

Total
no. of
Pending
Cases

Percent
of
Successful
Settled
Cases

July-Sep

10271

20015

30286

9497

9600

19097

11189

49.73

Legal Awareness Activities (July to September, 2016)
Type of
Camps

Total
No. of Camps
Held on

Total
No. of persons
Benefitted

Legal Literacy Camp

1770

248730

No. of Persons
Benefitted
SC

ST

17201

12977

Total Expenditure

36045

266 / NYAYA DEEP

Micro Legal
Literacy
Camp

183

8300

966

596

0

MNREGA
Camp

212

4300

290

233

0

Miscellaneous Activities
(a) Regional Conference on Mediation held at Indore on 2nd July 2016Under the aegis of MPSLSA a Regional Conference on Mediation
for the 13 Districts comes under Indore Zone was held on 2nd July, 2016
at Brilliant convention centre, Vijay Nagar, Indore. Hon’ble Shri Justice
Rajendra Menon Acting Chief Justice, High Court of MP and Executive
Chairman, M.P. State Legal Services Authority was the Chief Guest of the
Conference. Hon’ble Shri Justice P.K. Jaiswal, Administrative Judge, High
Court of M.P., Bench Indore, Co-Chairman, High Court Legal Services
Committee was the Special Guest.
The Conference was held in the Gracious presence of Hon’ble Shri
Justice Sanjay Yadav, Chairman, Main Mediation monitoring Committee,
Main Mediation Centre, Hon’ble Shri Justice S.C. Sharma Member, Main
Mediation monitoring Committee, Chairman, Mediation Monitoring
Sub-Committee Bench at Indore & Hon’ble Shri Justice Sheel Nagu,
Member, Main Mediation monitoring Committee & Chairman, Mediation
Monitoring Sub-Committee Bench at Gwalior. The Hon’ble Portfolio
Judges of the respective 13 Districts were also grace the Conference.
The Members of the District Mediation Monitoring Committees,
Coordinators of the Mediation Centers, Chairman and Members of the
Tehsil Mediation Monitoring Committees and best Mediator of the 13
Districts were participants of the Conference. In this Conference MP State
Legal Services Authority has felicitated best referral Judge, best Judge
Mediator and best Advocate.
(b) Regional Conference on Mediation held at Gwalior on 6th August
2016 Under the aegis of MPSLSA a Regional Conference on Mediation for
the 9 Districts comes under Gwalior Zone was held on 6th August, 2016 at
Gwalior. Hon’ble Shri Justice Rajendra Menon Acting Chief Justice, High
267 / NYAYA DEEP

Court of MP and Executive Chairman, M.P. State Legal Services Authority
was the Chief Guest of the Conference.
The Conference was held in the gracious presence of Hon’ble
Shri Justice Sanjay Yadav, Chairman and Main Mediation monitoring
Committee, Main Mediation Centre, Hon’ble Shri Justice Alok Aradhe,
Administrative Judge, High Court of M.P., Bench Gwalior & Hon’ble Shri
Justice Sheel Nagu, Member, Main Mediation monitoring Committee &
Chairman, Mediation Monitoring Sub-Committee Bench at Gwalior. The
Hon’ble Portfolio Judges of the respective 9 Districts were also grace the
Conference.
The Members of the District Mediation Monitoring Committees,
Coordinators of the Mediation Centers, Chairman and Members of the
Tehsil Mediation Monitoring Committees and best Mediator of the 9
Districts were participants of the Conference. In this Conference MP State
Legal Services Authority has felicitated best referral Judge, best Judge
Mediator and best Advocate.

MIZORAM
Lok Adalats
Lok Adalats were regularly organized by the State and District
Authorities, 122 cases were disposed on Criminal Compoundable Offence,
NI Act u/s 138, Bank recovery, MACT, Matrimonial, Labour disputes,
Land acquisition, Civil Cases, Revenue case and Others; Rs. 45,72,151 is
settlement amount. 148 Cases were settled under National Lok Adalat and
Rs. 44, 50,634/- is settlement amount. In this NLA, Bank recovery, Civil
cases, Money Suit, Title Suit, Maintenance, Guardianship, Declaratory
Suit, Land Dispute, Defamation, Heirship and Crl. Misc. matters were
taken.

Legal Aid
During this period, 975 persons who are entitled free legal services
were given legal aid i.e SC – 590; Women – 231; Children - 12; In Custody
– 116 and others – 26.
1544 persons visited Village Legal Care and Support Centres (LACs)
and 1355 Nos. were help by drafting application for Heirship, succession,
268 / NYAYA DEEP

guardianship, etc. certificate, Counselling litigants on legal issues/matters/
rights, Filing Income, Residential Certificate, Tribal Certificate, etc.

Legal Awareness Camps
Mizoram SLSA and the DLSA organized legal awareness campaigns
in both urban and rural areas by way of addresses to the public, circulation
of pamphlets, etc. Leaflets/booklets were distributed to the participants in
the course of the campaigns.
Awareness functions were held at schools, jails and other places. During
the quarter, legal awareness programmes were held in 45 Community
Centres/Villages; 8 Schools/Colleges; 4 Jails; 2 Two Talk Show/Dialogues
were arranged through Local TV Channels on the topics of Rights of
women and children; Corruption laws, The Mizo Marriage, Divorce and
Inheritance of Property Act, 2014, POCSO Act, Life Skills, Cyber Crime,
PLV & LAC, MLPC Act, ND&PS Act, Domestic Violence; Violence against
Women & Child Abuse; Lok Adalats, Para-Legal Volunteers & Legal Aid
Clinics, Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987; RTI, ILP and Foreigners Act,
Human Rights; Role and responsibilities of medical experts, JJ Act; Child
Abuse, Medical negligence for doctor & staff, etc.
Mizoram State Legal Services Authority conducted legal awareness
campaigns at Rulchawm on 6.7.2016; Falkawn with Mizoram College of
Nursing on 25.7.2016 and 30.8.2016; Darlawn with MHIP on 28.7.2016;
Mizoram Law College on 26.8.2016; Central Jail Veng on 27.8.2016; Mission
Vengthlang Middle School on 31.8.2016; Vana Memorial School, Mission
Vengthlang on 1.9.2016; Southgate School, Venghnuai on 2.9.2016; Falkawn
for Medical Staff on 6.9.2016; Saitual College on 9.9.2016; Sumsuih MS on
14.9.2016; Lengpui Middle School-II on 15.9.2016; Presbyterian English
School Saitual on 16.9.2016; Melriat Middle School on 19.9.2016; Sateek
Middle School on 23.9.2016; Presbyterian English School Muallungthu on
27.9.2016; Kepran Middle School on 29.9.2016.
Aizawl DLSA conducted legal awareness campaign at Maubuang on
6.7.2016; Thingsul on 19.8.2016; Ramhlun on 25.8.2016; Ch. Chhunga High
School on 29.8.2016; Mission Veng on 9.9.2016; Sateek on 25.9.2016
Kolasib DLSA conducted legal awareness campaigns at Bilkhawthlir
on 6.7.2016; Thingdawl on 6.7.2016; Kawnpui on 6.7.2016; JNV School,
Thingdawl on 22.7.2016; Project Veng, Kolasib on 25.7.2016; College Veng,
Kolasib on 8.8.2016
269 / NYAYA DEEP

Kolasib DLSA also conducted Essay Writing Competition on 15.7.2016
at Kolasib and had a programme ‘Sensitization on JJ Act, 2015 under
stakeholders’ at DIET on 19.8.2016.
Lawngtlai DLSA conducted legal awareness campaigns at CYLA
Hall Lawngtlai on 6.7.2016; YLA Hall, Chawnhu on 28.7.2016 and Govt.
Lawngtlai College on 22.9.2016 and Sensitization programme on medical
negligence for doctor & staff of LCMC, Lawngtlai on Medical Negligence
at Carolyn Hotel on 8.9.2016.
Lunglei DLSA conducted legal awareness campaigns at Vanhne
on 6.7.2016; Hrangchalkawn on 6.7.2016; Zobawk on 6.7.2016; Lunglei
Venglai on 6.7.2016; Rahsi Veng, Lunglei on 6.7.2016, HATIM, Lunglei on
15.7.2016. And conducted Talk Show/dialogue through Local TV Channel
on Corruption law, etc. at HATIM on 15.7.2016 and Role of Legal Services
Authority and Local Government at Cultural Heritage Centre, Lunglei
Venglai on 11.8.2016
Mamit DLSA conducted legal awareness campaign at Rulpuihlim on
15.7.2016; Mamit Field Veng on 29.7.2016; PYD Mamit on 21.8.2016; Mamit
Venghlun on 24.8.2016; Baptist Church, Mamit Vengthar on 17.9.2016 and
West Phaileng at 30.9.2016.
Serchhip DLSA conducted legal awareness campaigns at Zoar NPSS
Hall, N. Serchhip on 14.7.2016; Bazar B. KTP, Serchhip on 17.7.2016;
Field Veng Br. KTP, Serchhip on 24.7.2016; P&E Veng, Br. KTP, Serchhip
on 31.7.2016; N. Serchhip Kohhran Hall on 28.8.2016; N. Serchhip on
30.8.2016; Disrict Court Conference, Serchhip on 8.9.2016; Govt. Higher
Secondary School Hall, Serchhip on 9.9.2016; CMO Conference Hall,
Serchhip on 24.9.2016

Trainings/Seminars
Aizawl DLSA conducted Training of Legal Aid Counsels at District
Court, Aizawl on 24.8.2016. Lunglei DLSA conducted Training on PLVs,
Lawyers and Lok Adalat Conciliators on Procedure on Civil and Criminal
Cases; Social works : Issues and Challenges; Summary of relevant Acts,
Rules/Regulations, Scheme pertaining to Legal Services Authorities at
Agriculture Conference Hall, Lunglei on 22.7.2016.

270 / NYAYA DEEP

Jail Visits
The Member Secretary, Mizoram SLSA visited District Jail Champhai
and Kolasib The State and District Legal Services Authorities regularly
visited Central Jail,Aizawl and the District Jails in Mizoram during the
quarter to interact with the inmates including the under trial prisoners.

ODISHA
Legal Aid/Services
Free Legal Aid and assistance was provided to 758 persons comprising
SC- 97, ST- 48, Women-315, and Children-13, In-custody-81, General and
other weaker sections of the Society 204.

Lok Adalats
Monthly National Lok Adalat for the cases relating to Electricity/
Water/Telephone/ Public Utility disputes was organized throughout the
State on 09.07.2016. Total 5733 no.of cases were taken up, out of which,
1111 no.of cases were settled. Further, 60 number of cases were disposed
of by the High Court Legal Services Committee, Cuttack which included
Electricity/Water & Telephone matters-18 and Motor Accident Claims
Appeals-42. A sum of Rs.59, 71,000/- was awarded as Compensation
amount in the above M.A.C. Appeals.
Similarly, Monthly National Lok Adalat for the cases relating to
Bank matters (Section 138 N.I.Act, Recovery suits etc. was also organized
throughout the State on 13.8.2016. The High Court Legal Services
Committee, Debts Recovery Tribunal, Cuttack, 30 District Legal Services
Authorities, 74 Taluk Legal Services Committees participated in the
said National Lok Adalat. 75,761 no. of cases were taken up by the Subordinate Courts in total, out of which, 6910 no. of cases were settled/
disposed of. The pending cases included Recovery suits-904 and Cases
U/s.138 N.I.Act-699. The High Court Legal Services Committee disposed
of 60 no. of cases which included criminal matters involving N.I.Act-02,
Bank matters (SARFAESI)-26 and MACA-32. A sum of Rs.63, 14,300/- was
awarded as Compensation amount in the above MAC Appeals. Similarly,
The Debts Recovery Tribunal, Cuttack disposed of 12 no. of cases in the
said Lok Adalat.
271 / NYAYA DEEP

National Level held on 10.09.2016.
Further, Monthly National Lok Adalat for Compoundable Criminal
matters was also held throughout the State on 10.09.2016. The High Court
Legal Services Committee and all the 30 District Legal Services Authorities
and Taluk Legal Services Committees participated in the said Lok Adalat.
Total 12,237 no. of cases were placed in the said Lok Adalat, out of which,
1668 no. of Criminal compoundable cases were disposed of/settled.
Further, the High Court Legal Services Committee has also disposed of
33 no. of cases which included Criminal compoundable matters-05 and
Motor Accident Claim Appeals-28. A sum of Rs.82, 85,000/- was awarded
as compensation in the above M.A.C.Appeals.

At District & Taluk Levels:
During the above quarter, all the 30 District Legal Services Authorities
and 74 Taluk Legal Services Committees organized 231 Lok Adalats
in the State of Odisha. In the said Lok Adalats, total 1,05,395 no. of
cases comprising 748-Civil, 15620-Compoundable Criminal Cases,
88,411-Revenue matters, 64-Matrimonial cases, 05-Bank disputes, 476BSNL disputes, 14-Juveniles & 57-MACT cases were disposed of. A sum
of Rs.64, 80,784/- towards criminal fine and Rs.2, 03, 97,444/-as revenue
were collected in the said Lok Adalats. Further, a sum of Rs1, 67, 22,000/was awarded as compensation in the above Motor Accident Claim Cases.

Mediation :
During the quarter, 766 new cases were referred by different Courts
to the Mediation Centres in the State and 459 cases (including previously
pending cases) were disposed of, out of which, 60 cases met with successful
mediation.

Legal Awareness Activities:
To generate legal literacy and awareness, competitions on, Essay and
Drawing were held by all District Legal Services Authorities in some
selected Schools and at District levels amongst the members of Student
Legal Literacy Clubs and on Debate in some selected colleges and then at
District levels in the month of July, 2016. The winners of the District Level
Competitions participated in the Zonal Level Competitions.
272 / NYAYA DEEP

This Authority organized a State Level Competition on Essay, Debate
& Drawing amongst the Zonal Level Winners chosen across the State.
The winners of State Level Competition were felicitated in a Prize Giving
Ceremony graced by Hon’ble the Chief Justice, Orissa High Court-cumPatron-in-Chief, OSLSA, Hon’ble Executive Chairman, OSLSA and Hon’ble
Judges of the Hon’ble Court on 06.08.2016 at Odisha Judicial Academy,
Cuttack. A short play, “Kuna Ra Kahani” was staged by the members of
School Legal Literacy Clubs. On the same day, a commendation ceremony
for the State Best PLV and State Best DLSA was also convened by this
Authority.
During the quarter, 222 no. of Legal Literacy/Awareness Programmes
were organized by all the field units on different topics including Odisha
Victim Compensation Scheme, 2012, Domestic Violence Act, Maintenance
Act, Dowry Prohibition Act, Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987, Bonded
Labour System (Abolition) Act, Labour Law, Child Labour Prohibition and
Regulation Act, Law relating to workers on un-organized sector, PWDV
Act, Legal Aid and Human Trafficking, MNREGS, Minimum Wages
Act, Payment of Wages Act, Maintenance & Divorce, Free Legal Aid and
Services relating to women and other entitled persons etc.

Training Programmes
During the above quarter, 7 no. of training programmes for PLVs/
legal services lawyers were conducted in the different District Legal
Services Authorities as per the Calendar prepared by this Authority using
the Training Module (Part-1) and the teaching Methodology of NALSA.
Total 428 no. of legal services lawyers were trained in the above training
programmes.

Miscellaneous Activities:
(i) Victim Compensation Scheme :
During the quarter, 181 applications under Odisha Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2012 were received by the District Legal Services
Authorities, out of which, 108 applications were decided and a sum of
Rs.67,13,000/- towards compensation was paid to the victims under the
above Scheme.

273 / NYAYA DEEP

(ii) Permanent Lok Adalats( for Public Utility Services)
During the above quarter, 401 no. of new cases relating to Public
Utility Services were registered in the Thirteen Permanent Lok Adalats,
out of which, 996 no. of cases were settled.

(iii) Plantation Programme
This Authority in association with District Legal Services Authority,
Cuttack, District Administration, Cuttack and Divisional Forest Office,
City Division, Cuttack organized a “plantation programme” at Cuttack on
24.8.2016. The above programme was graced by the Hon’ble Shri Justice
Vinod Prasad, Judge, Orissa High Court & Executive Chairman, OSLSA
and other Hon’ble Judges of Orissa High Court.

PUNJAB
Legal Aid/Services:
From July, 2016 to September, 2016, Punjab Legal Services Authority
has provided legal aid to 6265 persons belonging to various categories in
all the districts of Punjab.

Lok Adalats:
From July, 2016 to September, 2016, Punjab Legal Services Authority
has organized 191 Lok Adalats in all the districts of Punjab and total 47585
cases were taken up and 18733 cases has been settled through these Lok
Adalats and a sum of Rs. 1,81,59,19,811/- (more than Rs. 181 Crores) has
been disbursed during disposal of these cases.

Mediation & Conciliation Centres:
During the quarter running from July, 2016 to September, 2016, a total
of 2110 cases were referred for mediation out of which 450 cases were
settled. In order to encourage people for settlement of their disputes
through the medium of mediation, awareness camps are also being
organized highlighting the benefit of settlement of the cases through
mediation.

274 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Awareness Activities:
In the month July to September, 2016 District Legal Services Authorities
organized 2867 legal awareness camps thereby benefiting 475195 person
who attended such camps.
•

To take forward the efforts of NALSA by formulating a scheme for
workers involved in unorganized sector, a state level function was
organized on rights of Building and Other Construction Workers in
Unorganized Sector, on 29.07.2016 in all the districts of Punjab. This
programme was organized by Punjab Legal Services Authority in
association with Labour department Punjab. During this programme
labourers were made aware about benefits of registration under the
schemes of “Punjab Building and other Construction Workers Welfare
Board. A total number of 21692 workers were got registered and 12007
cards were delivered to them during the said programme.

•

Maintenance and welfare of Parents and Senior citizen Act, 2007
women and child Rights, Protection of women from domestic
violence, Motor Accident claims, POCSO act, Right to Education,
various schemes of National Legal Services, District Legal Services
Authorities conducted legal awareness campaigns at various places in
their respective district on various dates.

•

District Legal Services Authorities in the State of Punjab have
organized legal awareness campaigns in both urban and rural areas by
way of addresses to the public, circulation of pamphlets etc, leaflets/
booklets were distributed to the participants during the course of the
campaigns.

•

Legal Literacy camps were also organized in jails from time to time in
which awareness was created about the rights of convicts/under trials
and also about various welfare schemes.

Training Programmes:
Under the directions of National Legal Services Authority, New Delhi,
the Punjab Legal Services Authority is imparting training to Para-Legal
Volunteers in each district and sub-divisional level. Under this scheme,
persons relating to different fields are being trained. Punjab Legal Services
Authority has trained 3946 Para-Legal Volunteers in various districts of
Punjab, during the period July to September, 2016. Apart from training
the PLVs, the police officers are also being trained to handle with the
Undertrial and witnesses especially the juveniles.
275 / NYAYA DEEP

Miscellaneous Activities:
Tree Plantation Programme: On 30.08.2016 a tree plantation
programme was organized by the Punjab Legal Services Authority in
every district of the state of Punjab under the able guidance of all the
Chairpersons of District Legal Services Authorities, for making people
aware about the environment protection. More than 6000 trees were
planted in one single day, all over the State, during the programme.
Medical Camps: The Punjab Legal Services Authority has organized
medical camps in all the district courts of Punjab, in which doctors of
various specialties examined hundreds of patients in the ADR Centres.
Various blood and other tests were also carried out by Government
Doctors free of cost to detect any ailment.

RAJASTHAN
Cases disposed of through ADR Mechanism (Lok Adalat &
Mediation)
ADR Mechanism

Cases disposed of

Amount Settled (Rupees)

Regular Lok Adalat

24664

207101816

Permanent Lok Adalat

699

41846102

National Lok Adalat

19373

446813510

Mediation

738

Total

45474

695761428

Cases Disposed of through Regular Lok Adalats
Months

No. of Cases
taken up

No. of cases
disposed

No. of MACT
cases disposed

July

No. of
Lok
Adalat
458

24039

7652

189

Amount
Settled
(Rupees)
37255352

Aug

642

30586

7874

208

68523009

Sep

644

28763

9138

314

101323455

Total

1744

83388

24664

711

207101816

Cases Disposed of through Permanent Lok Adalat
Months

Total No. of Cases disposed of

Amount Settled (Rupees)

July

330

87737719

276 / NYAYA DEEP

Aug

194

5159480

Sep

177

277948903

Total

699

41846102

Cases Disposed of through National Lok Adalat
Months

No. of Cases Taken
up

No. of Cases
Disposed of

Settlement Amount
(Rupees)

July

7222

1095

17841159

Aug

68977

13660

351656852

Sep

33114

4618

77315499

Total

109313

19373

446813510

Cases disposed of through Mediation
Months

No. of Cases Referred to Mediation Centers

Cases Disposed off

July

1445

227

Aug

1904

236

Sep

2034

275

Total

5383

738

Legal Aid Beneficiaries:
Months

S.C

S.T

O.B.C

In Custody

Women

Children

Other

Total

July

55

161

38

182

61

12

53

562

Aug

96

39

36

196

54

01

125

547

Sep

46

46

29

214

44

12

76

467

Total

197

246

103

592

159

25

254

1576

Application Disposed of through Legal Aid Clinics:
Months

Total No. of Application
received

Total No. Application Settled

July

490

305

Aug

1802

1065

Sep

463

95

Total

2755

1465

277 / NYAYA DEEP

Months

Legal Literacy Camps Organized

Beneficiaries

July

729

49025

Aug

953

63029

Sep

1069

84579

Total

2751

196633

Legal Services to weaker and marginalized personsSenior Citizens
A total 307 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting 15762
persons regarding maintenance as well as legal assistance.
A. Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribes and Tribals.
A total 207 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting
11162 Persons to make them aware of their legal rights and welfare
schemes.

Unorganized labour and victims of occupational disease in
mining area.
A total of 243 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting
12828 persons.
Legal services and assistance for Protection of Child Right.
A total 362 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting
28026 persons.
Inmates and Juveniles in conflict with law.
A total 216 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting
16635 persons.
Mentally ill persons.
A total 215 camps (July-Sept. 2016) have been organized benefiting
11493 persons.
Sex Workers.
A total 214(July-Sept. 2016) Camps have been organized benefiting
12376 persons.
278 / NYAYA DEEP

B. Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse and Eradication of
Drug Menace
A total 192 (July-Sept. 2016) Camps have been organized benefiting
11825 persons.
C. Effective implementation of Poverty Alleviation Scheme
A total 162 (July-Sept. 2016) Camps have been organized benefiting
9206 persons.

Rajasthan Victim Compensation Scheme, 2011
With constant effort of Rajasthan State Legal Services Authority, the
Rajasthan Victim Compensation Scheme is gaining momentum and from
July to Sept. 2016 an amount of Rs. 5.5 Crores approx. has been awarded
as compensation and a total of 524 people has been benefited.

Mediation
Seven mediators of Rajasthan have been trained for training of
programme (TOT) by Hon’ble Mediation and Conciliation Project
Committee and a direction has been given to organize three ACM
programmes and three 20-hour refresher courses by each mediators for
their assessment. The Authority organized awareness, coaching and
mentoring programmes on 18 & 19 September, 2016 at Ajmer, Chittorgarh
and Bharatpur under the aegis of Mediation and Conciliation Project
Committee, Supreme Court of India, New Delhi.

Legal Awareness
Mega Legal Awareness and Public Welfare Camps
Most successful innovation of RSLSA has been its unique scheme
Mega Legal Awareness & Public Welfare Camp. In this scheme, RSLSA
organized legal literacy camps to spread legal awareness and at the same
time, with the help of concerned Govt. Departments, Legal Services
Institutions facilitate the benefits of welfare scheme to the needy and
deserving persons.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Anil R. Dave, Judge, Supreme Court of India
and Executive Chairman, National Legal Services Authority, Hon’ble Mr.
279 / NYAYA DEEP

Justice Navin Sinha, Chief Justice, Rajasthan High Court and Patronin-Chief, Rajasthan State Legal Services Authority, Hon’ble Mr. Justice
Ajay Rastogi, Administrative Judge, Rajasthan High Court and Executive
Chairman, Rajasthan State Legal Services Authority and other dignitaries
present on the occasion of Mega Legal Awareness and Public Welfare
Camp at Sangariya, Jodhpur on 31st July, 2016.
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Anil R. Dave, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Navin Sinha
and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Rastogi with the beneficiaries at Mega
Legal Awareness and Public Welfare Camp, Sangariya, Jodhpur on 31st
July, 2016.
The Rajasthan State Legal Services Authority in coordination with the
UNICEF organized two days State Level Orientation Workshop on 30th
and 31st July, 2016 in the auditorium of State Judicial Academy, Jodhpur
for all the stakeholders on Juvenile Justice System.
The following activities were carried out under Awareness Campaign
to combat the menace of Polythene/ Plastic Carry Bags:Awareness campaign through
Para-Legal Volunteers, Panel
Advocates, Judicial Officers, NGOs, Govt. Officials, Forest Department,
District Collectors, SDM’s and officers of the Rajasthan Pollution Control
Board regarding plastic pollution menace.
District Collectors, SDM’s and officers of the Rajasthan Pollution
Control Board directed to initiate proceeding against use of plastic carry
bags in their districts.
Govt. Officers, Court staff, Canteens Managers, Shopkeepers directed
to obey the Govt. notification in their personal and commercial capacity.
Local Municipality/ Nagar Nigam/ Nagar Parisad directed to start a
clean city campaign to ensure that there should be no littering of plastic
bags on the road side.
Direction of participation of school and college students and teachers
to ensure and achieve a grand success in the pious campaign.

Middle Income Group Legal Aid Society
Pursuant to the initiative of Supreme Court Middle Income Group
280 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Aid Society, Rajasthan High Court followed the pious trail and took
steps to constitute Rajasthan High Court Middle Income Group Legal Aid
Society to provide Legal Aid to the Middle Income Group who forms a
large segment of the society and eventually with strong commitment of
His Lordship Hon’ble Mr. Justice Navin Sinha, Chief Justice, Rajasthan
High Court & Patron-in-Chief RSLSA, the desired society was constituted
on 6th July, 2016 under the name and style of Rajasthan High Court (Middle
Income Group) Legal Aid Society. In pursuance, a structure of Middle
Income Group Society was drafted under their guidance and eventually
the society was registered on 06.07.2016.

Protection of Water Resources
Under the aegis of NALSA, Rajasthan State Legal Services Authority
has launched the issue on mission mode basis and following effective
steps preservation of water resources have been undertaken:District Legal Services Authority and Taluka Legal Services Authority
have been directed to organize Legal Literacy Camps for the sensitization
on this issue.
Support of NGOs and Government department, print andelectronic
media has been taken in this regard.
Pamphlets and study material on the issue has been published and
distributed in the State of Rajasthan.
Essays, debates and poster competition have been organized in various
schools and colleges on this topic across the State.
Para-Legal Volunteers have been trained to conduct sensitization
programme amongst the community to spread awareness at grass root
level.

281 / NYAYA DEEP

SIKKIM
Sl.
No.

Heads
Aid/ 

Legal Aid/Services was provided to 332 beneficiaries
by Sikkim SLSA during the quarter July, 2016 to
September, 2016.



04 Lok Adalats were held at the High Court level
wherein 09 cases were taken up and 02 cases disposed
of.



95 Lok Adalats were held at the District and Taluk
level. 368 cases were taken up wherein 282 cases were
settled, 26 returned and 60 pending.



During the National Lok Adalat held in the quarter
July, 2016 to September, 2016, 178 cases were taken up
wherein 69 cases were settled and 109 returned. Total
amount awarded was Rs. 40, 91,107/- only.



Mediation Monitoring Committee was reconstituted
vide Notification No. 28/HCS dated 02.09.2016
comprising of Hon’ble Chief Justice, High Court of
Sikkim as the Ex-Officio Chairman, Hon’ble Executive
Chairperson as Judge-in-Charge, Member Secretary,
Sikkim SLSA and 02 Sr. Advocates as Members and
Special Secretary, Sikkim SLSA as Secretary/Incharge.



A meeting of Mediation Monitoring Committee was
held on 06.09.2016 in the Conference Hall, Office of
Sikkim SLSA.



During the quarter July, 2016 to September, 2016, 84
no. of mediations were held. 47 cases were taken up
wherein 09 cases were settled, 24 cases returned and
14 pending.

Legal Awareness 
Activities

Under the Micro Legal Literacy Scheme, 37 nos. of legal
awareness programmes were conducted by DLSAs
and TLSCs.



Under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 30 nos. of legal awareness
programmes were conducted by DLSAs and TLSCs.

1.

Legal
Services

2.

Lok Adalats

3.

4.

Activities

Mediation

282 / NYAYA DEEP

Sl.
No.

Heads

5.

Training
Programmes

6.

Activities


Two days training programme for Panel Services
Lawyers was conducted by Sikkim SLSA on 30th &
31st July, 2016 in the Conference Hall, Office of Sikkim
SLSA, Gangtok. 50 Panel Advocates were trained.



Two days PLV training programme for students of Law
Colleges was conducted by Sikkim SLSA on 20th & 21st
August, 2016 in the Moot Hall of Sikkim Government
Law College, Burtuk. 85 students and 02 faculty
members were trained.



Two days PLV training programme for Convict was
conducted by Sikkim SLSA on 26th & 27th August,
2016 in the Conference Hall of State Central Prison,
Rongyek. 03 Life Convicts were trained.

M i s c e l l a n e o u s  A sensitization programme on NALSA (Victims of
Activities
Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation)
Scheme, 2016 was organized by Sikkim SLSA on
02.07.2016 in the Conference Hall, Office of Sikkim
SLSA, Development Area, Gangtok as a prelude to the
launching of the Scheme.
 A meeting of Sikkim SLSA chaired by Hon’ble Mrs.
Justice Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge, High Court of
Sikkim & Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA with
the Ex-Officio Members of Sikkim SLSA was held on
02.07.2016 in the Conference Hall, Office of Sikkim
SLSA, Development Area, Gangtok to review the
activities undertaken by Sikkim SLSA.
 A meeting of Sikkim SLSA chaired by Hon’ble Mrs.
Justice Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge, High Court
of Sikkim & Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA
with Member Secretary, Special Secretary and Panel
Advocates of Sikkim SLSA was held on 16.08.2016 in
the official Chambers of Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Meenakshi
Madan Rai, Judge, High Court of Sikkim for the
formation of team comprising of Panel Advocates and
Officers of the Anti-Human Trafficking Unit of Sikkim
for awareness programmes in the Schools of Sikkim.

283 / NYAYA DEEP

Sl.
No.

Heads

Activities
 In pursuance to the meeting of 16.08.2016, awareness drive
in the Schools covered w.e.f. 27.08.2016. During this period,
06 schools were covered viz; Deorali Girls Senior Secondary
School, Modern Secondary School, Enchey Senior Secondary
School, Kyi-de-Khang School, Tadong Senior Secondary
School and Holy Cross Senior Secondary School to sensitize
the students about the NALSA (Victims of Trafficking and
Commercial Sexual Exploitation) Scheme, 2015, POCSO Act,
2012, SADA 2006 and Welfare Schemes of the Government.
 NALSA (Effective Implementation of Poverty Alleviation
Schemes) Scheme, 2016 was launched by Sikkim SLSA in
a function held on 11.09.2016 at District Court Complex,
Kyongsa, Gyalshing, West Sikkim. The function was chaired
by Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.K. Agnihotri, Chief Justice, High
Court of Sikkim & Patron-in-Chief, Sikkim SLSA presided over
by Hon’ble Mrs. Justice Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge, High
Court of Sikkim & Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA in the
presence of Mr. R.B. Subba, Hon’ble Minister, Department of
Law and Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs and Mr. S.B.
Subedi, Hon’ble Minister, Rural Management Department,
Panchayati Raj and Cooperation, Government of Sikkim.
 A meeting of Sikkim SLSA chaired by Hon’ble Mrs. Justice
Meenakshi Madan Rai, Judge, High Court of Sikkim &
Executive Chairperson, Sikkim SLSA with the Prison
Authorities of the State Central Prison, Rongyek, East Sikkim
and Boomtar, Namchi, South Sikkim, Counselors of various
Rehabilitation Centres of Sikkim and Psychiatrist was held
on 19.09.2016 in the Conference Hall, Office of Sikkim SLSA,
Development Area, Gangtok. The object of the meeting was to
create awareness of the NALSA (Legal Services to the Victims
of Drug Abuse and Eradication of Drug Menace) Scheme, 2015
amongst the care providers to the substance abusers in the
various rehabilitation centre. It was also to address the rising
menace of drug addiction and to provide rehabilitation to the
chemical dependent persons arrested under S.A.D.A., 2006 and
NDPS Act, 1985 and lodged in the prisons.

284 / NYAYA DEEP

TAMIL NADU
LEGAL AID/SERVICES
Through Advocate: (Written Complaints)
Number of applications Received: 952
Through PLV’s: (Telephone Message)
Total Number of complaints received: 589
General Counselling & Family Counselling Centre: Total 605 cases taken
up out of which 92 cases were settled.
Implementation of Legal Aid Programmes Applications received: 11,076
& Disposed: 9,896
Beneficiaries through Legal Aid: Total 11,076 people were benefitted.
II.

LOK ADALATS
Total Number of Lok Adalats Held

: 1,410

Total Number of Cases Taken Up

: 3, 79,358

Total Number of Cases Disposed

: 89,403

Total Award Amount		

: Rs.371, 64, 68,423.00

Category of cases

Total cases disposed off

Award Amout

PENDING CASES

70,830

230,64,39,309

PRE-LITIGATION CASES

18,573

141,00,29,114

GRAND TOTAL

89,403

371,64,68,423

➢

District wise particulars of Lok Adalat and settlement:

Name of the
Authority/
Committee
Chennai

109

36587

Total
Cases
Settled
2235

Chengalpattu

41

14532

2154

118692554

Coimbatore

61

18662

3164

409005375

No. of
Adalats

Cases Taken

Award
Amount
515593712

Cuddalore

26

2580

1281

172098756

Dindigul

33

6660

895

67365778

285 / NYAYA DEEP

Erode

24

8541

1132

128705370

Kanyakumari

30

8762

584

58585499

Karur

36

14174

2156

184608869

Krishnagiri

62

16565

1720

145422599

Madurai

38

73287

49007

147203038

Nagapattinam

18

6357

686

49775438

Namakkal

29

3092

481

97348072

Nilgiris

18

2461

1144

57097277

Perambalur

68

10594

939

55114397

Pudukottai

16

8893

679

86618278

Ramanathapuram

29

2044

406

17894700

Salem

38

11850

1310

193526819

Sivaganga

35

8100

2592

66974005

Thanjavur

31

23971

932

75269068

Theni

20

4263

395

54128725

Tiruvallur

58

5811

1463

143156070

Tiruvarur

18

3755

1141

36503528

Tiruchirappalli

27

13413

4337

73211048

Tirunelveli

36

10035

2043

66212787

Tiruvannamalai

39

8108

1208

108183470

Thoothukkudi

42

3732

602

33525895

Vellore

87

8459

1302

100877055

Villupuram

71

8717

1265

109938328

Virudhunagar

71

7089

1107

46951794

HCLSC, Chennai

124

4030

219

110427278

HCLSC, Madurai

6

821

91

53901375

State Authority

69

23413

733

132551466

TOTAL

1410

379358

89403

3716468423

III. MEDIATION:
Sl.No.

Month

Referral

Settled

Failure

Non-Staters

1.

July 2016

667

56

443

171

2.

August 2016

614

79

433

187

3.

Sept. 2016

739

91

557

271

Total

2,020

226

1,433

629

286 / NYAYA DEEP

IV . LEGAL AWARENESS ACTIVITIES:

CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT:
Month &
Year

July
2016

August
2016

September
2016

Particulars

No. of
Camps organized

Legal Applications Received

Non Legal
Applications
Received

Total

Regular

97

343

410

753

Micro

56

30

20

50

NREG

11

0

0

0

Total

164

373

430

803

Regular

64

47

106

153

Micro

143

209

50

259

NREG

8

0

0

0

Total

215

256

156

412

Regular

143

279

729

1,008

Micro

80

85

44

129

NREG

14

0

0

0

Total

237

364

773

1,137

GRAND
TOTAL

616

993

1,359

2,352

District wise particulars of Legal Literacy Programmes
No. of Camps
organized

Total Applications
Received

1 CHENNAI

11

270

2 CHENGALPATTU

23

43

3 COIMBATORE

6

0

4 CUDDALORE

25

16

5 DINDIGUL

20

15

6 ERODE

4

4

7 KANYAKUMARI

6

0

8 KARUR

22

10

S.No.

District

287 / NYAYA DEEP

9 KRISHNAGIRI

23

49

10 MADURAI

61

272

11 NAGAPATTINAM

25

41

12 NAMAKKAL

7

2

13 NILGIRIS

26

32

14 PERAMBALUR

3

0

15 PUDUKOTTAI

4

0

16 RAMANATHAPURAM

5

0

17 SALEM

24

304

18 SIVAGANGA

22

0

19 THANJAVUR

37

338

20 THENI

1

0

21 THIRUVALLUR

35

57

22 THIRUVARUR

5

1

23 THIRUCHIRAPPALLI

21

239

24 THIRUNELVELI

93

22

25 THIRUVANNAMALAI

10

0

26 THOOTHUKKUDI

26

63

27 VELLORE

7

0

28 VILLUPURAM

14

574

29 VIRUDHUNAGAR

50

0

616

2,352

Total

TRAINING PROGRAMMES:
DATES
15.07.2016

PROGRAMME VENUE

RESOURCE PERSONS

Training Programme for Judicial Mr. Sivakumar,
Officers relating Pocso Act and JJB
Professor of Law College,
Act at District Legal Services AuMadurai
thority, Thoothukkudi

288 / NYAYA DEEP

06.09.2016 to
09.09.2016

Training to Para-Legal Volun- 1) Tmt. P. Santhi,
teers at District Legal Services Au- Secretary/Sub Judge,
thority, Thanjavur
DLSA, Thanjavur.
2) Tmt. Minnalkodi,
Deputy Labour Inspector.
3) Tmt. Kasthuri,
Superintendent, Juvenile
Home

MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES:
IS LEGAL AID CLINIC FUNCTIONING IF SO, THE DETAILS
THEREOF:
S.No.

Month &
Date

Clinic Opened in

No. of Clinics
opened

1

July, 2016

Jail Clinic

106

2

August, 2016 1)
2)
3)
4)

3

Community Centre, Government
Hospital, Coimbatore
Juvenile Justice Board,
Coimbatore
Juvenile Justice Board, Tirunelveli
Juvenile Justice Board,
Tiruvannamalai

September
2016

Nil

1
1
1
1

Nil

NALSA SCHEME:
S.No.

Name of the Scheme

1

NALSA
(Victims
of Trafficking and
Commercial
Sexual
exploitation)
Scheme,2015

2

NALSA (Legal Services to the workers
in the Unorganized
Sector) Scheme,2015

Number of
awareness
Programmes

Any other activities/
initiatives with regard to the
scheme

34

Awareness camps organized
at District and Taluk Level
in Homes and Observation
Homes to create awareness
among the inmates.

42

Legal
Awareness
Camps
organized at District and
Taluk Level to explain the
Government welfare schemes.
About 39,478 persons were
benefitted.

289 / NYAYA DEEP

3

NALSA(Child
Friendly Legal Services to Children
and their protection)
Scheme,2015

44

Camps organized by SLSA
and DLSA to abolish child
labour and conducted Rally,
distributed Caps, displayed
Posters regarding do’s and
don’ts and Child Rights,
Released Pamphlets relating to
Rights of Children, Signature
Campaign was also organized.
Puppet shows and Miming
Programmes at District and
Taluk levels were conducted,
Legal
Awareness
Camps
with Rally and distributing
pamphlets were organized.

4

NALSA(Legal Services to the Mentally Ill and Mentally
Disabled
persons)
Scheme,2015

8

Awareness camps organized
at District and Taluk Level
in Mentally Ill Home and
Institute of Mental Health.
One girl by name Sangeetha
hails from Tamil Nadu also
rescured at Uttarpradesh State
and brought to Chennai and
she was admitted in IMH,
Chennai. Also 23 persons of
Tamil Nadu who are mentally
affected were also admitted
in the Homes maintained by
NGOs at Kerala. Out of which
5 persons brought Chennai for
rehabilitation.

5

NALSA(Effective
Implementation
of
Poverty Alleviation
Schemes)
Scheme,2015

65

Awareness camps organized
at District and Taluk Level in
villages to get government
benefits to the poor and
downtrodden people. In Zama
Bandhi programme more
persons were benefitted. Panel
lawyers have attend the Grama
Sabha Meeting.

6

NALSA(Protection
and
Enforcement
of Tribal Rights)
Scheme,2015

6

Awareness camps organized at
District and Taluk level in hill
areas to educate Tribal people
to get Government benefits at
the earliest.

290 / NYAYA DEEP

7

NALSA(Legal Services to the Victims of Drug Abuse
and
Eradication
of Drug Menace)
Scheme,2015

10

Total

209

Awareness camps organized
at District and Taluk level
in Schools and College to
motivate the students in the
right direction.

SUCCESS STORIES:
The Tamil Nadu State Legal Services Authority has received a
communication from Secretary, District Legal Services Authority, Gonda
District, Uttar Pradesh stating that a girl by name Ms.Sangeetha, D/O
Thiru Kandasamy, hails from Tamil Nadu State was rescued at Railway
Station of Gonda District, Uttar Pradesh by RPF Post, Gonda. The said
girl was sent to Chennai and with necessary escorts by the District Judge/
Chairman, DLSA, Gonda, Uttarapradesh. The said girl was received by
this Authority and admitted at IMH, Chennai-10, based on the Reception
Order issued by the Metropolitan Magistrate. Now the said girl is under
observation at IMH, Chennai.
The Member Secretary, Kerala State Legal Services Authority had
informed the Member Secretary, Tamil Nadu State Legal Services
Authority that there are five Mentally ill patients who belonged to various
parts of Tamil Nadu were rescued at Trivandrum and they have been
given treatment at Mental Health Centre, Trivandrum. It was informed
that the said five persons were cured from illness and they have to be
integrated with their family members. As directed by the Hon’ble
Member Secretary, TNSLSA and the Chairman / Principal Judge, DLSA,
the Secretary DLSA, Chennai had coordinated with the Secretary, DLSA,
Trivandrum and received the said five persons namely Smt. Ponnamma
@ Madathi, 2. Smt. Selvi, 3. Smt. Ratna, 4. Smt. Manga @Maniya and 5.
Thiru Muthusamy. The relatives of the above said five persons are yet to
be traced out. So they have been produced before the IInd Metropolitan
Magistrate, Egmore who is exclusively designated to deal with the cases
under Mental Health Act. The IInd Metropolitan Magistrate examined the
above said five persons and found that they are mentally stable. The IInd
Metropolitan Magistrate has directed that the four women be kept in a
home run by Baniyan, a registered NGO at Mogappair, Chennai and one
male person be kept with the Baniyan at Dooming Kuppam, Chennai for
rehabilitation until they are reintegrated with their family members. The
291 / NYAYA DEEP

Chennai District Legal Services Authority has initiated necessary action
to trace out their relatives for re-integration of the said five persons with
their family.

PLV’S SUCCESS STORIES:
The Tirunelveli District Legal Services Authority had nominated
one of its Para-Legal Volunteers to Tharuvai Village in Muneerpallam
Panchayat to create Legal Awareness to the Villagers. Accordingly, the
said PLV has conducted several Street Plays, Camps in the said village
with the help of villagers and created Legal Awareness in the said Village.
As a result, a victim of crime namely Tmt. Sunitha (name changed) of
the said village approached the DLSA through the said PLV for necessary
protection from her drunkard husband who was harassing her and her
two minor daughters. Her husband had murdered their only son, under
the influence of alcohol. The said occurrence was witnessed by said Tmt.
Sunitha and her two minor daughters. Tmt. Sunitha lodged a complaint
in the police station against her husband and the accused was arrested
and remanded to Judicial Custody. Thereafter he came out on bail and
harassed Tmt. Sunitha and her daughters. During the course of trial, Tmt.
Sunitha and her two daughters adduced evidence against the Accused.
Aggrieved by this, the accused chased them and made threats to kill
them all. At this stage, Tmt.Sunitha and her minor daughters approached
the District Legal Services Authority, Tirunelveli with the help of PLV. The
DLSA arranged necessary protection for them through concerned police
and as a result, another case was registered against the accused husband
and he was arrested and remanded to Judicial custody. The accused
husband was convicted and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and
now he is in prison. So, Tmt. Sunitha and her daughters are free from the
harassment and threats of the accused.
The deceased son of Sunitha was the sole breadwinner of the family
and after his death, Tmt. Sunitha and her two minor daughters suffered
for livelihood, and they were mentally affected by the murder of the
deceased. Considering their pathetic condition, the DLSA, Tirunelveli has
arranged a counselling to them. Thereafter, the DLSA also provided an
employment to Tmt. Sunitha which enabled her to look after herself and
her minor daughters.
292 / NYAYA DEEP

With the help of PLV, the DLSA has contacted a Management which
is running a school and college to provide education to one of the minor
child of Tmt.Sunitha with free of cost. The said Management also agreed
to provide free education up to College level to the said minor daughter.
The DLSA with the help of District Child Protection Officer, Tirunelveli
had arranged financial assistance to the said child under sponsorship
scheme, whereby the said child is given Rs.2, 000/- per month to meet her
needs.
So far as the other minor child of Tmt. Sunitha is concerned, she
was not able to concentrate in studies. Hence the District Legal Services
Authority, Tirunelveli has admitted her in a Open Shelter Home run by an
NGO namely Saranalayam at Tirunelveli wherein she is now undergoing
training in tailoring course at free of cost.
Further the DLSA. Tirunelveli has taken steps to provide victim
compensation to the said victim namely Tmt. Sunitha and her two minor
daughters and the same is under process. Thus the whole family members,
who were the victims of a crime, have been rehabilitated by the Tirunelveli
District Legal Services Authority with the help of Para Legal Volunteer.

TELANGANA
Lok Adalats
No. of Lok Adalats conducted: 611
No. of cases settled		

: 4349

Compensation awarded Rs.337975602/-

National Lok Adalats
Organized on 09.07.2016, 13.8.2016 & 10.9.2016)
No. of Cases settled: 24503
Compensation awarded Rs.548628381/-

293 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Aid Beneficiaries
Total no of beneficiaries —516
Beneficiaries in Jails —148

Mediation
No. of Cases referred —1292
No. of Cases settled —-173

Legal Literacy Camps / Awareness Programmes
Total no. of camps —- 461
Total No. Legal Literacy Camps conducted on 7 NALSA Schemes — 41

State level Convergence Meet on NALSA (Protection and
Enforcement of Tribal Rights) Scheme, 2015 at Adilbad
Telangana State Legal Services Authority along with DLSA, Adilabad
and in coordination with Integrated Tribal Development Agency conducted
“State Level Convergence Meet on NALSA (Protection and Enforcement
of Tribal Rights) Scheme, 2015 on 30th July, 2016 at Utnoor, Adilabad
District (one day programme)”. Hon’ble Sri Justice V. Ramasubramanian,
Executive Chairman, TSLSA has inaugurated the said programme and
addressed the gathering on the occasion and released the brochure on the
above NALSA Scheme prepared and got published by Telangana State
Legal Services Authority. A Booklet on the above NALSA Scheme with
FAQs was also distributed to the participants. Various stake holders who
have a role in implementation of this scheme participated in the above
convergence meet.

State level Convergence Meet on NALSA (Effective Implementation
of Poverty Alleviation) Scheme, 2015 at Nizamabad
Telangana State Legal Services Authority along wth DLSA,
Nizamabad and in coordination with Mission for Elimination of Poverty
in Municipal Areas (MEPMA) and Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty
(SERP) organized “State Level Convergence Meet on NALSA (Effective
Implementation of Poverty Allievation Schemes) Scheme, 2015 on 31st July,
2016 at Nizambad District (one day programme)”.
Hon’ble Sri Justice V. Ramasubramanian, Executive Chairman, TSLSA
294 / NYAYA DEEP

has inaugurated the said programme and addressed the gathering on
the occasion and released the brochure on the above NALSA Scheme
prepared and got published by Telangana State Legal Services Authority.
A Booklet on the above NALSA Scheme with FAQs was also distributed to
the participants. Various stake holders who have a role in implementation
of this scheme participated in the convergence meet.

TRIPURA
Legal Aid/Services:
In the Month of July, 2016:
571 nos. of persons are provided Legal aid by appointing legal aid
counsel throughout the State.
289 nos. of persons are provided Legal services through counselling
throughout the State.
1812 nos. of persons are provided Legal advice through the Village
Legal Care and Support Centres throughout the State.
04 persons are provided Legal advice through the Legal aid clinics in
schools and Colleges.
1249 nos. of persons are provided Legal advice through the front
offices throughout the State.

Lok Adalats
•

In the Month of July, 2016, Monthly National Lok Adalat was held as
per Calendar of NALSA where 19,525 numbers of cases were taken up
for disposal, and 3,956 numbers of cases were disposed of and the total
settlement amount was Rs. 12,57,200/-.

•

In the Month of August, 2016, Monthly National Lok Adalat was held
as per Calendar of NALSA where 16,762 numbers of cases were taken
up for disposal, and 4,534 numbers of cases were disposed of and the
total settlement amount was Rs. 1,96,20,568/-.

•

In the Month of September, 2016, Monthly National Lok Adalat was
held as per Calendar of NALSA where 18,077 numbers of cases were
taken up for disposal and 4,515 numbers of cases were disposed of
and the total settlement amount was Rs. 16,10,934/-.

295 / NYAYA DEEP

Mediation
In the Month of September, 2016, another Mediation Centre was
inaugurated in the North Tripura District, Dharmanagar under DLSA,
North on 24th September, 2016 by His Lordship, Hon’ble Hon’ble Mr.
Justice S.C.Das, Judge, High Court of Tripura & Hon’ble the Executive
Chairman, Tripura State Legal Services Authority in the august presence
of His Lordship, Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.Talapatra, Judge, High Court of
Tripura & Chairman, High Court Legal Services Committee & Judge-inCharge, Mediation for the State of Tripura.
Moreover, in the Month of August, 2016, A Training Programme on
Mediation for the Referral Judges of Tripura was organized by the High
Court Mediation Committee and Tripura State Legal Services Authority
under the aegis of MCPC, Supreme Court of India on 13th & 14th August,
2016 in the Auditorium of the Hon’ble High Court of Tripura. The
programme was chaired by Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.Talapatra, Judge, High
Court of Tripura & Judge-in-Charge, Mediation for the State of Tripura.
In the said training Programme, 58 nos. of Judicial officers throughout
the State were participated. Mr. Harish Dudani of Delhi Higher Judicial
Service has attended the training programme as a Master Trainer.
Legal Awareness Activities:
•

In the Month of July, 2016 : 65 nos. of Legal awareness camps were
organized throughout the state where total 8286 nos. of persons were
attended.

•

In the Month of August, 2016 : 13 nos. of Legal awareness camps were
organized throughout the state where total 1049 nos. of persons were
attended.

•

In the Month of September, 2016: 120 no. of Legal awareness camps
were organized throughout the state where total 8286 nos. of persons
were attended.

Training Programmes:
a. 02 days training programme of PLV were organized in the sub-jail of
Kanchanpur, under the North Tripura District, Dharmanagar on 31st
July, 2016 and 1st August, 2016 where 02 senior convicts were trained
as a PLV to work in the Legal aid Clinic set up in the Kanchanpur
Sub-Jail.
296 / NYAYA DEEP

b. In the Month of August, 2016, A Training Programme on Mediation
for the Referral Judges of Tripura was organized by the High Court
Mediation Committee and Tripura State Legal Services Authority
under the aegis of MCPC, Supreme Court of India on 13th & 14th
August, 2016 in the Auditorium of the Hon’ble High Court of Tripura.
The programme was chaired by Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.Talapatra,
Judge, High Court of Tripura & Judge-in-Charge, Mediation for the
State of Tripura. In the said training Programme, 58 nos. of Judicial
officers throughout the State were participated. Mr. Harish Dudani of
Delhi Higher Judicial Service has attended the training programme as
a Master Trainer.
c.

Conducted One day training under Project Diva in-collaboration with
the Tripura Aids Control Society with Panel Advocates and PLVs of
DLSAs and SDLSCs in the Conference Hall of Tripura Aids Control
Society at Agartala on 31/07/2016.

Miscellaneous Activities:

July, 2016
In the Month of July, 2016, TSLSA declared the result of 03 tier essay
competition held among the schools and college students (District-wise)
on fundamental duties of the citizen and other legal Rights:
Tiers

Tier –I
For
college
students

Name of the
Winners

Rank Name of the School /
College

Name of the District
Legal Services
Authority
West Tripura District
Legal Services
Authority, Agartala.
1st Floor, Old High
Court Building, District
and Sessions Judge
Court Complex, Firebrigade Chowmuhani,
Agartala.

Miss Aruva
Saha

1st

1st Year, M.B.B.S (Roll
No. 18)
Tripura Medical
College & Dr.
B.R.Ambedkar
Teaching Hospital,
Hapania.

Miss Tanusree
Debnath

2nd

3rd Year, M.M.L.T.
(Roll No. 011325)
Tripura Institute
of Para-Medical
Science, Hapania

Mr. Kaushik
Bhattacharjee

3rd

4th Semester, B.A.
L.L.B. (Roll No.03)
Tripura Govt. Law
College, Agartala.

297 / NYAYA DEEP

Miss Aparna
Biswas

1st

Ramkrishna
Mahavidyalaya B.A
3rd Year, Bengali
Hons. Paiturbazar,
Kailashahar.

Sri Rupak
Biswas

2nd

Ramkrishna
Mahavidyalaya
B.A 3rd Year, Pol.
Science (Hons.)
Village- Chantail,
Kailashahar.

Sri Prasenjit
Rudrapal

3rd

BBCM, 1st Year,
Address : Rajnagar,
Fatikroy, Unakoti

Sri Surajit Das

1st

Netaji Subash
Mahavidyalaya
Roll No. PLSH-40, 3rd
Year, Village- Natun
Bazar, Gomati.

Sri Sudipta
Ghosh

2nd

Netaji Subash
Mahavidyalaya
Roll No. A-35 BA 3rd
year, Village- Natun
Bazar, Gomati.

Smt. Licchavi
Bhowmik

3rd

Polytechnic College,
Gomati District, Fulkumari, Udaipur

North Tripura District
Legal Services
Authority,
Kailashahar.
District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,
Kailashahar.

South Tripura District
Legal Services
Authority,
Udaipur
District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,
Udaipur.

Roll No. 04/
EE/A/04/16
Branch-Electrical, 3rd
Year, 6th Semester
Tier –2

Mr. Tutan Das

1st

Class-XII, Roll No.
West Tripura District
32, Madhuban,
Legal Services AuthoriKathalia High School ty, Agartala.

Mr. Debanjan
For School
Majumder
Students

2nd

Class- XI, Sec-B, Shri
Krishna Mission
School, Agartala.

Class IX to A
XII

Mr. Satyakam
Sikdar

B

Mr.
Jayanta
Debnath

3rd

Class-XII, Holly
Cross H.S. School,
Agartala

1st Floor, Old High Court
Building, District and
Sessions Judge Court
Complex, Fire-brigade
Chowmuhani, Agartala.

Class – XI, Shishu
Niketan H.S. School,
Ranirbazar, Agartala.

298 / NYAYA DEEP

Rumpi Begam

1st

Class XII, Tilla
Bazar H.S + 2 School,
Kailashahar.

Mumina
Akhtar Duli

2nd

Class – X, Tilla
Bazar H.S + 2 School,
Kailashahar.

Miss Tamanna
Dasgupta

3rd

Class – X, Kamalpur Govt. English
Medium H.S, School,
Kailashahar.

Sri Arup Datta

1st

North Tripura District
Legal Services Authority,
Kailashahar.
District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,
Kailashahar

K.B.I School (Roll no. South Tripura District
4) Class IX,
Legal Services Authority,
Section – C
Udaipur
District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,
Udaipur.

Tier-3

st

Miss Akangsha
Saha

Class-VIII, Roll No.
01, Donbosco H.S
School, Nandan
Nagar

2nd

Class VII, Roll No.
16, Dorezeo Mission
School, Jambura,
Khowai

3rd

Class-VI, Sec-B, Roll
No. 04, Ram Krishna
Vidyalaya, East of
Old Central Jail,
Dhaleswar, Agartala.

Miss Sumita Pal 1st

Bhagaban Nagar
Madhyamik Vidyalaya, Class VII,

North Tripura District
Legal Services Authority, Kailashahar.

Miss Ishani
Biswas

2nd

Holycross Convent
School, Dharmanagar Class V,

District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,

Miss Gargi
Nath

3rd

Assam Rifle Public
School, Udaipur,
Class – VIII, Kamalpur Govt. English
Medium H.S, School,
Kailashahar.

For School
Master
Students
Soumyanetra
Datta
Class V to
VIII
Master Abhigyan Majumder

1

West Tripura District
Legal Services Authority, Agartala.
1st Floor, Old High Court
Building, District and
Sessions Judge Court
Complex, Fire-brigade
Chowmuhani, Agartala.

Kailashahar

299 / NYAYA DEEP

Arighna Saha

1st

Don Bosco School
Roll No. 5, Class V,
Section - A

Aniket Deb

2nd

Hrishika Biswas 3rd

Udaipur English
Medium H.S. School,
Roll No. 7 Class VI,
Assam Rifle Public
School, Udaipur

South Tripura District
Legal Services Authority, Udaipur
District and Sessions
Judge Court Complex,
Udaipur.

Class – VIII, Roll
No. 5

TSLSA conducted a Workshop in-collaboration with District Child
Protection Unit, West Tripura on Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 on 20.07.2016 in the State Juvenile Home, Narasinghar,
Agartala.
A one day Seminar cum Workshop on effective implementation on
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 at Udaipur
on 26.07.2016 at Rajarshi Multiplex Hall in collaboration with Child Line
Foundation of India, Udaipur Unit, under the aegis of Tripura State Legal
Services Authority which was inaugurated by the then Hon’ble Executive
Chairman, TSLSA.

August, 2016:
2. TSLSA conducted another Workshop on Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 in Annwesha Child Protection Centre
in Paschim Bhubanban, Ushabazar, Agartala on 8th August, 2016.
3. In implementing the newly launched Scheme of NALSA, 2015,
District Legal Services Authority, South Tripura District, Udaipur
organized one Seminar cum Workshop cum awareness programme
on effective implementation of NALSA “Legal Services to the Mental
ill and Mentally Disabled Person” Scheme, 2015 under the aegis of
Tripura State Legal Services Authority which was inaugurated by the
then Hon’ble Executive Chairman, TSLSA at Rajarshi Multiplex Hall,
Udaipur on 21.08.2016.

September, 2016:
2. In the Month of September, 2016, another Mediation Centre was
300 / NYAYA DEEP

inaugurated in the North Tripura District, Dharmanagar under DLSA,
North on 24th September, 2016 by His Lordship, Hon’ble Hon’ble Mr.
Justice S.C.Das, Judge, High Court of Tripura & Hon’ble the Executive
Chairman, Tripura State Legal Services Authority in the august
presence of His Lordship, Hon’ble Mr. Justice S.Talapatra, Judge, High
Court of Tripura & Chairman, High Court Legal Services Committee
& Judge-in-Charge, Mediation for the State of Tripura.
These are the information about the activities conducted by the
Tripura State Legal Services Authorities during the aforesaid period w.e.f
July, 2016 to September, 2016.

UTTAR PRADESH
Lok Adalats
The Monthly National Lok Adalats were held on 09-07-2016, 1008-2016 & 10-09-2016 focused on the specific subject matters relating to
Electricity/Water/Telephone/Public Utility disputes; Bank matters and
Criminal compoundable matters besides the regular civil and criminal
matters.
During the quarter ending September,2016, total 304 Lok Adalats in
different districts all over U.P. were successfully organized, 4,69,193 cases
including 1,91,993 Petty Criminal Cases; 29,205 Revenue Cases; 2,880
Civil Cases; 3,058 Matrimonial Disputes; 27,718 Bank Loan Disputes; 655
Labour Cases and 1,145 Motor Accident Claim Petitions were decided.
Compensation of Rs. 25, 83, 97,228/- was awarded/paid to the victims/
claimants.
Taking cue from the experiment of Lok Adalats, the UPSLSA has
been regularly organizing ‘Bal Samwad Adalats’ for settling the matters
regarding juveniles in conflict with law, who have been implicated
in criminal matters, which entails punishment up to 7 years for adult
offenders. During the quarter in question i.e. July, 2016 to September, 2016,
a total of 93 matters pertaining to children in conflict with law were settled
through the bal samwad adalats.

Legal Awareness Camps & Free Legal Assistance
During the months of July to September, 2016, the DLSAs organized
301 / NYAYA DEEP

500 legal awareness camps and thereby benefiting 1, 08,612 persons, who
attended such camps.
The UPSLSA, to provide legal assistance to persons looking for legal
advice and counsel, started the toll free number in April, 2009. The
services are provided for a caller from anywhere in the country, through
3 lawyers having experience of the application of law and working of the
High Court and the District Court.
During this quarter 2,999 persons were provided free legal aid through
DLSAs.
Payment of Compensation to the Victims under Victim Compensation
Scheme
The State Government has enacted Victim Compensation Scheme,
2014 to provide compensation to the victims of the Acid attacks; Rape;
Murder; Human trafficking etc. In this quarter a compensation of Rs. 18,
70,000/- awarded and paid to 13 victims of the different offences.
Inspection of Vrindavan Widow Ashram at Mathura by the Member
Secretary, UPSLSA
The Member Secretary, UPSLSA in company of the Full-Time Secretary,
DLSA, Mathura carried out inspection of the above home to gauge the
living conditions and to ensure that proper care of the widows living
in the home is being taken. The shortcomings and problems of inmates
that were observed during inspection were brought to the notice of the
concerned authorities with the direction to rectify those defects.
One day Conference on “Re-enforcement of Resolve of Access to
Justice for All”
The Uttar Pradesh State Legal Services Authority (UPSLSA) organized
a one day conference – cum- workshop on “Re-enforcement of Resolve
of Access to Justice for All” of All the District Judges/Chairpersons &
Secretaries, District Legal Services Authorities (DLSAs) on 31st July, 2016 at
the Judicial Training and Research Institute (JTRI), Gomti Nagar, Lucknow.
The conference was chaired by Hon’ble Mr. Justice V.K. Shukla, Senior
Judge, High Court of Judicature at Allahabad and Executive Chairman,
UPSLSA and was co-chaired by Hon’ble Mr. Justice, Arun Tandon, Judge,
302 / NYAYA DEEP

Allahabad High Court and Hon’ble Mr. Justice A.P. Sahi, Senior Judge,
High Court, Lucknow.
The conference was organized on the agenda items: 1- Enhancing
the reach and the quality of legal representation, 2- Performance of Legal
Services Clinics, 3- Construction of ADR Centres, 4- The progress made
in the establishment of student legal literacy clubs/law clubs, 5- Victim
Compensation Scheme (VCS), 6- Engagement of Para-Legal Volunteers
(PLVs), 7- Implementation of the 07 new schemes launched by NALSA, 8Submission of timely and accurate reports to the UPSLSA, 9- Organization
of legal awareness camps, 10- Information related to mediation activities.
The conference began with the Inaugural Session in the morning and
was followed by discussions amongst the breakout groups. The 06 breakout
groups were constituted from amongst the 71 participating DLSAs and
each group was assigned a separate topic related to the legal services
activities. Based on the intra-group discussion, a representative from each
group made a presentation before the full House. The presentations were
followed by a summing up and valedictory session.
During the conference, a quarterly report of the activities that have
been undertaken by the UPSLSA during the months of April to June, 2016
was also released.

Publicity Measures
In order to give publicity to legal services and institutions, the
officers of UPSLSA delivered talks and interviews on All India Radio/
Doordarshan Lucknow on socially relevant legal topics such as Juvenile
Justice, Domestic Violence, institutional objectives of UPSLSA Legal Aid
to the People, Acid Attack & Rights of Victims etc.
In addition to it on almost regular basis, in coordination with City
Montessori School, Lucknow, a programme to raise legal awareness is
being run on Community radio run by the school. In this programme the
officers of the UPSLSA have been participating. They have given talks on
subjects as wide ranging as from legal rights of women to legal rights of
children.
In this quarter the services of publicity van was utilized to spread legal
awareness and free legal aid services to the people, who are living in far
303 / NYAYA DEEP

flung areas and are in deprived conditions. The publicity van covered
Behraich, Shravasti, Balrampur, Sant Kabir Nagar, Basti, Gonda, Faizabad,
Ambedkar Nagar, Ghazipur, Chandauli and Sonbhadra districts.
Pamphlets were distributed containing the literature of free legal services
and short movies were also displayed to make the people aware of their
legal rights. DLSAs, PLVs and Local Administration extended whole
hearted support to make this tour a successful event.

Establishment of Permanent Lok Adalats (PLAs) (2nd Phase)
In the first phase in 23 Districts, Permanent Lok Adalats (PLAs) were
established. In the second phase in 21 Districts namely Mathura, Muzaffar
Nagar, Pilibhit, Pratapgarh, Kushi Nagar at Padrauna, Sultanpur, Unnao,
Chandauli, Rampur, Barabanki, Hardoi, Deoria, Etah, Etawah, Budaun,
Sitapur, Bijnore, Kannauj, Basti, Behraich and Mainpuri, PLAs have been
established and appointment letters have been already issued in the end
of September, 2016 and reportedly in most of the above districts PLAs
have now become functional.

UTTARAKHAND
Lok Adalat:
During these months, 58 Monthly/Mega/National Lok Adalats have
been organized and in these Lok Adalats total 4,325 Cases were disposed
off, a sum of ` 5,62,08,641/- were awarded as compensation to the litigants,
a sum of ` 55,14,832/- was realized as fine and total 4,591 Persons were
benefitted.
Total 06 Jail Lok Adalats were organized during these months in
District/Sub Jails of the State and 14 Cases were settled through these Jail
Lok Adalats and 14 Under Trial Prisoner/Jail Inmates were benefitted.
Besides the above, 158 Cases were resolved/settled through Women/
Child Helpline as per needs & requirements of said cases/complaints.

Mediation
From July to September, 2016 total no. of 281 cases were referred to
Mediation Centres out of which 60 Cases were settled in the Mediation &
ADR Centres established right from High Court to Outlying Courts of the
State.
304 / NYAYA DEEP

Legal Aid & Advice:
In these months of July, August and September, 2016, a total number
of 486 persons were benefited by providing Panel Lawyers free of cost
to defend their cases from High Court to Tehsil Courts of the State. Out
of which 276 Under Trial Prisoners were benefitted through legal aid. 83
persons were benefitted by giving legal advice and total 26 persons were
provided legal advice through Toll Free No: 1800 180 4000 installed in the
office of Uttarakhand SLSA, Nainital.

Legal Literacy/Sensitization Campaign & Seminars:
Between the months from July, 2016 to September, 2016, total
112 awareness programmes were organized wherein 25263 persons
were made aware on the subjects, like Sexual Harassment, ill effects of
Population Increasing, Right to Education, Juvenile Justice Act, Child
Labour, Important Legal Rights to Women, Protection of Child Rights.
Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation Scheme,
2015, Sensitization of Women to save money & Channelize it into
entrepreneurship and Govt. Industrial Policy, ‘observation of World
Hepatitis Day’. Constitution of Special Cell for registration of Unorganized
Sectors, Different Govt etc.

Legal Literacy Campaign in Village/Community Centres:During the month of July to September, 2016 a total number of 104
Legal Literacy Camps were organized in rural/urban areas of the State
of Uttarakhand wherein 11104 persons were benefitted. During these
camps/programmes the subjects/issues such as ‘World Population Day’,
Importance of Family Planning, ill effects of Population Increasing, Right
to Education, Child Labour, Important Legal Rights to Women, MultiPurpose Camp, Sensitization of Women to save money & Channelize it into
entrepreneurship and Govt. Industrial Policy, Camp on different subject
benefitted to common mass, ‘observation of ‘World Hepatitis Day’. Legal
Services to the Workers in the Unorganized Sector as per NALSA Scheme
2015, Constitution of Special Cell for registration of Unorganized Sectors
for availing benefits of the schemes for unorganized workers, particularly
in the interior areas preferably at their workplaces in collaboration with
labour department, Human Trafficking, Poverty Alleviation, World
Population Day, Women Rights, Health Schemes. JJB Acts & Rules,
Protection Of Water Resources, Provisions & Rules of Different Pensions,
Child Marriage, Dowry Act, PC&PNDT Act, Right to Education, Govt.
305 / NYAYA DEEP

Welfare Schemes for Children, International Literacy Day, NALSA’s Child
Friendly Legal Services to Children and their Protection Scheme, 2015,
Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganized Sector Scheme, 2015.

Legal Literacy Campaign in District/Sub Jails, Children/
Observation/Protection Homes:In order to make aware Jail Inmates, Under Trial Prisoners, Inmates/
Detunes of different Homes of the State, total 48 Legal Awareness Camps
were organized in District/Sub Jails and Children/Observation Homes
during July to September, 2016. By these campaigns total 5671 Under Trial
Prisoners and Inmates detained in different Homes were sensitized on the
rights of Under Trial Prisoners, Moral Education to Children, Drug Abuse.
Legal Rights of detenues/inmates in Children Homes, Right to Education,
POCSO Act, Legal Rights to Under Trial Prisoners, Procedure of PleaBargaining after undertaking all necessary ground work through panel
lawyers & PLVs, Protection of child rights & Moral education, Issues of
Missing women and children, Drug abuse & against drug menace.

Multi-Purpose Camps:
From July to September, 2016 a total number of 53 Multi/Mega Legal
Sensitization Camps were organized throughout the State of Uttarakhand
wherein 4505 persons were apprised about various aspects on the eve of
Environment Day, World Population Day, World Hepatitis Day. Also they
were made aware about provisions of Drug Abuse, Domestic Violence,
Victims of Trafficking and Commercial Sexual Exploitation Scheme, 2015,
Legal Rights to Inmates, Registration of Unorganized Workers to avail
benefit Govt. Welfare Schemes, Govt. Welfare Schemes for Workers in the
Unorganized Sector and Labour Law, Camp by Special Cell Team with
Employers to make aware them about their Statutory Duties as per NALSA
(Legal Services to the Workers in the Unorganized Sectors) Scheme,
2015. Juvenile Justice Act, 2015, Mediation Mechanism & ADR Rules etc.,
Protection of Child Rights & Moral Education, Basis Knowledge on day to
day life Rules & Law and JJB Act, Right to Education etc.

Camps on Special issues:
A total number of 400 persons were sensitized on different issues,
provisions, acts and rules benefiting them in their day to day life by
organizing 04 Legal Awareness Camps in Slum/Labour Colonies. The
attendants were sensitized on Child/Labour Rights, legal rights of workers
306 / NYAYA DEEP

of unorganized sectors, ill effects of drug use, Drug Abuse and Illicit
Trafficking, free legal aid/advice and POCSO Act, Constitution of Special
Cell for registration of Unorganized Sectors for availing benefits of the
schemes for unorganized workers etc.

Campaign in Melas/Exhibitions:
During this period total 06 Legal Literacy Camps/Stalls were held in
regional fairs organized throughout the State of Uttarakhand. The said
camps/stalls were visited by 5071 persons of the locality and neighboring
districts have visited these stalls and were provided Saral Kanooni Gyan
Mala booklets as per their need. Legal Problems as faced by them were
also attended by the Panel Lawyers and DLSAs Staff. Also there were
made aware about Woman & Child Rights, Power of Literacy, Protection
of Water Resources, Child Labour, Victims Compensation Scheme, Right
to Education, JJ Act & Rules relevant on Child Rights.

Visits/Inspection/Meetings/Trainings:
During this period 29 Visits were conducted to District/Sub-Jails &
Judicial Lock-ups of the State by the Secretaries/Panel Advocates of the
Concerned DLSAs. The aim of the visits to secure legal rights of under
trial prisoners and detenues confined in the Jails of the State.
Total number of 31 Meetings were conducted with PLVs. In the said
meetings PLVs were sensitized on all 07 NALSA’s Schemes, 2015 and also
directed them to make aware common mass about free legal aid/activities
available in the State. Duties of PLVs were also discussed in charges of
Legal Aid Clinics and Workers Facilitation Centres.
During this period 09 Training/Seminars/Conference were organized
for all Stakeholders, sensitizing them about JJ Act, JJ Rules, and relevant
judgements on Child Rights. During this period 07 Training Programme
were conducted for the Judicial Officers/referral judges, Advocates/
Mediators wherein they were made aware about the Mediation Mechanism,
ADR/Mediation Rules, Mediation Procedure and AFCONS Judgement.
Total number of 03 training programmes were organized for the new
selected PLVs.

Other Activities:
On 23rd July, 2016 the building of ADR Centre at High Court
Compound, Nainital was inaugurated by the Hon’ble Patron-in-Chief,
307 / NYAYA DEEP

Uttarakhand SLSA, Nainital in the benign presence of Hon’ble Executive
Chairman, UKSLSA, Nainital and other Hon’ble Judges of the High Court
of Uttarakhand.

WEST BENGAL
LEGAL AID SERVICES
Legal aid services during this quarter had been given by way of various
activities. There had been a number of legal representations, legal advice
had been given and counselling have been done The District Secretaries
paid visits to Homes and Jails. About ……. legal aid seekers have been
benefitted. One of the Districts – Murshidabad had set up a Legal Aid
Kiosk in the vicinity of a busy thoroughfare – a bus stand to render legal
aid services especially relating to Motor Vehicles Act.
As an ‘Achievement’ in the field of imparting legal aid services, DLSA
Hooghly took an active stand in helping the family of an acid attack victim
named Jyotsna Malik residing under Tarakeshwar P.S. suo motu upon
being aware of the incident reported in a Bengali newspaper Anandabazar
patrika on 27.07.16.Though the victim succumbed to her injuries, DLSA
Hooghly had been firm in its stand in facilitating the victim compensation
award of Rs.300000/- to the victim’s family from the Govt. administration
and had also helped the victim’s son to open a bank account in his name
where the amount had been deposited.

LOK ADALATS
Tea garden Lok Adalats
Lok Adalats have been organized in the entire State on the specific
dates mentioned by NALSA. After the success of the previous Tea garden
Lok Adalats, WBSLSA organized more such Lok Adalats at Bagrakote
Tea garden, Malbazar, Jalpaiguri and Bandapani Tea garden, Alipurduar,
Jalpaiguri on 24.07.16 and 24.09.16. About 3610 matters have been
disposed of. The matters varied from old age pension, widow pension to
P.F., gratuity, non-issuance of ration card, etc. A Special Lok Adalat had
been organized at Jalpaiguri Central Correctional Home on 18.09.2016.
About 25 G.R. cases relating to matters compoundable in had been taken
up and the notices were issued to the defacto complainant and victim and
all other accused persons on bail to be present before the Lok Adalat. A
total of 9 cases had been disposed of.
308 / NYAYA DEEP

Cases disposed of through Lok Adalat (u/s. 19 of the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987)
Period

July –
Sept., 16

Benches
641

Pre-litigation
matter
disposed of

Post-litigation
cases disposed
of

185495

6663

Total
DisSettlement
posed of
Amt.
192158

255160910/-

Cases disposed of through National Lok Adalat
Period

July –
Sep ‘16

Benches

273

Pre-litigation matter
disposed of

Post-litigation cases
disposed of

Disposed
of

Total
Settlement
Amt.

5548

6192

11740

211172284/-

LEGAL AWARENESS ACTIVITIES
To generate awareness amongst the masses, several Legal Awareness
camps have been organised. Legal Aid Clinics have been set up and Legal
Literacy clubs have been opened. The District Secretaries paid visits to
villages, rural areas, schools, colleges, universities, blocks, Panchayats to
spread awareness.

Seminar on the NALSA Scheme of Human Trafficking and
Commercial Sexual Exploitation on 9th July 2016
The West Bengal State Legal Services Authority (WBSLSA) had
organized its first dissemination campaign upon the above NALSA Scheme
on a large scale with the Government administration, Judicial Officers,
police department, NGOs, Community based organizations(CBOs), other
stakeholders, etc. by conducting a one-day Seminar in the Auditorium of
the Sesquicentenary building of our High Court at Calcutta. The Seminar
was graced by The Hon’ble Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court, Dr.
Manjula Chellur, the Hon’ble Executive Chairperson-in-Charge and Judge,
High Court Calcutta, Justice Indira Banerjee and a Research- Coordinator
of the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Dr. P.M. Nair. There had been a
panel discussion with eminent experts in the field moderated by one of our
eminent Judges of the High Court, Hon’ble Mr. Justice Joymalya Bagchi
and and the discussion was highly enriching and knowledgeable. The
309 / NYAYA DEEP

survivors voiced their difficulties and a representative of the Transgender
community also added another perspective to the issue. With this attempt,
WBSLSA intended to place its first foot forward to join hands with the
concerned stakeholders in being an active part of this revolution.

Statistical Information in Respect of Legal Literacy/Legal
Awareness Camps / Programmes
Period

School/
Village/
College/ Community
University
Centre

Jail

Slums

Melas/
Radio Community TV Others
Exhibitions
Radio

Total

Legal
Literacy
Programme

396

430

69

15

15

11

1

6

128

1071

Persons
benefitted.

48617

33886

6501

910

8320

-

-

-

4119

102353

TRAINING PROGRAM
The 7th Phase training program for the panel lawyers had been
organized at the ADR Centre at Birbhum for the Panel lawyers of Birbhum.
The training took place on 06.08.16 and 07.08.16. About 24 Panel Advocates
were trained by our Master trainers.

MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
Laying of Foundation stone for ADR Centre in Howrah District on 14th
July 2016
The unveiling of the foundation stone for the last and the lone, as of the
present, 19th ADR Centre in the Howrah District, was done on 14th July 2016
through a gorgeous ceremony comprising of the Hon’ble Chief justice Dr.
Manjula Chellur, the Executive Chairperson-in-charge, WBSLSA, Hon’ble
Justice Indira Banerjee, Judge, High Court, Calcutta and other eminent
Judges of the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta.

******

310 / NYAYA DEEP

Statistical Information
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
STATEMENT SHOWING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS BENEFITTED THROUGH LEGAL SERVICES AND
ADVICE HELD BY STATE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES UNDER LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES
ACT, 1987, SINCE INCEPTION (AS ON 30.06.2016).
S.
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

State
Andhra
Pradesh
Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal
Pradesh
Jammu &
Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya
Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Andaman and
Nicobar Islands
U.T.
Chandigarh
Dadra and
Nagar Haveli
Daman & Diu
Delhi
Lakshadweep
Puducheery
SCLSC
Total

SC

ST

BC

Women

Children

In
custody

General

7,369

5,779

10,108

14,278

1,750

11,383

32,684

Total
83,351

175

1,536

78

508

5

145

1,570

4,017

38,296
5,297
53,496
86
17,319
39,845

28,552
1,480
64,862
38
9,093
113

8,350
9,144
54,313
315
1,953
1,240

25,672
7,599
40,700
2,780
35,586
14,518

1,459
2,750
8,650
98
617
634

1,174
3,574
39,871
4,042
15,666
45,307

123,747
19,533
41,445
1,992
50,236
16,735

227,250
49,377
303,337
9,351
130,470
118,392

1,518

203

140

7,561

170

444

5,854

15,890

2,312

623

1,292

18,499

937

507

14,093

38,263

2,568
10,481
3,152

3,484
2,549
830

3,863
19,938
3,596

5,884
16,969
23,807

675
266
1,080

6,544
689
28,864

6,284
93,279
170,390

29,302
144,171
231,719

320,871

273,882

230,016

108,851

12,182

71,115

688,293

1,705,210

50,107
83
431
244
1,150
32,938
12,199
21,107
181
200,866
157
725
797,260
3,157
9,130

36,349
223
1,726
35,416
7,549
22,270
593
29,256
626
25,079
74
537
103,265
1,625
4,234

23,501
30
66
2,581
2,136
1,905
4,992
9,417
49
279,692
106
138
630,007
443
4,247

102,664
565
249
5,301
2,863
38,108
19,544
18,588
2,702
433,400
1,245
7,142
379,391
3,945
30,344

2,442
22
2,015
568
896
624
938
829
304
3,803
316
475
140,855
1,857
1,703

29,965
206
1,752
5,257
2,536
4,839
47,461
25,797
3,762
39,262
1,265
2,901
17,405
2,210
22,300

3,701,906
2,814
269
6,584
612
40,257
32,784
26,811
883
1,595,917
1,094
4,693
2,560,596
19,276
26,302

3,946,934
3,943
6,508
55,951
17,742
140,941
118,511
131,805
8,507
2,578,019
4,257
16,611
4,628,779
32,513
98,260

-

-

-

211

-

1,269

404

1,884

1,011

10

57

2,012

305

6,396

939

10,730

1

6

1

483

185

45

1,474

2,195

1
6,924
22,305
1,256
1,664,018

2
344
2
37
252
662,499

4
368
16,178
1,795
1,322,059

72
66,550
22,249
2,644
1,463,484

123
9,173
4,665
23
203,394

59
130,952
1
1,074
6,430
582,469

214
111,394
2
6,525
11,519
9,419,404

475
325,705
5
73,033
23,919
15,317,327

311 / NYAYA DEEP

Statistical Information
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
STATEMENT SHOWNG THE NUMBER OF LOK ADALATS HELD BY STATE LEGAL
SERVICES AUTHORITIES UNDER LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT 1987 AND
CASES SETTLED SINCE INCEPTION (AS ON 30.06.2016)
S.
No.

State

No. of Lok
Adalats held

No. of MACT
Cases Settled

Total No. of Cases
Settled (including
MACT Cases)

Compensation Awarded
in MACT Cases
(in Rs.)

1

Andhra Pradesh

218,212

144,458

2,240,486

2

Arunachal Pradesh

715

1,062

7,098

45,661,176

3

Assam

4,238

33,010

475,144

3,036,994,807

4

Bihar

29,662

136,255

1,510,364

1,238,024,478

5

Chhattisgarh

18,699

13,441

6,626,270

2,741,757,350

6

Goa

1,170

5,337

18,656

402,233,626

7

Gujarat

167,785

221,805

7,918,811

16,375,561,842

8

Haryana

174,685

41,704

1,948,159

4,776,517,790

9

Himachal Pradesh

11,012

6,781

357,272

1,040,891,068

10

Jammu & Kashmir

6,025

12,180

441,900

2,794,172,662

11

Jharkhand

32,238

6,384

6,046,830

1,035,732,129

12

Karnataka

179,229

180,592

4,776,318

11,295,095,748

13

Kerala

43,712

175,604

759,482

9,750,541,381

14

Madhya Pradesh

40,576

218,794

16,224,863

17,100,552,844

15

Maharashtra

45,648

111,615

3,119,638

20,527,176,411

16

Manipur

126

1,533

7,543

182,341,500

17

Meghalaya

285

1,019

12,534

143,130,406

18

Mizoram

1,554

243

3,997

6,257,080

19

Nagaland

356

1,595

6,668

235,892,117

20

Odisha

17,361

53,310

5,058,330

4,703,839,024

21

Punjab

34,768

19,471

3,395,423

2,216,406,772

22

Rajasthan

206,425

628,074

3,677,661

10,740,093,325

23

Sikkim

2,283

174

8,349

9,646,000

24

Tamil Nadu

267,332

265,841

7,349,845

47,639,058,092

25

Telengana

11,379

11,633

391,663

3,648,761,725

26

Tripura

1,870

11,038

205,709

157,912,198

27

Uttar Pradesh

49,792

97,080

17,731,369

9,961,604,292

28

Uttarakhand

2,069

5,423

396,571

751,887,370

29

West Bengal

25,822

44,250

2,457,377

4,504,934,285

30

Andaman and
Nicobar Islands

276

39

9,005

8,033,468

31

U.T. Chandigarh

9,789

20,877

687,850

1,788,718,388

32

Dadra and Nagar
Haveli

32

158

2,429

12,147,699

33

Daman & Diu

37

61

2,182

3,099,000

34

Delhi

16,144

23,923

1,614,603

4,128,992,748

35

Lakshadweep

319

11

172

435,000

36

Puducherry

1,332

9,589

63,720

522,019,250

37

SCLSC
TOTAL :

17,912,565,063

8

44

281

-

1,622,965

2,504,408

95,554,572

201,438,688,114

312 / NYAYA DEEP

Statistical Information
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
STATEMENT SHOWING THE NUMBER OF PERSONS BENEFITTED THROUGH LEGAL SERVICES AND
ADVICE HELD BY STATE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES UNDER LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES
ACT, 1987, SINCE INCEPTION (AS ON 30.09.2016).
S.
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

State
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Andaman and
Nicobar Islands
U.T. Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar
Haveli
Daman & Diu
Delhi
Lakshadweep
Puducheery
SCLSC
TOTAL :

Women

Children

10,108

14,668

1,827

In
custody
11,550

1,563

78

598

5

169

1,578

4,166

28,617
1,490
66,417
40
9,189
115
215
633
3,759
3,202
965
275,528
36,376
309
1,843
36,006
7,549
22,318
593
29,810
655
25,290
94
556
103,843
1,625
4,410

8,350
9,144
54,313
315
1,953
1,240
140
1,292
3,863
19,938
3,596
230,016
23,501
30
66
2,581
2,136
1,905
4,992
9,417
49
279,692
106
138
630,007
443
4,247

25,878
7,726
41,387
2,916
36,571
15,724
7,883
18,650
6,882
19,485
29,798
111,412
103,296
752
279
5,532
2,863
38,423
21,096
18,958
2,788
435,459
1,390
7,524
380,447
4,071
32,218

1,462
2,842
9,671
101
653
663
173
937
778
370
1,223
13,704
2,470
23
2,150
592
896
637
958
859
327
3,828
350
488
140,880
1,873
1,788

1,332
5,022
42,471
4,145
16,412
46,682
486
563
6,812
1,455
32,331
77,139
30,480
256
1,838
5,373
2,536
4,920
49,172
26,536
3,923
40,539
1,413
3,028
18,279
2,467
24,125

125,275
19,931
44,758
2,099
51,565
17,676
6,016
14,471
7,731
99,038
176,621
692,353
3,702,257
2,953
292
6,619
612
40,461
34,290
27,949
906
1,602,287
1,240
4,826
2,566,420
19,457
28,605

229,245
51,509
313,801
9,704
134,086
122,179
16,498
38,952
32,611
155,125
248,273
1,722,631
3,948,591
4,456
6,904
56,947
17,742
141,699
124,242
135,144
8,839
2,588,958
4,773
17,471
4,638,674
33,111
105,133

SC

ST

BC

7,426

5,799

175
38,331
5,354
54,784
88
17,743
40,079
1,585
2,406
2,786
11,637
3,739
322,479
50,211
133
436
244
1,150
33,035
13,141
21,615
191
201,863
180
911
798,798
3,175
9,740

General

Total

33,466

84,844

-

-

-

217

-

1,282

405

1,904

1,043

10

57

2,232

343

6,490

1,024

11,199

1

6

1

483

185

45

1,475

2,196

1
7,160
22,314
1,256
1,675,210

2
346
2
37
252
69,464

4
368
16,178
1,795
1,322,059

73
69,164
22,310
2,644
1,491,797

123
12,794
4,711
23
210,707

59
130,952
1
1,121
6,430
607,834

214
114,442
2
6,550
11,519
9,467,383

476
335,226
5
73,221
23,919
5,444,454

313 / NYAYA DEEP

Statistical Information
NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY
STATEMENT SHOWNG THE NUMBER OF LOK ADALATS HELD BY STATE LEGAL
SERVICES AUTHORITIES UNDER LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT 1987 AND
CASES SETTLED SINCE INCEPTION (AS ON 30.09.2016).
S.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37

State
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Goa
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Telengana
Tripura
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
Andaman and Nicobar
Islands
U.T. Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar Haveli
Daman & Diu
Delhi
Lakshadweep
Puducherry
SCLSC
TOTAL :

144,932
1,062
33,010
136,358
13,592
5,342
222,807
42,165
6,793
12,202
6,384
183,295
176,470
219,990
111,998
1,533
1,019
243
1,595
53,367
19,639
628,785
174
266,481
12,041
11,039
97,092
5,434
45,174

Total No. of Cases
Settled (including
MACT Cases)
2,248,228
7,098
478,401
1,513,866
6,628,330
18,778
7,928,328
1,995,297
358,687
443,046
6,046,830
4,886,678
767,946
16,229,372
3,125,158
7,543
12,534
4,062
6,668
5,163,727
3,399,061
3,702,325
8,504
7,353,617
394,098
206,425
17,731,919
399,752
2,756,912

Compensation
Awarded in MACT
Cases (in Rs.)
18,073,067,663
45,661,176
3,036,994,807
1,268,764,678
2,785,539,398
403,003,626
16,563,034,986
4,865,099,990
1,041,926,068
2,803,707,662
1,035,732,129
11,665,489,231
9,874,316,051
17,311,481,362
20,574,736,007
182,341,500
143,130,406
6,257,080
235,892,117
4,720,561,024
2,325,139,160
10,945,753,899
9,646,000
47,840,306,255
3,783,389,196
158,432,198
9,961,604,292
755,670,260
4,820,704,588

278

39

9,149

8,033,468

9,806
32
37
16,154
319
1,357
8
1,657,323

20,877
158
61
23,923
11
9,642
44
2,514,771

687,864
2,429
2,182
1,614,859
172
64,131
281
96,204,257

1,788,718,388
12,147,699
3,099,000
4,128,992,748
435,000
533,206,750
203,712,015,862

No. of Lok
Adalats held

No. of MACT
Cases Settled

220,776
715
4,240
30,204
18,994
1,183
170,466
192,492
11,090
6,057
32,238
183,880
44,121
41,220
46,046
126
285
1,567
356
17,592
34,985
208,169
2,303
267,961
11,778
1,876
49,862
2,089
26,661

******

314 / NYAYA DEEP

NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Dipak Misra
Chief Justice of India

Patron-in-Chief

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ranjan Gagoi
Judge, Supreme Court of India

Executive Chairman

Hon’ble Mr. Justice D.N.Patel
Judge, High Court of Jharkhand & Executive Chairman
Jharkhand State Legal Services Authority

Member

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Aniruddha Bose
Judge, High Court of Calcutta & Executive Chairman,
West Bengal State Legal Services Authority

Member

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hakim Imtiyaz Hussain
Former Judge, High Court of Jammu & Kashmir

Member

Hon’ble Ms. Justice Rekha Sharma
Former Judge, High Court of Delhi

Member

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Kailash Gambhir
Former Judge, High Court of Delhi

Member

Hon’ble Mr. Justice Virender Singh

Member

Chairperson, Armed Forces Tribunal (Principal Bench)
Hon’ble Mr. Justice P.Vishwanatha Shetty
Lokayukta, Karnataka

Member

Shri P.S.Narasimha
Sr. Advocate, Supreme Court of India

Member

Prof. P.S.Jaswal
Vice Chancellor,
Rajiv Gandhi National University of Law, Patiala

Member

Shri Ashok Lavasa
Secretary, Department of Expenditure
Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India

Member

Ms. Snehlata Shrivastava
Secretary, Department of Justice
Ministry of Law & Justice, Govt. of India

Member

Sh. Bindeshwar Pathak 	
Social Worker

Member

