Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

INDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872
INTRODUCTION: -The law of evidence is the most important branch of adjective law. It is to legal
practice what logic is to all reasoning. Without it, trials might be infinitely prolonged to the great
detriment of the public and the vexation and expense of suitors. It is by this that the judge separates
the wheat from the chaff among the mass of facts that are brought before him, decides upon their just
and mutual bearing, learns to draw correct inferences from circumstances, and to weigh the value of
direct testimony.
The Evidence Act codifies the rules of English law of evidence with such modification as are rendered
necessary by the peculiar circumstances of this country.
The main principles which underlie the law of evidence are:




Evidence must be confined to the matters in issue,
Hearsay evidence must not be admitted, and
The best evidence must be given in all cases.

The evidence Act is divided into three parts comprising of eleven chapters—
Part I- consists of two Chapters dealing with definitions and relevancy of facts.
Part II comprises Chapters III to V which provide for proof of facts by oral or documentary evidence.
Part III embodies Chapters VI to XI which contain rules for the production of evidence in court, the
effect of presumptions and the duties of the court in dealing with the evidence produced before it.
The functions of Court of Justice are two-fold:i)
ii)

To ascertain the existence or non-existence of certain facts, and
To apply the substantive law to the ascertained facts and to declare the rights and liabilities
of the parties.
For this, the court has to collect, peruse, analyse and sift the evidential material brought before it. The
means whereby the court informs itself of the existence of these facts is called Evidence.
JURIST PROPOSITION

 ‘Evidence’ is derived from the Latin term “Evidere” which means – “to show clearly, to make
plainly certain, to ascertain, to prove”

 Taylor says– (functional description of court process)
 “The word ‘evidence’ includes all legal means, exclusive of mere arguments, which tend to prove
or disprove any matter of fact, the truth of which is submitted to judicial investigation.”

 Classical exposition of Bentham–
 “Any matter of fact, the effect or tendency of which is to produce in the mind a persuasion,

affirmative or disaffirmative of the existence of some other matter of fact.” (comprehends both
physical and psychological facts)
Evidence may bear two meanings or refer to –
i)
ii)

MEANS – that tend to create a belief in the mind of judge; and
FINAL BELIEF – actually created in his mind, known as PROOF.
1

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

“PROOF IS THE END AND EVIDENCE IS THE MEANS TO PROOF”. In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the
word ‘Evidence’ is used in the sense of “Means”.
STATUTORU INTERPRETATION
Sec-3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 reads:
EVIDENCE means and includes –
(1)
(2)

All statements which the court permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses, in
relation to matters of facts under inquiry – such statements are called ORAL EVIDENCE.
All documents produced for the inspection of the court – called DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE.
This interpretation is not exhaustive. It did not cover ‘Material Objects’ like, photos, weapon
used in murder, bloodstained clothes etc. which are admitted in practice.
Court need not concern itself with the method by which such evidence is obtained.
(Pushpa Devi M. Jatia vs. M.L.Wadhwan)

 Tape recorded conversation is held as documentary evidence. (Rama Reddy vs. V.V.Giri)
 Dock tracking evidence is held to be scientific evidence. (Abdul vs. State)
OBJECT OF LAW OF EVIDENCE

 Ascertaining controverted questions of fact in judicial proceedings. Evidence is to a judicial
investigation what Logic is to reasoning.

 To prevent laxity in the admissibility of evidence.
 CARDINAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW OF EVIDENCE:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)

Evidence must be confined to the matter in issue.
Hearsay evidence must not be admitted.
Best evidence must be given in all cases.
Facts judicially noticeable need not be proved.(S-56)

V) Facts admitted need not be proved. (S-58)

CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE
Evidence may be divided into –
I. Direct Evidence and
II. Circumstantial Evidence.



I) Oral Evidence (S-60)
II) Documentary Evidence. (Ss-61 to 65)



Primary Evidence (Ss-62/64)
Secondary Evidence. (Ss-63/65)
2

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is divided into 3 parts, 11 chapters and comprises of 167
sections.
Part-I answers the question ‘what facts may or may not be proved?’ (Ss-1 to 55)
Part-II deals with ‘what sort of evidence is to be given of these facts?’ (Ss-56 to100)
Part-III covers ‘by whom and in what manner the facts are to be proved?’ (Ss-101 to 167)
Sec-5 to 55 deal with RELEVANCY and
Sec-56 to 167 deal with the ADMISSIBILITY.








EXTENT AND APPLICATION OF THEINDIAN EVIDENCE ACT, 1872

Sec

- 1



The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 came into force on 1st. September, 1872.



It applies to the whole of India except J & K.

It applies to all JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS in or before a court, including court Martials
under the Army Act, 1950, The Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950.
Not applicable to –

i) proceedings under The Army Act, The Naval Discipline Act, 1934 and the Air Force
Act passed by the British Parliament.



ii) Affidavits



iii) Arbitration proceedings.

The provisions of this Act are not applicable to Departmental Inquiries / Domestic
Inquiries/Commissions of Inquiries / Administrative Tribunals.



Refer to Court – Judicial Proceedings – Taking of evidence on oath.

1. Interpretation (Clause (Sec.3)
1. Court
2. Fact
3. Relevant Fact
4. Facts in Issue
5. Document
6. Evidence
7. Proved
8. Disproved
9. Not Proved; and
10. Indian.
2. Presumptions (Sec.4)
(May Presume, Shall Presume and Conclusive Proof).

3

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

1.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

INTERPRETATION CLAUSE (Section-3)
In this Act, the following words and expressions are used in the following senses,,
unless a contrary intention appears from the context.
The words and expressions which are used in the sense in which they are defined in
the Evidence Act have to be understood only in that sense unless a contrary intention
appears from the context. For example, the expression „court‟ has to be understood only in
the sense in which it is defined in Sec. 3, But the expression „court‟ may also mean a tennis
court, a badminton court if used in different contexts.
1. Court (Sec.3):
According to Sec.3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872., „Court‟ includes „all Judges
and Magistrates and all person except arbitrators, legally authorized to take evidence‟.
Etymologically the word „court‟ means King‟s Durbar. It is also understood in the
sense of: (1) the place where justice is administered, and (2) the person or persons who
administer justice. The expression „court‟ is defined in the Evidence Act in the latter sense.
According to the definition given in Sec.3 of the Act the court does not mean the
four walls of the premises where justices is administered but it means and includes all
Judges, Magistrates and such other persons who are legally authorized to take evidence.
The above definition under Sec.3 is not exhaustive. The expression „court‟ is not
confined only to regular courts. It also includes any person who administers justice and is
authorised to take evidence.
Eg.: Commissioners appointed under the Code of Civil procedure, 1908 and the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2. Fact (Sec.3):
The term „fact‟ means “an existing thing‟. But under the Evidence Act, the meaning
of the word is not limited to only what is tangible and visible or, is any way, the object of
sense.
According to Sec.3 of the Act, fact means and includes:
1. anything, state of things or relation of things capable of being perceived by the senses.
Illustrations:
i.
That a person heard or saw something.
ii.
That person said certain words.
2. any mental condition of which any person is conscious
Illustrations:
i.
A person has an intention to commit murder.
ii.
That a man has certain reputation.
Rights and liabilities in a judicial proceedings emerge (arise) out of facts. Sec.3
categorizes facts into: (i) Physical Facts; and (ii) Psychological Facts.
(i)

Physical Facts: – It means and includes anything, state of thing or relation of things,
capable of being perceived by sense. In other words, all facts, which are subject to
4

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

(ii)

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

perception by bodily senses, are „Physical Facts‟. They are also known as external
facts.
Psychological facts: – They are also known as „internal facts‟. Those facts, which
cannot be perceived by senses, are „Psychological Facts‟.
Eg.: intention (means area) knowledge, good faith, fraud etc.

3. Relevant Fact (Sec.3):
The word „relevant‟ has two meanings. In one sense, it means, “Connected” and in
another sense “admissible”. One fact is said to be relevant to another, when the one is
connected is said to be relevant to another, when the one is connected with the other, in any
of the ways referred to in the provisions of the Evidence Act relating to the relevancy of
facts (S.s. 5-55). In other/simple words, a fact is said to be relevant to another, if it is
connected there with under the provision of the Evidence Act.
The expression „relevancy‟ means “connection between one fact and another”.
According to Stephen, „relevancy‟ means “Connection of events as to cause and effect”.
What is really meant by „relevant facts‟ is a fact that has a certain degree of probative force?
Kinds of relevancy:
i.
Logical Relevancy, and
ii.
Legal relevancy.
(i)

(ii)

Logical Relevancy:– A fact is said to be logically relevant to another, when by
application of our logic, it appears (to us that one fact has a bearing on another fact.
Facts. Which are logically relevant are not provable. For instance, Confessional
statement made to wife, by her husband. Husband said his wife that he had
committed a crime i.e. murder or rape or theft. If the wife gives evidence as to the
commission of crime by her husband, it is not admitted in evidence under Sec. 122
of the Indian Evidence Act. The Act does not deal with logical relevancy. (The Act
means Evidence Act). Therefore, it is aid that „All facts logically relevant are not
provable; however, legally relevant facts are provable.”
Legal Relevancy:- A fact is said to be legally relevant when it is expressed as
relevant under Sections 5 to 55 (Relevancy of Facts).
Ex.: A is tried for administering poison to B with a motive of inheriting property.
Here, the motive is relevant under Sec.8. Similarly the fact revealed by post-mortem
expert that the death is caused by the poison is relevant under sec.45. The Act deals
with legal relevancy.
According to Section 6-55 of the Act, following are relevant facts:
i.
Facts connected with facts in issue or relevant facts.
ii.
Facts to the issue as admission (Ss.17-23) and confessions (Ss.24-30).
iii.
Statements under special circumstances (Ss.34-38).
iv.
Judgments (Ss.40 and 41).
v.
Opinion of third person (Ss.45-51), and
vi.
Character of Parties (Ss.52-55).
5

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Facts in Issue (Sec.3):
The expression „Facts in issue‟ means and includes–– any fact from which, either by
itself or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any
right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied I any suit or proceeding necessarily follows.
Explanation: Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating
to Civil Procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in the
answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations:
„A‟ is accused of the murder of „B‟
At his trial the following facts may be in issue:
That A caused B‟s death; That A intended to cause B‟s death; That A hand received
grave and sudden provocation from B; That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B‟s
death, was, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing its nature.
Facts in issue in the plain sense mean „facts, which are in issue and form the subject
matter of the court‟s decision‟. The questions relating to a fact enabling the court to give
decision are „Facts in Issue‟.
„Facts in issue‟ are those facts, which are alleged by one party and denied by the
other in the pleading in a civil case or alleged by the prosecution and denied by the accused
in a criminal case.
Eg.: A is accused of murdering B. At trial, the following facts may be in issue.
That A caused B‟s death. (It refers to the question, whether A has caused the death of B. If
the answer is „no‟, A is discharged/acquitted. If the answer is „yes‟ the following question
will arise).
That A intended to cause B‟s death. (If A caused B‟s death, the next question arises
is, whether A had an intention to cause B‟s death or not. If the intention (mens rea/mental
element) is present, it us murder or culpable homicide and A is awarded serious punishment
i.e. death of life imprisonment. Otherwise (if intention/men rea is absent) it amounts to
accident, which is a defence Under Sec.80 I.P.C. If the accident is by negligence, the
punishment is up to 2 years imprisonment or fine or both).

That A had received grave and sudden provocation form B. (It refers to the question,
whether B is instrumental/responsible for such a grave and sudden provocation by A,
accuating to cause B‟s death).
That at the time of committing the act, whether A was incapable of knowing the
nature and extent of the consequences (of his act) by reason of unsoundness or other. (Even
if A caused B‟s death intentionally, A may plead the defence, on the ground that he was
incapable of knowing the nature and extent of consequence of the act was doing, due to
6

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

insanity under Sec.84 I.P.C., Drunkenness under Sec.85 & 86 I.P.C. etc.). In short, the
questions, which give rise to right or liability, are called Facts in issue.
In a Criminal Proceeding, Charge contains facts in issue. Facts in issue are alleged
by the prosecution and denied by the defence counsel/defendant. According to Sec.3 of the
Act, facts in issue are asserted by the plaintiff and denied by the defendant. According to
Sec.3 of the Act, facts in issue arise out of a legal right or liability or disability of a party to
the case.
Definition: – Section 3 of the Evidence Act, defines „Facts in Issue‟ as follows:
“Facts in issue means and includes any facts from which either by itself or in
connection with other facts gives rise to the existence, non-existence, nature or
extent of any right, liability asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding.”
Recording facts in issue by civil court is also a fact in issue. Answers to facts in issue
are also facts in issue.
Eg.: A sues B for default against promissory note. B denies execution of promissory
note. The questions and also answers in this example constitute „facts in issue‟.
Questions:
1.
Whether B executed promissory note in favour of A.
2.
What is the relief that A is entitled to?
Answers
1.
B executed promissory note in favour of A.
2.
B is liable to pay the amount due to A.

Distinction between Facts in issue and Relevant Facts:Following are the notable points of distinction between facts in issue and relevant facts:
S.No. Facts in Issue
Relevant Facts
1.

It is a necessary ingredient of It is not a necessary ingredient
a right or liability.
of a right or liability.

2.

It is called the principal fact or It is called evidentiary fact or
„factum probandium.‟
factum probandi.

3.

Facts in issue are affirmed by Relevant
facts
one party and denied by the foundation
of
other party.
regarding them.

are
the
inference

5. Document (Sec.3):
The word „Document‟ in the general parlance is understood to mean any matter
written upon a paper in some language such as English, Hindi, Urdu and so on. Under the
7

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Evidence Act it means “any matter expressed or described upon any substance, paper, stone,
or anything by means of letters or marks.
According to Sec.3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, “Document” means any matter
expressed or described on any substance by means of letters, figures, or marks; or by more
than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for the purpose of
recoding that matter.
Illustrations:
Writing is a document. Words printed, lithographed or photographed are document:
A map or plan is a document: an inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document: A
caricature is a document.
The word „Documents‟ literally means “written papers”. According to Sec.3 of the
Evidence Act, it means and includes matters expressed or described on all material
substances by means or letters, figures or marks. For example, writing is a document, and
inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document. A writing on the wall is a document.
Numbers given on fixed tables and trees are document Hence, document means all material
substance on which human thoughts are recorded. Documents are inanimated proofs while
witnesses are animated proofs.
6. Evidence (Sec.3) :
„Evidence‟ means and includes––
1.
All statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by
Witnesses, in relation to matter of facts under inquiry; such statements are called oral
evidence;
2.
All document (including electronic records produced for the inspection of the
Court; such documents are called documentary evidence”.
7. Proved (Sec.3):
A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it, the Court
either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought,
under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
The word „Proof‟ means “anything, which serves the purpose of convincing either
immediately the mind as to the truth or falsehood of a fact or profession. The expression
proof under Section 3 of the Evidence Act means “such evidence as would induce a
reasonable man to come to a conclusion.
8. Disproved (Sec.3):
A fact is said to be „disproved‟ when after considering the matters before it, the court
either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so probable that a prudent
ma ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it
does not exist.
The definition of the expression disproved is converse of the definition of the
expression proved.
8

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

9. Not Proved (Sec.3):
A fact is said to be proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.
A fact is said to be not proved when neither its existence nor its non-existence is
proved. It also indicates a state of mind in between the two, that is one cannot say whether a
fact is proved or disproved. It negatives both and disproof.”
Distinction between Proved, Disproved and Not Proved:
Proved

Disproved

Not Proved

1. The term „proved‟ is

1. The term „Disproved‟ is

1. The term „Not Proved‟ is a

Positive.

2. When a fact is proved, the

Negative.

mean between the terms
proved and disproved.

2. When a fact is disproved

2. When a fact is not proved,

court decides/gives

no further question arises

it implies (gives room for

judgment in favour of the

as to its proof.

further evidence either to

person, who has proved it.

prove or disprove the fact.

10. Indian (Sec.3.):
„India‟ means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
{The expressions “Certifying Authority”, “digital signature”, “Digital Signature
Certificate”, “electronic form”, “electronic records”, “information”, “secure electronic
record”, “secure digital signature” and “subscriber” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Information Technology Act, 2000}.

2.

PRESUMPTIONS (Section–4).
(May Presume, Shall Presume and Conclusive Proof)
Sec.4 of the Indian Evidence Act; 1872 provides for three types of presumptions
namely, May Presume, Shall Presume and conclusive Proof. It runs as follows:
‘May Presume’:– Whether it is provided by this Act that the Court may presume a fact, it
may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved, or may call for proof
of it:
‘Shall Presume’:– Whenever it is directed by this Act that the Court shall presume a fact, it
shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved.
9

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

‘Conclusive Proof’:– When one fact is declared by this Act to be the conclusive proof of
another, the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not
allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving it.
Evidence is a „means‟ to arrive at proof. Proof is a process by which truth or
falsehood as to fact is convinced. Proof enables a reasonable man to come to a conclusion.
Before analyzing the expressions, May Presume, Shall Presume and Conclusive Proof, it is
necessary to explain „presumption‟, from which the above‟ expressions are emerged as
follows:
Presumption:– In the absence of absolute certainty, we resort to presumptions. The word
„presume‟ means “supposed to be”. The word „presumption‟ means “an inference from
known facts‟.
For instance, A finds B‟s scooter in front of a, restaurant. Then, A may presume that
B is in the restaurant. When A entered into the restaurant, he found B, then his presumption
is correct/true. Instead of b‟ if C (B‟s brother) is found, his (A‟s) presumption is
incorrect/wrong. Thus, presumptions may be true or untrue. In other words, they may be
rebuttable (may be challenged or irrebuttable (cannot be challenged).
„Presumption‟ is and inference, which takes place in the absence of absolute
certainty as to truth or falsehood of a fact. In other words, presumption is an inference
drawn by the court as to the truth of a particular, from other known or proved factsa.
Definition:– The term „Presumption‟, in its largest and most comprehensive signification,
may by defined to be an inference, affirmative or disaffirmative of the truth or falsehood of
a doubtful fact or proposition, drawn by a process of probable reasoning from something
proved or taken for granted.

Classification of Presumption:– Presumptions may be classified as flllows:
1.
Presumption of Fact or Natural Presumption or May Presume 9Ss.86–88, 90, 133, A
and 114)
2.
Presumption of Law or Artificial Presumption–
(i)
Rebuttable Presuptions of Law or Shall Presume
(Ss.79–86, 189, 105, 11.A, 111.B and 114.A)
(ii)
Irrebuttable Presumptions of Law or Conclusive Proof
(Ss.41, 112 and 113).

The above classification is shown in the table given below:

10

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

May Presume or
Presumption of Fact or natural Presumption
(Sections 86–88, 90, 113.A and 114)
Section 86–88, 90 113A and 114 lay down the provision relating to Presumption of
Fact or Natural Presumption or May Presume as stated below:
Sec.86
Sec.87
Sec.88
Sec.90
Sec.113
Sec.114

deals with “Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records”.
deals with “Presumption as to books, maps and charts”.
deals with “Presumption as to telegraphic messages”.
deals with “Presumption as to documents thirty years old”.
A deals with “presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman”.
deals with „Court may presume existence of certain facts”.

The expressioin „may presume‟ refers to discretion of the court as to the exietence or
non-existence of a fact in issue. For instance, when a person is found in possession of stolen
property, the court may presume him as thief or has received such goods with the
knowledge that they are stolen (Sec/11 Evi.Act).
According to Sec.4 of the Evidence Act, „may presume‟ a fact mean (a) regard it as
proved unless and until it is disproved, or (b) call for proof of it. In the above example, the
court has discretionary power either to presume the possessor (of stolen property) as thief;
or may presume that he had received such goods with the knowledge that they are stolen or
may refuse to presume the guilt of accused and may ask (direct0 the prosecution to prove
the guilt of the accused. These presumptions are generally rebuttable.

Shall Presume or Rebuttable Presumptions of Law
(Sections 79–85, 89, 105, 111A, 113B and 114A)
Section 79–85, 89, 105, 11A, 113B and 114A lay down the provisions relating to
„Rebuttable Presumptions or Shall Presume as stated below:
Sec.79
deals with “Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies”.
11

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Sec.80
Sec.81
Sec.82
Sec.83
Sec.84
Sec.85
Sec.89
Sec.105
Sec.111A
Sec.113B
Sec.114A

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

deals with “Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence”.
deals with “presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts or
Parliament and other documents”.
deals with “Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof
of seal or signature”.
deals with “Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of
Government”
deals with “Presumption as to collection of laws and reports and decisions”.
deals with “Presumption as to powers-of-attorney”.
deals with “Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not
produced”.
deals with “Burden of proving that cause of accused comes within
exceptions”.
deals with “Presumption as to certain offences”.
deals with “Presumption as to dowry death”.
deals with “Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for
rape”.

According to Sec.4 of the Evidence Act, the Court has no option or discretionary
power in drawing a presumption as to the existence or non-existence of a fact in issue. The
Court is bound to regard a fact as proved, unless an evidence is produced to disprove it.
However, (rebuttable presumption of law) „shall presume‟ is not conclusive, but only
rebuttable. Section 79 directs that when a certified copy of a public document is produced,
the Court shall presume that the certifying officer held that official character when the copy
was certified. The Court cannot call for evidence to disprove this fact but the opposite party
still has privilege to disprove that he held that official character.
Eg.:– The Court presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be the
official Gazette (U/s.81 of Evidence Act). Similarly, the court shall presume the accuracy or
genuineness of the maps and plans made by the Government authority (U/s.83 of Evidence
Act).

Conclusive Proof or Irrebuttable Presumptions of Law
(Section 41, 112 & 113)
Section 41, 112 and 113 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lay down the provisions
relating to “Conclusive Proof or Irrebuttable of Law as stated below:
Sec. 41
Sec.112
Sec.113

deals with “Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, ect. Jurisdiction”.
deals with „Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy”.
deals with “Proof of cession of territory”.

According to Section 4 of the Evidence Act, when one fact is declared by the
Evidence Act to be conclusive proof of another, the court, on proof of that fact must regard
the other having been proved and it (court) shall not permit any kind of evidence for the
purpose of rebutting or disproving that fact. In other words, when a fact is proved to be
12

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

conclusive under evidence Act, the court must confirm it as conclusive and shall not
permit/entertain any evidence for the purpose of disproving that fact. In such words, neither
the court has discretion to call for evidence nor the party has the privilege to disprove it.
Even if the party seeks to disprove it, the court has a duty, not to allow evidence for that
purpose.
Eg.:– „A‟ and „B‟ are married but divorced. When the question arises whether „A‟
and „B‟ are husband and wife, if the decree of divorce is submitted to the court, the court
shall conclusively presume that they are no longer husband and wife from the date of such
decree for divorce. In this example, the divorce decree is regarded as conclusive proof.
1.

EVIDENCE OF ONLY FACTS IN ISSUE AND RELEVANT FACTS (Section-5)
Section 5 of the Indian Evidence Act, 182 says that, “Evidence may be given of facts in
issue and relevant. It runs as follows:
Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence of every
fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and of no
others.
Explanation:- This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact which he
is disentitled to prove by any provisions of the law for the time being in force relating to
Civil Procedure
Illustrations:(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of causing
his death.\
At A‟s trial the following the club;
A‟s beating B with the club;
A‟s causing B‟s death by such beating;
A‟s intention to cause B‟s death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first
hearing of the cause of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable
him to produce the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings,
otherwise than in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Code of Civil
Procedure
Section 5 of the Evidence Act says that evidence may be given of existence or nonexistence of every facts in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be
relevant and of no others. The words “and of no others” under Section 5 indicate clearly that
to be admissible in evidence, a fact must be either in issue or must fall within the purview of
Section 6 to 55 of the Evidence Act. Otherwise, the fact cannot be admitted in evidence.

13

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

DOCTRINE OF RES GESTATE
2.

DOCTRINE OF RES GESTATE (Section-6)
(Relevancy of Facts Forming Part of Same Transaction)
Section 6 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lays down the provisions relating to the
“Doctrine of Res Gestae” or “Relevancy of facts forming part of the same transaction”. It
runs as follows–
“Facts which, through not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue as to form
part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and place
or at different times and place.”
Illustrations:(a) A is accused of the murder of b by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A or B or
the bystander at the beating, or so shortly before or after is as to form part of the
transaction, is a relevant fact.
The term “same transaction” under Section 6, has not been defined in the Evidence Act.
The principle underlying Section 6, the following is sometimes termed as “Res Gestae”.
Res Gestae- Meaning:– The Doctrine of „Res Gestae‟ is borrowed from English Law and
incorporated in Section 6 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The term „res‟ is a Latin word,
which means “thing” and the expression “Res Gestae” literally means “the thing done, a
subject matter, a transaction or essential circumstances surrounding the subject.” In Law of
Evidence, it means thing done including words spoken, forming part of the same
transaction. There is a fact story behind every case before the court of law. It (fact story)
contains certain acts, omissions or statements, which are not in issue, but are capable of
throwing some light upon the nature of the transaction revealing its true quality and
character. Such acts, omissions, or statements from part of the same transaction in issue and
are allowed to be proved.
Definition:– The doctrine of „Res Gestae‟ may be defined as those circumstances, which are
automatic and undersigned incidents of a particular litigated act and which are admissible
when illustrative of such acts.
Halsbury defines „res gaste‟ as “Facts which from part of the res gestae and are
consequently provable as facts relevant to the issue‟ include acts, declarations and incidents
which themselves constitute or accompany and explain the facts or transaction issue.
Section of 6 of the Indian Evidence Act deals with the „Doctrine of Res Gestae‟.
According to Section 6, facts though not in issue are so connected with a fact in issue as to
form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at the same time and
place or at different times and places. (Some times fact itself is not a fact in issue, but is
connected with transaction. It may occur at the same time and place or at different times and
places. In simple words, only relevant facts are admissible in evidence. However, there are
14

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

certain circumstances in which certain facts, though not relevant admissible, since they
form part of the same transaction.)
E.g:- A is accused of murdering B by beating. Whatever is said or done by A or B
bystanders at the beating, or shortly or after is (beating) forms part of the same
transaction and is relevant.
In simple words, relevancy of facts, which form part of the same transaction,
denotes „Res Gestae‟. Now the question is, what is transaction?
According to Stephen, “a transaction is a group of facts so connected together as to be
referred to by single legal name such as a crime, a contract wrong or any other subjet of
inquiry, which may be in issue”. This definition was approved in may cases.
In the above example, certain words likes “I will kill you”, “I will not spare you”,
“Oh! Please do not beat he would die”– uttered by A, B or bystanders, are not the facts in
issue. But they form part of the same transaction (beating-crime) and becomes provable
under Section-6 of the Act.
While applying the principle of Res Gestae, the courts are very rigid and cautious,
since it is very difficult to understand what facts do form and what facts do not form part of
the same transaction.
Case Law:R.V. Foster, (1941) SC 363 – The accused in the instant case was charged with
manslaughter for killing person by driving over hi m. A witness saw the vehicle at a high
speed, but did not see the accident. On hearing cries of the victim, he reached the spot. The
victim died after making statement as to cause of accident. The statement was held
admissible.
Conditions:– A statement to be admissible under Section 6, the following conditions are to
be satisfied:
1. The statement must be a statement of fact and not of opinion.
2. The statement must have been made by a participant or witness of the transaction.
3. The statement made by bystander is admissible, if he was present at the scence of the
offence.
4. The statement must explain, elucidate or characterise the incident in the same manner.

3.

MOTIVE, PREPARATION AND PREVIOUS OR SUBSEQUENT CONDUCT
(Section 8)
Section 8 of the Indian Evidence Ac, 1872 lays down the provisions relating to the
relevancy of three principle facts, which are very important in connection with every kind of
civil or criminal cases. The are:
i. Motive
ii. Preparation; and
iii. Conduct.

15

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Section 8 runs as follows:
Any fact is relevant which show or constitutes a motive or preparation for any facts
in issue or relevant fact.
The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in
reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any facts in issue therein or relevant
thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence against whom is the subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any facts in issue or
relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thethereto.
Explanation 1 – The word „conduct‟ in this section does not include statements, unless
those statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this explanation is
not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other section of this Act.
Explanation 2 – When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to him or
his presence and hearing which affects such conduct is relevant.

Illustrations:
(a)
A is tried for the murder of B.
The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had murdered C, and that B had
tried to extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge public, are
relevant.
(b)
A sues b upon a bond for the payment of money. B denies the making of the
bond.
(i) Motive:- The word „motive‟ means “the reason behind the act or conduct or an act to be
achieved in doing an act.” Salmond describes motive as “the ulterior intent”. It may be good
or bad.
Motive is the moving power, which impels one to do an act. In other words, a motive
is that, which moves a man to do a particular act. It is and emotion of state of mind, which
leads a man to do an act. Motive by itself is no cime, however heinous it may by. But once a
crime has been committed, the evidence of motive becomes important. Therefore, evidence
of the existence of a motive for the charged is admissible.
Motive differs from intention. Intention refers to immediate consequences, whereas,
motive refers to ultimate purpose with which an act is done. An may be done with bad
intention but good motive.
Eg.: A thief steals money and helps the poor. To establish liability whether civil or
criminal, motive is generally irrelevant but an enquiry into motive is often of great
importance, particularly in cases of circumstantial evidence. It helps in estimating
probabilities and thus fixing the crime upon the proper person and in some cases, it
is strongly instrumental in determining the degree of offence. It may also be an
important factor in evidencing the state of mind, which is material for establishing a
particular offence.
Proof of Motive:– Motive cannot always be shown directly. It has to be inferred from the
facts and circumstances in evidence.
16

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Eg.: A is tried for murder of B. The fact that B was present at the scene of the
offence, while A was murdering C. B tried to extort money from A, by threatening
him to reveal in the public that A murdered C are relevant.
Similarly, A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money, B denies the execution
of the bond. The fact that, at the time, when the bond is alleged to have been made, b
required money for a particular purpose is relevant to show his motive.
Importance of evidence of Motive:- Motive is a relevant factor in all criminal cases,
whether based on the testimony of eye witnesses or circumstantial evidence. Motive alone is
not sufficient evidence to establish that the crime in question has been committed by a
particular person. Where a crime is to be proved beyond reasonable doubt, it is not
necessary to consider the evidence of motive. Inadequacy of motive does not affect the
cogent evidence but is important, whether evidence is doubtful (Matadin vs. Emperor, AIR
1931 Oudh 199).
Sukh Ram vs. State of M.P. AIR 1992 SC 758:
It was laid down in this case that absence of motive may not be relevant, where there
is overwhelming evidence against the accused but it is a plus point where evidence against
him is only circumstantial. It is therefore, not proper to consider the evidence of motive
before examining the evidence as to commission of the crime.
(ii) Preparation:- Section 8, Para I of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 says “Any fact is
relevant which shows constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant
fact”.
Preparation consists in arranging the means necessary for the commission of a crime.
Every crime is necessarily preceded by preparation.
For the commission of any crime preparation must by there. Illustration (c) to Sec. 8,
says:
“A is tried for the murder of B by poison. The fact that before the death of B, A
procured poison, similar to that which was administered to B is relevant.”
The facts that a day prior to the murder of B, A went to the druggist shop and
obtained a particular poison, is relevant to show that he made necessary preparation for
committing the crime.
There are four stages in commission of a crime/an offence viz. i) Intention; ii)
Preparation; iii) Attempt; and iv) Accomplishment/Completed act. The first (intention) is
not punishable. The second stage in Commission of a Crime is preparation, which is
punishable in creation cases. The third stage „attempt” is exempted from criminal liability in
rare cases in respect of minor offences. Preparation consists in devising or arraging means
necessary for commission of an offence.

17

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Mohan Lal vs. Emperor, AIR 1937 Sind 293;
In this case, the accused was charged with cheating for importing goods without
paying proper customs duty by deceiving customs authorities. The evidence of his previous
visits to the port trying to make certain arrangements whereby he could import goods
without paying duty, was held admissible under this Section.
The preparation on part of the accused may be, to accomplish the crime, to prevent
discovery of crime or it may be to aid the escape of the criminal and avert suspicion.
iii) Conduct:- The second paragraph of Sec. 8 deals with the relevancy of conduct. It says.
“The conduct of any party, or of ay agent of any party to any suit or proceeding, in
reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant
thereto, and the conduct of any person, an offence against whom is subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or
relevant fact and whether it was previous subsequent thereto”.
Conduct is different from the character. Conduct is what a person is in the estimation
of others.
Paragraph 2 to Sec. 8 deals with the relevancy of the conduct of the following
persons:
1.
Parties to the suit and of their agents.
2.
Person, and offence against whom is the subject of proceedings.
Against whom admissible:- The conduct of any person, if relevant under Section 8, is
admissible only against himself and not against any other person. The conduct of an accused
is not, therefore, admissible, against a co-accused.
Conditions of admissibility:- The conduct is admissible only if the following conditions
are satisfied:
i)
ii)

It must be in reference to the suit or proceeding or in reference to any fact in issue
therein or relevant thereto.
It must directly influence or be influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact.
The conduct remains inadmissible if any one of the above two conditions is not
satisfied.

Statement accompanying or explaining conduct:- Evidence can be given of a statement,
which either accompanies some conduct or explains acts other than statements.
Previous Conduct:- The fact that two months before his death the deceased had lodged
complaint with the police expressing apprehension of death or injury would be relevant as
previous conduct of the deceased, such conduct being influenced by his fear of injury.
Habeeb Mohammed vs. State of Hyderabad, Air 1954, S.C. 51:
18

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The allegation against the appellant was that he was acting in pursuance of the policy
of the Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen and that he wanted to exterminate Hindus. It was held by the
Supreme Court that he was entitled to lead evidence to show that his behavior towards the
Hindus throughout his official career has been very good and could possibly think
exterminating them.
Subsequent conduct:- The conduct of an accused soon after and incident plays an
important role in determining the guilt of the accused and in ascertaining his state of mid.
When a person is accused of a crime the fact that after the alleged crime he destroyed or
concealed evidence or prevented the presence or procured the absence of persons who might
have been witnesses or suborned person to give false evidence is relevant. Where murder
and robbery have been shown to be parts of the same transaction, recent and unexplained
possession of stolen property would be a presumptive evidence against a person on the
charge of robbery as well as murder. Disapperance of the accused after occurrence is a
conduct, which in the absence of any plausible explanation might be taken into account
against him.
To be san absconder under Section 8 it is not necessary that the should run away from his
house. It is sufficient even if he hides himself in his own house to evade the process of law.
Balmukund Ram vs. Ghansam Ram, (1895) I.L.R. 22 Cal. 391:
In this case, the landlord of a house was found in the midnight in a room of his
tenant in which the tenant and his wife were sleeping. Upon being detected the accused was
subjected to severe treatment but did not utter a word of protection of innocence nor made
any show of remonstrance. In his trial under Section 45 of I.P.C. it was held that judging
from time, place and conduct of the accused it was impossible to suppose that trespass was
with innocent intention.
IDENTIFICATION PARADE
4.

IDENTIFICATION PARADE (Section 9)
(Facts necessary to explain or introduce relevant facts)
Section 9 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 provides for “Facts necessary to explain
or introduce relevant facts. It runs as follows:
Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish
the identity of anything or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at
which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by
whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that
purpose.
Illustrations:
(a) The questions is, whether a given document is the will of A.
The state of A‟s property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant
facts
19

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirm that the matter alleged
to be libelous is true.
Section 9 provides for the “Identification parade of persons”. The purpose of identification
test is to test the memory and veracity of a witness, who claims to identify an accused
person, who is said to have participated in a crime. Section 7 and 8 of the Evidence Act deal
with facts, which have some causal relation with the facts in issue or relevant facts. Whereas
Section 9 of the Act deals with the facts, which are not so connected but are necessary to
introduce or explain the facts in issue or relevant facts.
Identification is as important process in the administration of justice. Where the
Court has to know the identity of any thing or any person, any fact, which establishes such
identity is relevant. The identity of a person can be established by the evidence of person,
who know him. Identification parades are held for the purpose of identifying the properties,
which are subject matter on an offence or persons concerned in an offence. During the
course of investigation test identification parades are arranged by the police either in jail or
at some other place. Certain persons are brought to such a place and the accused person is
mixed with them. In case of property, the property recovered is mixed with some other
articles/properties, of similar description. Then the Magistrate or the Panch witnesses will
ask the witness to identify the accused person or the property in questions. The evidence
given by such witness is relevant under Section 9.
CONSPIRACY
5.

CONSPIRACY (Section–10)
(Things said or done by Conspirator in reference to common design)
Section 10 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 says that “things said or done by
conspirator in reference to common design” It runs as follows
Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have conspired
together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or written by
anyone of such person in reference to their common intention, after the time when such
intention was first entertained by anyone of them is a relevant facts as against each of the
persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the
conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.
Illustration:
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage
against the Government of India.
The fact that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C
collected money in Bombay, E published writings advocating the object in view at Agra,
and F transmitted from Delhi to G at Kabul the money which C had collected at Calcutta,
and the contents of a letter written by H giving and account of the conspiracy, and to prove
A‟s complicity in it, although he may have been ignorant of all of them, and although the
persons by whom they ignorant of all of strangers to him, and although they may have taken
place before he joined the conspiracy or after he left it.

20

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Conspiracy– Meaning & Definition:– Etymologically, the word „Conspiracy‟ means
“breathing together”. When two or more persons agree to commit a crime, they are said to
have conspired to do an illegal act or a legal act by an illegal means. Such persons are said
to be conspirators. Section 120.A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 defines „Criminal
Conspiracy‟ and Section 120.B prescribes punishment for the same.

1.
2.

Section 120.A defines criminal conspiracy as follows:
“When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done;
an illegal act, or
an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such and agreement is designated as
criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount
to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or
more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof.
Explanation:– It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such
agreement or is merely incidental to that object.

1.
2.

Ingredients or Essentials of Conspiracy:– To constitute criminal conspiracy, the
following ingredients are to be satisfied.
There must be an agreement between the persons, who are alleged to conspire;
and
The agreement should be:
(i) for doing of an illegal act; or
(ii) for doing by an illegal means an act, which may not itself be illegal.

In simple words, to constitute criminal conspiracy:
1.
There must be an agreement between two or more persons.
2.
The agreement must be for:
(i) doing an illegal act; or
(ii) doing a lawful act by illegal means; and
3.
There must exist overt act.
Conditions for application of Section 10:– For the purpose of Section 10 of the Evidence
Act, the following conditions are to be satisfied:
1.
Reasonable grounds to believe the existence of Conspiracy.
2.
Act or Statement of the Conspirator.
3.
Common Intention; and
4.
The act or statement must be in reference to common intention.
1.

2.

Reasonable ground to believe the existence of Conspiracy:– Before the
application of Section 10, it must be established by independent evidence that, there
is a reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons conspired to commit an
offence or an actionable wrong. In other words, there must be a prima facie evidence
in support of the existence of conspiracy between two or more persons.
Act or statement of the Conspirator:- Section allows evidence to be given of
anything said, done or written by any one of the conspirators.
21

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

3.

4.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Common Intentions:– „Intention‟ means “the desire of doing an act”. If two or
more persons desirous of doing an act by prior meeting or pre-arranged plan, it is
called „Common Intention‟. For application of Section 10, there must exist common
intention before the act or statement by the conspirator.
Act or Statement must be in reference to common intention:– The expression “in
reference to common intentions or in furtherance of common intention” means
“action of helping forward.” The offence is committed in accordance with the
common intention. In other words, putting the common intentions in operation.
However, the expression “in reference to their common intentions used in Section 10
of the Evidence Act is very comprehensive.
Bhagwan Swaroop vs. State of Maharashta, AIR 1965 SC 682:
In this case, the Supreme Court pointed out that the expression “in reference to
common intention” has a wider scope than the expression “in furtherance of
common intention” used under English Law.

1.

2.
3.

4.

Restrictions as to use of Evidence:– The evidence of anything said, done or written
by one conspirator against the other conspirator may be used subject to the following
restrictions:
The evidence is capable of being used only for two purposes, namely:
(a) to prove the existence of conspiracy, and
(b) to prove that a particular person was a party to the conspiracy.
The death of the conspirator does affect the act or statement.
The evidence of anything said, done or written by one conspirator cannot be
rendered inadmissible merely because of the fact that the person who made the
statement or had done the act is dead.
Acts and statements of one conspirator cannot be utilized in favour of another
Conspirator.

ALIBI
6.

ALIBI
(facts not otherwise relevant become relevant: Section 11)
Section 11 of the Indian Evidence Act that, „when facts not otherwise relevant become
relevant. It reads as follows
Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant–
1.
If they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
2.
If by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or
non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable
relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations:
(a) The question is whether A committed a crime at Calcutta on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Lahore is relevant.
22

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The fact that, near the time when crime was committed, A was at a distance from the
place where it was committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not
impossible, that he committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is whether A committed a crime.
The circumstances are such that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C
or D. Every fact, which shows that no one else could have committed the crime, and that
it was not committed by B, C or D, is relevant.
As stated above, Section 11 comprises of two clauses. First clause provides that the facts,
which are inconsistent with the facts in issue or relevant facts, are relevant. The second
clause provides that the facts, which by themselves or I connection with other facts make the
existence or non-existence of any facts in issue or relevant fact higly probable or
improbable, are relevant.
Clause 1 of Section 11 contains five common instances/cases of inconsistent facts as stated
below:
(i) Alibi.
(ii) Absence or non-access of husband
(iii) Survival of the alleged deceased.
(iv) Commission of an offence by a third person; and
(v) Self-infliction of harm alleged.
Among the above, alibi is of great importance.
(i)
Alibi
„Alibi‟ comes under the head „Facts otherwise relevant becomes relevant‟ as
explained Section 11 of the Evidence Act.
Meaning
„Alibi‟ is a Latin term] which means “elsewhere”. The accused very often takes the
plea that he was not present at the place, where the offence was committed. In otherwords,
alibi is a defence under which a person accused of an offence alleges that he was so far
away from the place of the commission of that he was so far away from the place of the
commission of the offence, that he could not be guilty.
Eg.: A is accused of B‟s murder on a particular day at Bombay. On that day A was
Delhi, is relevant to prove alibi. He (A) has to prove that it would be impossible for him to
commit murder at Bombay as he was in Delhi on the occurrence of the offence.
The plea of alibi ------ be proved with absolute certainty, offence.
In Bhuboni Sahu v. The king, AIR 1949 PC 257:
The privy Council held that „Alibi evidence through disinterested and impartial
witness has a greater evidentiary value. But, in certain cases, the accused may not be able to
produce such evidence. For instance, if he can produce alibi evidence at home at the time of
crime. In Such cases, it is not possible through his family members. In such cases, it is not
possible for him to prove the alibi through disinterested and impartial witness.

23

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

(ii) Absence or non-access of husband
Where legitimacy of a child is in question the absence or non-access of husband is a
relevant fact because legitimacy of the offspring implies a begetting by the husband. (See
for details Sec. 112, Evidence Act).
(iii) Survival of the alleged deceased
Where A is alleged to have killed B on a particular date the fact that after that date B
was seen alive is a relevant fact as being inconsistent with this being killed on that date. (See
for details Section 107 and 108 of the Evidence Act).
(iv) Commission of an offence by a third person
Where A is charged with a crime committed by himself alone, any evidence which
includes that B might have committed the crime may be received. Threats by a third person
or motive of such third person are generally offered to prove that he and not the accused
have committed the alleged crime.
(v) Self-infliction of harm alleged
Where A is charged with murder of B, if it is proved that B has committed suicide A
cannot be convicted for murder of B. Where a lover was charged with murder of a woman,
whose body was found in a river the fact that during the week before her death she had
actually attempted to down herself and had been prevented from doing so was held to be
relevant to show that she might have made a second attempt.

Right or Custom
7.

RIGHT OR CUSTOM (Section–13)
(Facts relevant when right or custom is in questions)
Section 13 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 speaks about, “Facts relevant, when
right or custom is in question”. It runs as follows:
Where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following facts
are relevant(a) Any transaction by which the right or custom in questions was created, claimed,
modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence;
(b) Particular instances, in which the right or custom was claimed, recognized or exercised,
or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustration
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on
A‟s ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A‟s father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by
A‟s father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which A‟s father
exercised the right, or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A‟s neighbours, are
relevant facts.
Right:- The word „right‟ literally means “an interest recognised and protected”. If it is
protected by the administration of justice, it is called “legal right”. Sec. 13 is concerned with
legal rights only.
24

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The word „right‟ as used under Section 13 of the Evidence Act means, “only public
and incorporeal rights such as right to ferries, right to roads, right to fisheries etc. The right
of private ownership of a house or chattel is not covered by Sec. 13. However, the High
Courts of Bombay, Madras and Allahabad took a different view on this point.
Custom: - Meaning & Definition: The term „Custom‟ Means „Achara of usage or
traditionally followed long practice by the members of a society. Manu recognized custom
to be transcendent law. Custom is a good source to interpret law in the administration of
justice.
A custom is a particular rule, which has existed from time immemorial and has
obtained the force of law, in a particular locality. A custom is nothing but a long-standing
usage.
Sec. 3, Clause (d) of the Hindu Succession Act 1956 defines a custom as follows:
The expressions „custom and usage‟ signify Act 1956 defines a custom as follows:
The expressions „custom and usage‟ signify any rule which having been
continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, have obtained the force of law, among
Hindus in any local area, tribe community, group or family:
Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable and opposed to Public Policy,
and provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not been
discontinued by the family.
Requisites or Essentials of a valid custom
1. Custom must be ancient (antiquity)
2. It must be continuous.
3. It must be reasonable.
4. It must be moral, equitable and in accordance with the public policy.
5. It must not be contrary to justice, equity & public policy.
6. It must not be contrary to statutory law.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Custom must be ancient
It is necessary that it should be ancient. It must be from time immemorial.
Custom must be continuous
A custom to be valid, must be continuous without any break or interruption for a long time
Custom must be reasonable
A custom must be good and reasonable. Unreasonable customs are void.
Custom must not be immoral
Custom be moral. If it is immoral, it is not treated as a law.
If must not be contrary to justice, equity & public policy
A custom to be valid, must not be contrary to justice equity and public policy.
Custom must not be contrary to Statutory Law
The last ingredient of a custom is that, it should not be contrary to justice, equity and public
policy.
25

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Proof of Custom: Section 13 makes the instances and transactions relevant to prove or
disprove a custom: it has nothing to do with the mode of proof.
A custom is a mixed question of law and fact. First certain facts are to be proved and
from those facts an inference of the existence of a valid custom is drawn. Where a custom is
pleaded by one party and denied by the other, the onus is on the party pleading it to show its
existence.
A custom may be proved or disproved in any of the following ways:
1.
2.

By opinion likely to know of its existence of having special means of knowledge
thereof.
By statement of persons who are dead or whose attendance cannot be procured
without unreasonable delay or expenses] provided they were made before any
controversy as to such custom arose and were made by persons who would have
been or likely to have been aware of the existence of such custom if it existed

3.

By any transaction by which the custom in question was claimed, modified
recognized, asserted or denied or which was inconsistent with its existence.

4.

By particular instances by which the custom was claimed] recognized or exercised or
knowledge of its existence was disputed, asserted or departed from.

Judgments, orders or decrees are relevant to prove a custom but they are not conclusive
proof thereof. But, when a custom has been repeatedly brought to the notice of the court and
judicially recognized, it becomes a part of the law of the locality where it prevails and it is
not necessary to prove its attributes in each individual case.
STATE OF MIND
8.

STATE OF MIND OR BODY OR BODILY FEELING (Section–14)
(Facts showing existence of state of Mind or of Body or Bodily Feeling)
Section 14 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 deals with the proof of “Facts showing
the existence of any state of mind or of body or bodily felling”. It runs as follows:
Facts showing the existence of any state of mind, such as intention, knowledge, good
faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or goodwill towards any particular person, or showing
the existence of any state of mind or body or bodily felling, is in issue or relevant.
Explanation–1: A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind must
that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular matter in
questions.
Explanation–2: But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the previous
commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this section, the
previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.
26

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Illustrations:
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that he
was in possession of a particular stolen article.
The fact that, at the same time, he was in possession of many other stolen articles is
relevant, as tending to show that he knew each and all of the articles of which
1. State of mind; and
2. State of Body or Bodily Feeling.
1. State of Mind
Facts showing the state of mind constitute Intention, Knowledge, Good Faith,
Negligence, Rashness, ill will or Good will. For the purpose of showing the existence of
state of mind, it is not possible to provide direct evidence.
Brain, C.J. observed, “It is common knowledge that thought of a man cannot be tried
for devil knoweth not what passes in one‟s mind.” But it is now well established that the
state of one‟s mind is as much a fact as the state of his digestion. If need not be directly
proved by confession by the accused or by the evidence of a person who had an admission
from the accused about his intention.
2. State of Body or Bodily Feeling
The condition of one‟s body or his bodily felling may help a lot in finding the truth.
Thus, where it is alleged that A was murdered by administering poison to him his statements
regarding his condition and bodily felling may help in finding whether poison was given to
him and which type of poison was administered.
9.

FACTS BEARING ON QUESTION WHETHER ACT WAS. ACCIDENTAL OR
INTENTIONAL (Section–15)
Section 14 and 15 of the Evidence Act are overlapping. Section 15 is an application
of the general rule laid down in Section 14.
Section 15 of the Evidence Act deals with “Facts bearing on question whether act
was accidental or incidental”. It reads as follows:
When there an act was accidental or intentional or done with a particular knowledge
or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of similar occurrences, in each of
which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations:
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order obtain money for which it is insured.
The fact that A lived in several houses successively, each of which he insured, in each of
which a fire occurred, and after each of which fire A received payment from a different
insurance office, are relevant, as tending to show that the fires were not accidental.

27

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Confession
CONFESSIONS (Section 24-30)
Meaning & Definition
The expression „Confession‟ means “a statement made by an accused admitting his
guilt: It is and admission or acknowledgement as to commission of an offerice. If a person
accused of an offence (accused) makes a statement against himself] it is called confession or
confessional statement.
Eg: A is charged with the murder of B. If A said that he had killed B, it is a
confession or confessional statement by A. Confessions are special form of
admissions. Thus] it is popularly said that “All Confessions are Admissions; but all
admissions are not Confessions.”
The term „Confession‟ has not been defined anywhere. It appears for the first time
in Section 24 of the Evidence Act. According to Sir James Stephen „a confession made at
any time by a person charged with a crime stating or suggesting the inference that he
committed the crime.‟
Sections 24 to 30 deal with confessions. Confessions should be voluntary. Section 24
says that confessional statement made and inadmissible. Similarly, Section 24 and 26
exclude evidence of confessional statements to police officer. Section 27 deals with how
much of information received from accused may be proved. Section 28 and 29 are in the
nature of exception to Section 24. Section 30 deals with the admissibility of confession of a
co-accused jointly tried with the accused.
It is a rule of universal law that „a person may be convicted on the basis of his
confession made in a judicial proceeding. The underlying principle is enshrined in two Latin
maxims as stated below;
1.
Confession in Judicio Omini Probatione Major Est: It means confession in
judicial proceedings is greater than any other proof‟.
2.
Confession Facta in Judicio Est Plena Probatio: It means „confession is the
absolute proof.‟
Judicial and Extra-judicial Confessions
Confessions are of two kinds namely–Judicial and Extra-judicial. Confessions
made during the course judicial proceedings are called „Judicial Confessions‟.
Confessions made outside the course of judicial proceedings are called „Exyra-judicial
confessions‟.
Evidentiary Value of Confession
Confession, whether it is judicial or extra-judicial, must be clear and unequivocal.
No reliance can be placed on confessions, which are in general or vague terms. The
judicial confessions of an accused is good evidence and he can be convicted on the
strength of it. Law does not require that a confession must be corroborated before it can
28

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

be acted upon. It is the duty of the court to decide whether it believes a confession or not.
Thus, the court must apply double test:
1. Whether the confession was perfectly voluntary?
2. If so, whether it is true and trust-worthy.
Satisfaction of the first test is a sine qua non for its admissibility in evidence. If
the first test is satisfied, the Court should carefully examine the confession and compare
it with the rest of the evidence, in the light of the surrounding circumstances and
probabilities of the case. If, on such examination and comparison the confession appears to
be a probable catalogue of events and naturally fits in with the rest of the evidence and the
surrounding circumstances, it may be taken to have satisfied the second test.
Section 24 to 30 of the Evidence Act, lay down the provisions relating to
Confessions as follows:
Confessions caused by Inducement, threat or promise (Section 24)
A Confession to be admissible in evidence, it must be free and voluntary. If it
proceeds from remorse and a desire to make reparation for the crime, it is admissible. A
Confession made by an accused in a criminal proceeding is irrelevant, if it is caused by any
inducement, threat or promise.
Eg.: If the Magistrate says the accused, „explain, how you committed the offence, so
that I will help you‟. It is inadmissible.
Ingredients: To attract the prohibition enacted in Section 24 the following facts must be
established:
1. that the statement in question is a confession,
2. that such confession has been made by the accused,
3. that it has been made to a person in authority,
4. that the confession has been obtained by reason of any inducement, threat or
promise, proceeding from a person in authority,
5. such inducement threat or promise must have reference to the charge against the
accused; and
6. the inducement, threat or promise must in the opinion of the court be sufficient to
give the accused ground, which would appear to him reasonable, for supporting
that by making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of temporal
nature in reference to the proceedings against him.
It is very difficult, to lay down any hard and fast rule as to what constitutes
inducement. It is for the Judge to decide in every case. An inducement may be express or
implied; it need not be made to the accused directly from the person in authority.
Pyarelal Bhorgava vs. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1963 SC 1094:
The accused in the instant case was charged and tried for theft of certain official
files. He was taken to the Chief Secretary, where he made confession. Later, he retracted the
confession, on the ground that he was threatened with dismissal. The Supreme Court held
that, the threat by the Chief Secretary was not sufficient, to cause reasonable belief in the
mind of the accused and the confession was held to be admissible.
29

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Confessions to Police Officer (Section 25)
According to Section 25, Confession made to Police Officer is inadmissible.
Confession under Section 25 may be a statement directly made to a Police Officer orally or
in writing or indirectly made to such Police Officer. The reason is the Police Officers in
India resort to third rate methods to extort Confession. Confessions to Police Officer are
excluded even if arrest and custody are illegal 9Emperor vs. Mst.Jagia, AIR 1938 Pat. 308).
Sitaram vs. State (1996) Supp. S.C.R. 265:
The accused after committing murder left a confessional letter on the dead body. The
letter was addressed to Police Officer. The court treated the letter, not addressed to Police,
since Police Officer was not nearby. The confession was admitted and the accused was
convicted.
Confession by accused while in custody of the Police not be proved against him
9Sec. 26): No confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a Police Officer,
unless it be made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such
person.
Explanation: In this section, „Magistrate‟ does not include the head of a village discharging
magisterial, functions in the presidency of Fort St. George, or elsewhere, unless such
headman is a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Coder of Criminal
Procedure, 1882.
According to Section 26, confessions made by an accused in police custody shall not
be proved against him.
Confessions caused by inducement, threat or promise have been made inadmissible
by Sections 24. Confessions made to a police have been declared irrelevant by Section 25
without proof of inducement, threat or promise.
How much of information received from accused
in police custody may be prove (Sec.27)
Section 27 is an exemption to the preceding three Sections 24, 25 and 26. According
to Section 27, when an information, given by the accused in police custody leads to the
discovery of an incriminating material object, like jewellery, weapons etc. the portion of the
information can be proved. The reason is such discovery guarantees truth of the information.
Eg.: A is tried for murder of B. If A, in police custody says „I have killed B and
buried the dead body in my garden‟. Accordingly, if the body is found, A‟s statement
(confession) becomes provable under Sec.27.
Section 27 runs as follows:
30

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

How much of information received from accused may be proved:
Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police
officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates
distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.
Conditions:– For application of Section 27, the following conditions are to be satisfied.
1. The accused in police custody has given some information in his confessional
statement.
2. Such information must relate to the discovery of certain fact relating to the
commission of some offence.
3. In pursuance of such information, the police discovered certain facts.
4. The facts discovered must be connected with (or relevant to) the offence.
When the above conditions are satisfied, only that portion of the information
which directly relates to the fact discovered, shall be relevant.

Thimma vs. State of Mysore, AIR 1971 SC 1871, 1971 Cr.LJ 1314 (SC):
In this case, the accused was charged with the muder of his mistress and the dead
body of the lady was found in a gunny bag left in a railway compartment. The accused was
arrested. He pointed out the shop where he had purchased the gunny bag and he also pointed
out the cooley whom he had to be inadmissible because it leads only to the discovery of a
psychological fact, ad not, to the discovery of some physical fact. The word „discovery‟ in
Section 27 has been used in the sense of discovery of some material object.
As held by the Privy Council in Pulukuri Kotayya‟s case, the Superme Cout in
Udaibhan vs. State of U.P. AIR 1962 SC 1116 laid down that – a discovery of fact includes
(i) the object found;
(ii) place from which it is produced; and
(iii) the knowledge of the accused as to its existence.
Constitutional validity of Section 27
The validity of Section 27, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 was challenged on the ground
that, it violates Article 20(3) of the Indian Constitution.
According to Article 20(3) of the Indian Constitution, „No person accused of an
offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself‟. It is the responsibility of the
prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused. The constitutional validity of Section 27,
Indian Evidence Act was challenged on the ground that, using information given by the
accused for discovery of a fact against him, makes the accused, a witness against himself.
Before the constitution came into force, the information leading to discovery was
provable and admissible, whether it was given by the accused voluntarily or against
31

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

compulsion. After the constitution came in to force, such information obtained by
compulsion is not admissible on the ground that, it violates Article 20(3) of the constitution.
This view was followed by A.P. High Court in Re madugula Jermaiah (AIR 1957, AP 611)
Allahabad High Court in Amin vs. State (AIR 1958 All 293) and Bombay High Court in
Amrut vs. State (AIR 1960 Bom, 488). But the Mysore High Court in Re Govinda Reddy
(AIR 1958 Mys. 150) was of the view that Section 27 of the Evidence Act, is not controlled
by Article 20(3) of the Constitution.
The above conflict was resolved by the Supreme Court in State of Bombay vs. Kati
kallu Oghad (AIR 1961 SC 1808 : 1961 (2) Cr. LJ 856 (SC) that, such information obtained
does not give rise to a presumption that the information was given under compulsion. It is
the prosecution to find out whether the accused gave the information voluntarily or by
compulsion.
Sections 28 and 29 provide for exceptions to Section 24. That is to say that
confessions made after removal of impression caused by inducement, threat or promise are
relevant (Section 28), and confession under the promise of secrecy (Section 29).
Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly under
trial for same offence (Section 30)
When more person than one are being jointly for the same offence, and a confession
made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such person is proved, the
Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other person as well as
against the person who makes such confession.
Explanation: „Offence‟ as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or attempt to
commit the offence.
Illustrations;
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said, „B and I murdered
C‟. The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
Admissions not conclusive proof, but may stop (Section 31)
Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted but they may operate as
estoppels under the provision hereinafter contained.

32

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Distinction between Admission and Confession
S.No.

Admission

Confession

It means voluntary acknoweldgement

It means a statement made by an
accused admitting his guilt.

1.
as to the truth of a fact.
2.

It is defined Under Sec. 17 of the It is not defined in the Act.
Evidence Act, 1872.

3.

It is not a conclusive proof.

Judicial confession is conclusive proof.

4.

All admissions are not confessions.

All confessions are admissions.

5.

It is made in civil cases.

It is made in criminal cases.

6.

Admissions can be made on behalf of Confession must be made by the
another/or by a stranger.
accused himself.

DYING DECLARATION
DYING DECLARATION
(STATEMENTS OF PERSONS WHO CANNOT BE CALLED AS WITNESSES)
Of relevancy of facts provided for under Sections 5-55 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, Section 32 and 33 of the Act lay down the provision relating to “Statements by
person, who cannot be called as witnesses”. Section 32 says that “Cases in which statement
of relevant fact by person, who is dead or cannot be found etc. is relevant (Dying
declaration). Section 33 deals with “Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in
subsequent proceeding, the truth of certain facts therein stated”.
Section 32 makes relevant statement made by a person.
(i) Who is dead;
(ii) Who cannot be found;
(iii) Who has become incapable of giving evidence; or
(iv) Whose attendance cannot be procured without unreasonable delay or
expenses.
Dying Declaration: Clause (1) Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lays down
the provision relating to „Dying Declaration‟. It is provable in Evidence.
Meaning and Definition: “A dying declaration is a declaration written or verbal made by a
person, as to the cause of his death or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction,
which resulted in his death.”
33

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Eg.: A has been attacked by B. If A, shortly before death, makes a declaration
holding B, responsible for his injuries, it is called „dying declaration‟.
Section 32(1) of the Act defines „dying declaration‟ as „statements written or verbal,
of relevant facts made by a person, who is dead or who cannot be found, or who has become
incapable of giving evidence or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of
delay or expenses, which under the circumstance of the case, appears to the court
unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases.
1. When it relates to cause of death; or
2. When it is made in course of business; or
3. Against the interest of the maker; or
4. Gives opinion as to public right or custom or matters of general interest; or
5. Relates to existence of relationship; or
6. When it is made in will or deed relating to the family affairs; or
7. In document relating to transaction mentioned in Section 13(a); or
8. When it is made by several person and expresses felling relevant to matter in
question.
In fine, according to Section 32(1), “dying declaration is a statement oral/verbal or
written made by a person who is dead or cannot be fount or written made by a person who is
dead or cannot be found or incapable of giving evidence or whose attendance involves delay
or expensive under the circumstances stated above, which the court considers reasonable.”
Dying declaration is of the utmost importance and the evidence as to it should be as
exact and full as possible. The general rule is, „hearsay evidence is no evidence and is not
admissible in evidence‟. Sections 32 and 33 of the Evidence Acr are among the exceptions,
as such dying declaration is an exception to this general rule.
Reasons for admissibility of dying declaration:– Dying declaration is admissible for the
following two reasons.
1. As the victim is sole eye witness, exclusion of his evidence defeats the ends of
justice.
2. Declarations made by a person under expectation of death are presumed to be
true.
Underlying principle/maxim:– The admissibility of dying declaration is based on the
maxim „Nemo Moritur Prasumntur Mentiri’. It means that a mean that a man will not
meet his maker with a lie in his mouth. In other words, a person who is about to die would
not lie. Truth sits on the lips of a person who is about to die. Such person would not lie,
because he has to face his Maker, the Almighty, in the other world. This is the reason, why
dying declaration is made admissible under Section 32(1).
Though dying declarations are not statements made on oath and no crossexamination is possible, yet because of the solemnity of the occasion, which ensures truth
more than a positive oath they are received in evidence. Absolute guarantee of truth cannot
be expected even in case of statements made on oath in a Court.

34

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The second reason for admissibility of dying declarations is necessity. Where is the
only evidence available under the circumstances, rejection of it may result in injustice. The
person, being no more in the world cannot be called in the Court to testify and other
evidence is not available to help in determining the truth.
Conditions:– For admissibility of dying declaration, the following conditions are to be
satisfied.
1. The person making statement must have died.
2. Injuries must have caused the death.
3. Statement must have been made as to cause of his death or as to circumstances of
the transaction resulting in his death.
4. The cause of his death must be in question.
5. The person making statement must be in a fit condition to make the statement.
6. The statement must be complete.
7. Declaration must be competent.
1.

The declarant must have died
Dying declaration to be admissible, the declarant must be dead. If the declarant
survives, it is not admissible under Sec.32(1) although it is admissible under Sec. 157
(Corroborative evidence).
Maqsoodan vs. State of U.P, AIR 1983 SC 126:
In this case, survival of the declarant was held to be admissible under Section 157
for corroborating his testimony in the court.
Ram Prasad vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1999 SC 1969:
In this case, dying declaration was recorded by the Judicial Magistrate. But, the
declarant survived. It was held that the statement/declaration could not be used under
Section 32, but it could be used to corroborate his evidence under Section 157 of the
Evidence Act.
The term „death‟ under Section 32 includes both suicidal and homicidal deaths (Kans
Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 2000 SC 2324, Sudhakar vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2000
SC 2602).
2.

Injuries must have caused the death
The person (declarant) must have been dead as a consequence of the injuries
inflicted, but not as a consequence of some other reason or ailment.
Moti Singh vs. State of U.P, AIR 1964 SC 900:
It was held in this case that, if the person survives, his statement cannot be said to be
the statement as to cause of his death.
35

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

3.

Statement as to cause of death or circumstances leading to death
The statement must relate to the cause of his death or circumstances of the case
resulting in his death. Statements which relate to cause or circumstances not responsible for
his death are not admissible as dying declaration under the Clause (1) of Section 32.
4.

Cause of death must be in question
The statement as to cause of the death of the deceased person will be relevant only if
the cause of his death is in question.
5.

The declarant must be in fit condition to make the declaration

Dying declaration to be admissible under Section 32(1), the person making the
statement must be in a fit condition to make the statement.
6.

The statement must be complete
To be admissible in evidence, dying declaration must be complete. This is a matter
of common sense because the deceased might have added something in contradiction to
things already stated. It is, therefore, necessary that incomplete declaration should not be
received in evidence.
7.

Competence of declarant
The admissibility of statement under Section 2 is based on the assumption that the
maker of the statement was competent to take oath as a witness.
Evidentiary Value of Dying Declaration:– The evidentiary value of the dying declaration
will vary according to the circumstances of a particular case in which it is made. While
considering the value of dying declaration, the courts take into account the whole, but not a
part of it. It cannot be allowed as sole basis for conviction for the following reasons.
1. The declarant is not subject to cross-examination.
2. The declarant may be in a state of confusion.
3. The declarant may take last opportunity to take revenge against his enemies.
The declaration must be as to the cause of death or as to any of the circumstances
that resulted in death.
Distinction between English Law and Indian Law
1.
In English Law, a dying declaration is provable only in criminal cases (homicide
cases). While in Indian Law, it is provable both in civil and criminal cases.
2.
Under English Law, the declarant must die without a ray of hope of survival. But
according to para 2 of Section 32(1) statements made not under expectation of death
are relevant and admissible.
3.
According to English Law, the declarant must be competent. A statement/declaration
by an infant/child is not admissible. But in Indian Law, every person whether major
or not is competent to make a declaration.
Section 33
Section 33 of the Evidence Act deals with „relevancy of certain evidence for
36

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

proving, in subsequent proceedings, the truth of certain facts therein stated‟. It runs as
follows:
Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person
authorized by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent
judicial proceeding, or in a later state of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the
facts which it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of
giving evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot
be obtained without „an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of
the case, the Court considers unreasonable:
Provided––
That the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in
interest.
That the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to
cross-examine.
That the questions‟ in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the
second proceedings.
Explanation:- A criminal trial inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding
between the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.
Section 33 recognises the relevancy of evidence given by a witness in a judicial
proceeding to prove a particular fact when such witness is dead or cannot be found or is
incapable of giving evidence or is kept out of the way by the adverse party or whose
presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense. It provides that t
he truthness of a fact can be proved by using the evidence given by a witness relating to
that fact. However such evidence can be used to prove the said fact either in the same
case or in another case, on the circumstances laid down by the said section.
Conditions:- For application of Section 33, the following conditions (as
applicable to Section 32) are to be satisfied.
(i)
the maker of the statement is dead; or
(ii)
cannot be found; or
(iii) has become incapable of giving evidence; or
(iv)
his evidence cannot be procured without unreasonable delary or expense; or
(v)
is kept out of the „way of the adverse party.
The first 4 conditions are common to Section 32 and 33. But the 5th condition is
peculiar to Section 33.

37

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Judgments
JUDGMENTS
(JUDGMENTS OF COURTS OF JUSTICE, WHEN RELEVANT)
Section 40 to 44 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 lay down the provisions relating
to Judgment of Court of Justice, when relevant. Section 40 deals with pervious judgments
relevant to bar a suit or trial. Section 41 deals with the relevancy of certain judgments in
probate etc. jurisdiction. Section 42 deals with relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or
decrees other than those mentioned in Section 41. Section 43 relates to judgments etc. other
than those mentioned in Section 40 to 42, when relevant. Section 44 speaks about fraud or
collusion in obtaining judgment or incompetence of court, may be proved.
Kind of Judgments: Judgments are categorized/classified in to two kinds, namely–
1. Judgments in rem; and
2. Judgments in personam
1. Judgments in rem
Judgments affecting the legal status of some subject matters, persons or things are
called „Judgments in rem‟. E.g. Divorce Court Judgment, grant of probate or administration
etc. Such judgments are conclusive evidence against all the persons, whether parties to it or
not.
2. Judgments in personam
Judgments in personam are all the ordinary judgments not affecting the status of
any subject matter, any person or any thing. In such judgments, the rights of the parties to
the suit or proceedings are determined.
Under Sections 40 to 44, a judgment is not relevant to prove that the plaintiff has filed a
false case 9Hassan Abdullah vs. State of Gujarat, AIR 1962 Guj. 214 : 1962 (2) Cr.LJ 55).
Judgments
Distinction between
Distinction between ‘Judgment in rem’ and ‘Judgment in personam:
Judgments in Rem

Judgments in Personam

1. Judgments in rem is adjudication

1. Judgment in personam are all the

probnounced upon the status of a person or

ordinary judgments not affecting the

a thing by a competent or a thing by a

status of any subject matter, any person

competent court to the world generally.

or anything.

2. Judgment of a court in exercise of probate,

2. The judgments of the civil court are the

38

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.
matrimonial or insolvency jurisdiction

Subject – Indian Evidence Act
judgments in personam.

confirming or taking away any legal
character are judgments in rem.
3. It is binding on all persons, whether they
are parties to those proceedings or not.

3. It is binding on the parties to the suit
only.

Section 40 provides for „pervious judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.‟ It
runs as follows:
The existence of any judgments, order or decree which by law prevents any Court
from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is
whether such court ought to take cognizance of such suit, or to hold such trial.
Section 40 permits evidence of the previous judgment, order or decree, which by law
prevents any court from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, when the question
arises whether such court ought to take cognizance of such suit or hold such trial. The object
of Section 40 is to avoid multiplicity of suits and to save the precious time of the court. This
provision is incorporated under Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which
deals with the doctrine of Res judicata.
Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, ect., jurisdiction (Section 41):
Section 41 deals with judgments in rem, which bind not only the parties and their
representatives but the whole world. A judgment in rem under Sec. 41 shall be conclusive in
civil as well as criminal proceedings. Section 41 runs as follows:
A final judgment, order decree of a competent Court, in the exercise of probate,
matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon or takes away from
any person to any legal character, or which declares any person to be entitled to any such
character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any specified person but
absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character, or the title of any such
person to any such thing is relevant.
Such judgment, order decree is conclusive proof
that any legal character which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
that any legal character, to which it declares any such person to be entitled, accrued
to that person at the time when such judgment, order or decree declares it to have accrued to
that person;
that any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the time
from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it had ceased or should cease;
39

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

and that anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property
of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or decree delares that it has been
or should be his property.
Section 41 deals with what is known as judgments in re. Under this section a final
judgment, order or decree of a competent court in the exercise of probate, matrimonial,
admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction which confers upon or takes away from any person any
legal character or which declares any person to be entitled to any such character or to be
entitled to any specific thing absolutely (not as against some specific person) is relevant
when existence of any such legal character or title to any such things is relevant.
A judgment in rem under this section shall be conclusive in civil as well as criminal
proceedings.
Conditions:– For application of Section 41, the following conditions are to be satisfied:
(i)
The judgment should be final judgment, not an ********** one;
(ii)
The court must be competent;
(iii) The judgment must be in exercise of any of the following four types of
jurisdictions mentioned in the Section viz. probate, admiralty, matrimonial
and insolvency;
(iv)
Such judgment must confer upon or take away from any person any legal
character or declare that any person is entitled to such character, or declare
that any person is entitled to any specific thing absolutely.
Relevancy and effect of judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in
Section 41 9Section 42):
According to Section 42, Judgments, Orders or Decrees other than those mentioned
in Section 41, are relevant if they relate to matters of public nature relevant to the enquiry;
but such judgments, orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state
Illustration:
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way
over the land, which A denies.
The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by A against C for a
trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same right of way, is
relevant; but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
Judgments etc. other than those mentioned in Sections 40 to 42, when relevant (Section
43)
Section 43 provides that judgments, orders or decrees, which are not mentioned in
Section 40, 41 are not relevant unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree is a
fact in issue or a relevant fact under some other section of the Evidence Act. It runs as
follows:
40

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in Section 40, 41 and 42
are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment, order or decree, is a fact in issue, or is
relevant under some other provision of this Act.
Illustrations:
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them. C in each case
says, that matter alleged to be libelous is true, and the circumstances are such that it is
probably true in each case, or in neither.
A obtains a decree against C for damages on the ground that C failed to make out his
justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A‟s wife.
B denies that C is A‟s wife, but the Court convicts B of adultery.
Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during A‟s lifetime. C says that
she never was A‟s wife.
The judgment against B is irrelevant as against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted.
A afterwards, sues C for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction. As
between A and C, the judgment against B is irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B‟s son, murders A in
consequence.
The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(e) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The previous
conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The facts that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was
convicted and sentenced is relevant under Section 8 as showing the motive for the facts
in issue.
Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetence of Court, may be proved
(Section 44)
The general rule is, a judgment of a competent court shall be binding on the parties
operating as res judicata in subsequent proceedings between the same parties. Section 44
contains exceptions to this general rule. According to Section 44, a judgment is liable to be
annulled /impeached on the ground of a) want of jurisdiction; b) fraud; and c) collusion. It
runs as follows:
Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree
which is relevant under Section 40, 41 or 42 and which has been proved by the adverse
party, was delivered by a Court no competent to deliver it, or was obtained by fraud or
collusion.

41

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

FACT
Sec-3: Interpretation.
FACT means and includes –

i) Anything, state of things or relation of things capable of being perceived by the
senses ….. Called as Physical Facts.


Ii) Any mental condition of which any person is conscious … .called as Psychological facts.

Fact may be divided into–
i) Fact in issue (FACTUM PROBANDUM) and, ii) Relevant Fact (FACTUM PROBANS)/Evidentiary fact.
Facts are the subjects of judicial inquiry and form the fulcrum of adjudication. A fact may be not only
the object of perception by any one of the five senses, but also the subject of consciousness.

STANDERED OF PROOF
S-3 – PROVED – DISPROVED – NOT PROVED
These terms deal with the degree or standard of proof. What and how much proof is necessary
to convince the judge of a fact in issue depends upon many circumstances. These terms assess the
degree of certainty to be arrived at before a fact is said to be proved, disproved or not proved.


‘Proved’ refers to a state when the court believes in the existence of a fact absolutely, or considers it
existence highly probable that prudent man would act on the assumption of its existence.
‘Disproved’ indicates that the material is sufficient to establish the non-existence of the fact asserted.
Court believes in the non-existence of a fact or its existence highly improbable.
‘Not proved’ implies that the material on record falls short of the requisite proof. A fact is said to be
not proved when it is neither proved nor disproved.


Standard of proof in civil cases – Preponderance of probability.



Standard of proof in criminal cases – Proof beyond any shadow of doubt.

Proof does not mean proof to rigid mathematical demonstrations, but must be such to induce an
apprehension in a reasonable man to come to the conclusion.
Suspicion cannot take the place of proof. “The sea of suspicion has no shore and the court that
embarks upon it is without rudder and compass.” – Justice Caldwell.

42

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

RELEVANT
One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is connected with the other in any of the
ways mentioned from S-5 to 55 of on relevancy. So only those facts that fall within the sweep of S-6 to
55 will be known as Relevant Facts.


S-5 of the I.E. Act, 1872 lays down the rule of relevancy. Evidence may be given in respect of (i)
fact in issue and (ii) relevant Fact falling within the sphere of section 5 to 55 and OF NO OTHERS.


Thus opinions and individual presumptions cannot form evidence except to the extent
permitted by the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.


Facts which need not to be proved:





Section 56 to 58 describe the situations in which facts are not required to be proved.
S-56 Facts which are judicially noticeable by the court need not be proved. (Take judicial notice
means- recognition without proof of something as existing or as being true For Examples court taking
judicial notice that the law and order situation has deteriorated over the years and continues to be
worsening fast and, therefore, it is an importune time to think of reconsidering death penalty (Shashi
Nayar v/s Union Of India, AIR 1992 SC 395. The court can take judicial cognizance of the fact that a
certain area is terrorist-stricken etc.
S-57 Facts of which court must take judicial notice. All Indian laws in force, all public acts passed by
the U.K. Govt., Articles of war for all the three forces in India etc.)
S-58 Facts which are admitted by the parties need not be proved, provided that the court may, in its
discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admissions. This section
deals with admission at or before the hearing.

ORAL EVIDENCE:S-59 says that all facts - except the contents of documents or electronic records - may be proved by
oral evidence.
If a fact is to be proved by oral evidence, the evidence must be of a person who has directly perceived
the facts which he testifies or who has the personal knowledge of the facts i.e. oral evidence must be
‘direct’. (S-60)
S-3 provides that “all statements which the court permits or requires to be made
before it by witnesses in relation to the matters of fact under inquiry” – called oral evidence.


Statements of facts made by the parties to the suit or proceedings, and witnesses
constitute oral evidence.



Statements made by gestures may be considered as oral evidence. Ex. R. vs. Abdullah.

DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE:S-3: DOCUMENT – “Any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters,
figures or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter.” Ex. A writing is a document.
43

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

◦ Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents.
◦ A map or plan is a documents;
◦ An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document.
◦ A caricature is a document.
Thus the term includes all material substances on which the thoughts of men are represented by
writing or any other species of conventional work or symbol.
This definition is similar to the definition in sec.29 of the I.P.C.
VOX AUDIT PETIT – LITERA SCRIPTA MANET – The law of evidence recognizes the superior
credibility of the documentary evidence as against oral evidence.
PROOF OF CONTAINT OF DOCUMENT:-



S-61 says that the contents of a document may be proved either by primary or by
secondary evidence.



S-62: PRIMARY EVIDENCE means ‘the document itself produced for the inspection of
the court’.

Explanation-1.



Where a document is in several parts, each part is primary evidence. If executed in
counterparts, each counterpart is primary evidence.
Explanation-2:



Where documents are made one uniform process, i.e. printing, lithograph or
photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the documents.
SECONDARY EVIDENCE:





S-63 – Secondary Evidence means and includes –
i) Certified copies of the original documents.
Copies made from the original by mechanical process which assure the accuracy of the copy,
copies made from or compared with the original,
Counterpart of a document against the party who did not sign it,
V) Oral account of the contents of a document given by a person who has himself seen the document.
This section is not exhaustive of all kinds of secondary evidence.
WHEN SECONDARY EVIDENCE IS ADMISSIBLE:S-65 provides that Secondary Evidence may be given in the following cases: - (i) When a
document is in possession of –
(a) The person against whom it is to be proved (b)any person out of reach or not subject to the process
of the court
(c) Personlegally bound to produce does not produce even after notice.
44

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.








Subject – Indian Evidence Act

ii) When the contents of the original are admitted in writing by the party against whom to be proved,
iii) When the original is lost or destroyed not out of one’s own negligence,
iv) When the original is not easily movable,
v) When the original is a public document,
vi) When the certified copy of the original is permitted by the Act,
vii) When the original consists of numerous accounts and unwieldy for perusal, a summary result of
such documents.
Ss-45 to 51 dealing with ‘Expert Evidence’ or opinions of third persons constitute exception to the rule of
relevancy of S-5 of I.E. Act, 1872.
S-45 provides that when the court has to take opinion upon a point
i) of foreign law
ii) of science or art
iii) identity of hand writing
iv) Finger impressions
The opinions of ‘persons especially skilled’ on that point will be considered as relevant.
Such persons are called Experts. (Expert opinion is only opinion evidence and is not helpful to the
court in interpretation of the law-“Forest Range officer v/s Mohammed Ali, AIR 1994 SC 120”.
(Both under section 45 and section 47 the evidence is of opinion, in the former by a scientific
comparison and in the latter on the basis of familiarity resulting from frequent observations and
experience.)
Who is an expert:An expert witness is one who has devoted time and study to a special branch of learning, and thus
is specially skilled on those points on which he is asked to state his opinion. (“Ramesh Chandra
Agarwal v/s Regency Hospital Ltd., AIR 2010 SC 806”)
Principle:- It is a general rule that the opinion of witnesses possessing peculiar skill is admissible,
whenever the subject- matter of enquiry is such that inexperienced persons are unlikely to prove
capable of forming a correct judgement upon it without such assistance. In all other cases witnesses
must speak only of facts and not of opinion or inference. The supreme court of India in “Mubarik Ali
Ahmed v/s The State of Bombay, AIR 1957 SC 857- “A witness has to state the facts which he has
seen, heard or perceived and not the conclusion which he has formed on observing or perceiving them
(sec.60). The function of the drawing inference is a judicial function and must be performed by the
court.”
 Ex: whether the death of a person is caused by poison? The opinion of an expert doctor as
to
the symptom produced by the poison may be considered as relevant.
 Opinion of a professional goldsmith as to the purity of gold may be relevant as expert evidence.
(Abdul Rahaman vs. State of Mysore- (1972)
 Section 45A- When in an proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to
any information transmitted or sought in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to insection 79A
of the I.T. Act, 2000 is a relevant fact.
 Muslim law is not a foreign law in India.
 S-46 says that facts bearing upon opinion of experts are relevant. ( The opinion of an expert is
open to corroboration or rebuttal)
 Ex. The question whether A was poisoned by certain poison. The fact that persons who were
poisoned by the same poison had exhibited the same symptoms is relevant.
S-47 says when the opinion as to handwriting would be relevant. - Opinion of any person acquainted
with the handwriting of the person supposed to have written or signed, is relevant.
45

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.













Subject – Indian Evidence Act

may be proved –
i) By the evidence of the writer himself
Ii) by the opinion of an expert
Iii) by the evidence of a person who is acquainted with the handwriting of the person in question
(Shankeappa v/s Sushilabai, AIR 1984 Kant 112)
Iv) by the court under Sec-73 itself comparing the handwriting in question with the proven
handwriting.
In case of digital signature, by the opinion of the Certifying Authority. (section 47A)
S-48 makes relevant the opinions of persons who know the existence of a general right or
custom. (Ex:-The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular
well is a general right within the meaning of this section.)
Custom:-Custom is an unwritten law established by usage. Usage is a fact and custom is a law.
There can be usage without custom, but not custom without usage.
S-49 refers to opinions as to usages, tenets etc.- opinions of persons having special means of
knowledge thereon are relevant.
Usages: - These will include usages of trade and agriculture, mercantile usage and any usage
common to a body of men of family. Usages of family will include, for instance. The custom of any
peculiar course of descent.
Tenets: - This will include any opinion, principle, dogma or doctrine which is held or maintained
by a body of men. It will apply to religion, politics, science, etc.
Special means of knowledge: - Means that the person must have had opportunities for acquiring
knowledge of a usage or custom and that he had acquired the necessary knowledge.

S-50 says when the court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person with another,
opinion expressed by conduct as to such relationship by any family member or person having
special means of knowledge on that subject is relevant.
 Ex. Whether A was the legitimate child of B. Whether A and B were married.
 S-51 says that whenever the opinion of a person is relevant, the grounds on which such opinion
is based are also relevant. (Opinion means a belief or a conviction resulting from what one thinks
on a particular question, it is something more than mere retailing of gossip or of hearsay.)
Character when relevant:
S-52 In civil cases evidence of the character of any party to the suit to prove the probability or
improbability of any conduct imputed to him is irrelevant. (In respect of the character of a party,
two distinction must be drawn, namely between the cases when the character is in issue and is
not in issue and when the cause is civil or criminal.

S-53 In criminal proceedings the fact that the person accused is of a good character is relevant
(In criminal cases if the evidence were in even balance, previous character should make it
preponderate in favour of the defendant.

S-54 In criminal proceedings the fact that the accused person has a bad character is irrelevant,
unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in which case it becomes relevant.
(This section is not applicable to cases in which the bad character of any person is itself a fact in
issue but a previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.)

S-55 In civil cases the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the amount of
damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.

Explanation- In sections 52,53, 54 and 55, the word “character” includes both reputation and
disposition, but except as provided in section 54, evidence may be given only of general
reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts by which reputation or disposition
were shown.

46

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

PUBLIC AND PRIVATE DOCUMENT
S-74 says that the following documents are public documents: 1) Documents forming the acts or records of the acts ( Inserted by the I.T. Act 2000 section 92 w.e.f.
17.10.2000)
 i) of sovereign authority,
 ii) official bodies and tribunals, and
 iii) Of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of India or of the Commonwealth or of a
foreign country.
2) Public records kept in any state of private documents.
 Ex. Memorandum of Articles of a Company registered with the Registrar of companies.
 A private Wakf deed recorded in the office of the sub-registrar is a public document.
 Entries made by a police officer in the site inspection map and site memo held to be public
documents.
 Bankers’ books of nationalized banks are public documents.
 But an application for a license filed in Govt. is not a public document.
 Similarly a post-mortem report is not a public document as a proof of identity of the dead
without producing the doctor in evidence.
 SEC-75 SAYS THAT ALL OTHER DOCUMENTS ARE PRIVATE DOCUMENTS.
PROOF OF DOCUMENTS:Proof of Public Documents by secondary evidence/certified copies.
 S-76 says that every public officer having the custody of a public document, shall give on demand
a copy of it on payment of legal fee to every person who has a right to inspect such document.
 Endorsement at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such document, and shall be signed,
dated and affixed with official title and sealed.
 S-77 provides that such certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public
documents, or part thereof.
 Cultivation registers, registers of paddy producers prepared by village assistants provable by
secondary evidence.
S-78 deals with the proof of other official documents –
 Central Acts, orders or notifications – certified by the Heads of the departments concerned.
 Proceedings of the Legislatures – Journals of those bodies or copies printed by the Govt.
 Proclamations, orders or regulations issued by Her Majesty or Privy Council – by copies of
extracts of London Gazette.
 Foreign legislative Acts – journals published by foreign authority, copy certified under the seal of
the sovereign of such foreign country.
 Municipal Proceedings – publications of such body certified by their legal keeper
 Public documents of any other class in a foreign country may be proved by the original or
certified copy issued by the legal keeper of the document with a certificate and seal of notary
public, or Indian counsel or diplomatic agent.

47

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Sec-79 to 90 Deal with certain Presumptions as to Documents.
This section proceeds upon the maxim “Omnia proesumuntur rite esse acta (all acts are presumed to
be rightly done). In fact all the following sections down to section 90 inclusive, are illustration of, and
founded upon, this principle. This presumption is liable to be rebutted.
This section imperatively directs the court to raise a presumption. The terms of section 114 are only
permissive. The world “shall presume’ indicate that if no other evidence is given the court is bound to
find that the facts mentioned in the section exist. They occur in sections 79, 85 and 89 of the Act. These
sections are, therefore mandatory.
 S-79 – Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies – Courts shall presumeto be genuine
every documents purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by
law declared to be admissible as evidence of any particular fact and which purports to be duly
certified by any officer of the central Government or of state Government.
 S-80 – The Court shall presume genuineness of documents produced as records of evidence –
Deposition of witness, confessional statement of accused before Judge or Magistrate
 S-81 – The court shall presume as to the genuineness of the gazettes, newspapers, private acts of
parliament and other documents purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by
any person etc.
 S-81-A presumption as to Gazettes in electronic forms.

S-82 – The court shall presume the genuineness of documents admissible in England without
proof of seal or signature, will be admissible in courts in India.
 S-83 – Presumption as to maps and plans issued under the authority of Government – The courts
shall presume their genuineness. (But maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be
proved to be accurate.)
 S-84 – The courts shall presume the genuineness of collections of laws and reports of decisions
of the courts of such a foreign country.
 S-85& S-85A – Presumption as to power of attorney, electronic agreements and digital
signatures. – Courts shall presume. (Section 85B- presumption as to electronic records and
digital signature and section 85C- presumption as to digital signature certificate, until in both
these cases contrary is proved.)
 S-86 – Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records – courts shall presume.
 S-87 – Presumption as to books, maps and charts - May presume that any book to which it
mayrefer for information on matters of public or general interest, and any published maps and
charts, the statement of which are relevant facts and produced before it for its inspection.
 S-88 – Presumption as to telegraphic messages - May presume.
 S-88A- Presumption as to electronic messages- May presume.
 S-89 – The court shall presume due execution of documentss not produced even after due notice.
 S-90 – Presumption as to documents of 30 years old – MAY PRESUME.
S-90A- Presumption as to electronic records five years old.

O




Of the exclusion of oral by Documentary
Evidence

S-91- When a transaction has been reduced to writing either by agreement of the parties or by
requirement of law, the writing becomes the exclusive memorial thereof, and no evidence shall
be given to prove the transaction, except the document itself or secondary evidence of its
contents where such evidence is admissible.
The first provision that is either by the agreement of the parties refers to transactions
voluntarily reduced to writing (a contract, a grant etc.), and the second by the requirement of
48

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.













Subject – Indian Evidence Act

law refers to those cases in which any matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a
document, e,g, sale of immovable property, mortgage, lease, trust and gifts.
Illustration – If a contract is contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained
must be proved. If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
S-92- Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement. When a transaction has been reduced into
writing, either by requirement of the law or by agreement of the parties, no oral agreement or
statement shall be admitted.
Section 93 to 99 deals with the interpretation of documents by oral evidence. These sections
deals with the rules for construction of documents with the aid of extrinsic evidence.
S-93- Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous documents.
S-94- Exclusion of evidence againsed application of document to existing facts.
S-95- Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing facts.
S-96- Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of several persons.
S-97- Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to neither of which the
whole correctly applies.
S-98-Evidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc. short hand –writers note or of foreign
obsolete, technical, local and of words used in peculiar sense evidence may be given.)
S-99- Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms of document.( persons who are not
parties to a document, or their representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts to
show a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the document.
S-100- Saving of provisions of Indian succession Act relating to wills.

Production and effect of evidence
Of the Burden of Proof Section 101 to section 114 of the act
S-101-Whoever desires any court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the
existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist. In another word when a person is
bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof lies on that person. The
party on whom the onus of proof lies must, in order to succeed, establish a prima facie case.
The expression means two different things. It means something that a party is required to prove an
allegation before judgment can be given in its favour, it also means that on a contested issue one of the
two contending parties has to introduce evidence. The burden will, at the beginning of a trial, lie on
one party, but during the course of the trial it may shift from one side to another. (Deena v/s Union of
India, AIR 1983 SC 1155)
The term “onus probandi” in its proper use, merely means that, if a fact has to be proved, the person
whose interest it is to prove it, should adduce some evidence, however slight, upon which a court
could find the fact he desires the court to find. It does not mean that he shall call all conceivable or
available evidence. It merely means that the evidence he lays before the court should be sufficient.
Where there is an admission by a party the burden of proof shifts and it is for the party making the
admission to explain it away.
In the matter of proof, in a civil case, a defendant cannot take up the same stand as an accused in a
criminal case. In civil cases, unlike criminal ones, it cannot be said that the benefit of reasonable doubt
must necessarily go to the defendant. Even the preponderance of probability may serve as a good basis
for decision. (Himmat mal v/s Shah Magaji Khubji (1953), 3 Raj. 815.

49

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

In a tort action for malicious prosecution, the plaintiff failed to prove that the criminal complaint was
lodged againsed him without any reasonable and probable cause. His suit failed. (Philip v/s Hindu
Madhan Dharma Paripalana Sabha, AIR 2003 Ker 205).
In a claim of damages for breach of contract, the burden is on the complainant to show the basis on
which the damages claimed by him have been quantified. (Usha Beltron Ltd. v/s Nand Kishore
Parasramka, AIR 2001 cal.137) – The case required proof of market price for assessment of
damages.
In the criminal trial the burden of proving the guilt of the accused beyond all reasonable doubts
always rest on the prosecution and on its failure it cannot fall back upon the evidence adduced by the
accused in support of his defense to rest his case solely thereon. (Jarnail Singh v/s State of Punjab,
AIR 1996 SC 755 – The prosecution cannot take undue advantage of the defence put by the accused
even if the same was found to be false and improbable. In a criminal trial burden of proof squarely
rests upon prosecution.
In an accusatory system, such as that prevailing in India, it is for the prosecution to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offence, it is not for the court to
speculate as to how the crime has been committed.
Recovery of articles by itself does not connect anybody with the crime. Connection of the accused with
the article must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Realities or truth apart, the fundamental and basic presumption in the administration of criminal law
and justice delivery system is the innocence of the alleged accused and till the charges are proved
beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of clear, cogent, credible or unimpeachable evidence, the
question of indicting or punishing an accused does not arise, merely by carried away by heinous
nature of the crime or the gruesome manner in which it was found to have been committed.
Courts dealing with criminal cases at least should constantly remember that there is a long mental
distance between may be true and must be true and this basic and golden rule only helps to maintain
the vital distinction between conjunctures and sure conclusions to be arrived by the touch stone of a
dispassionate judicial scrutiny based upon a complete and comprehensive appreciation of all features
of the case as well as quality and credibility of the evidence brought on record.(Ashish Batham v/s
State of M.P., AIR 2002 SC 3206)
More serious the crime, more strict proof would be requisite.
Examples: - The possession of small quantity of psychotropic substance for personal use requires the
prosecution to prove its allegation of commercial possession beyond reasonable doubt. It is enough for
the accused in his defence to satisfy the judicial mind on a preponderance of probability (Offence
under NDPS Act)
Plea of Alibi (his presence elsewhere)- “In soma Bhai v/s State of Gujrat AIR 1975 SC 1453Where it was taken to be a settled law that a plea of alibi has got to be proved to the satisfaction
of the court.
In state of Maharashtra v/s Narsingarao Gangaram Pimple 1984 Cr. LJ 4- to the effect that- “ the
plea of alibi must be proved with absolute certainty so as to completely, exclude the possibility
of the presence of the accused at the place of occurrence.
In the cases where the evidence is of such a nature that conclusion cannot be arrived at as to who
started the fight or how the quarrel started, the benefit of doubt should be given to the accused.
Other examples are:- Proof of good faith, blank signature, whole evidence on record, presumption as
to consideration and dishonour of cheques, Gift deed, will caste claim etc.
50

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

S-102- On whom burden of proof lies- The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that
person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Example: - A sues B for money due on a bond.
The execution of the bond is admitted, but B says that it was obtained by fraud, which A denies. If no
evidence is given on either side, A would succeed, as the bond is not disputed and fraud is not proved.
The phrase “burden of proof” has two meanings- one, the burden of proof as a matter of law and
pleading, and the other the burden of establishing a case. The former is fixed as a question on the basis
of the pleadings and is unchanged during the entire trial, whereas the latter is not constant but shifts
as soon as the party adduces sufficient evidence to raise a presumption in his favour.
The burden of proof lies upon the party, whether plaintiff or defendant, who substantially asserts the
affirmative of the issue. In another word the party on whom the burden of proof lies begins.
In criminal cases the prosecution has to prove the ingredients of the offence.
S-103- Burden of proof as to particular fact- The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on
that person who wishes the court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the
proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Example: - A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the court to believe that B admitted the theft to C. A
must prove the admission,
B wishes the court to believe that, at the time in question, he was elsewhere (Alibi). He must
prove it.
The burden of proving a particular fact lies on the party as indicated in the section irrespective of the
fact whether it is an affirmative or negative of the issue.
Claim for setting aside gift deed- The plaintiff filed a suit for a declaration that the gift deed relating to
his property was null and void because at the time of its execution ha was a minor. His birth certificate
was neither exhibited nor proved through other witnesses. It was for him to prove his age and not for
the defendant. The suit was filed 3 years after attaining majority. He was held not entitled to the relief
claimed. (Habib Ullah Bhat v/s Juna, AIR 2003 J&K 32.
S-104- Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible –The burden of proving
any fact necessary to be proved to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the
person who wishes to such evidence.
EX.- A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B’s death.
A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A must prove that the
document has been lost.
Principle- Whenever it is necessary to prove any fact, in order to render evidence of any other fact,
admissible, the burden of proving that fact is on the person who wants to give such evidence.
“Kalooram v/s Mangilal, AIR 1984 MP 147. (A person seeking to recover possession has to prove
that he was dispossessed within 12 years.)
“Mahboob Sab v/s Union of India, AIR 2011 Kart. 8 (Where the Railways contentions was that the
person who died by falling from a train was not a bonafide passenger being without ticket, the court
said that it was for the Railways to prove that fact.
S-105- Burden of proving that the case of the accused comes within exceptions.- When a person is
accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstance bringing the case within
any of the general exceptions in the I.P.C. or within any special exceptions or proviso contained in any
other part of the same code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the court shall
presume the absence of such circumstances.
Ex. -A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature
of the act. (The burden of proof is on A).
51

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was deprived of the power of
self-control. (The burden of proof is on A).
Section 325 of the I.P.C. provided that whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335,
voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be subject to certain punishments.
A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under section 325.
The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under section 335 lies on A.
Comment:- The onus of establishing an exception shifts to the accused when he pleads an exception.
“Subodh Tiwari v/s State of Assam, 1988 Cr LJ 223 (Gau.) – The court never presumes the
existence of circumstances which entitle the accused to his defense.
“Brindaban Prasad v/s State of Bihar, AIR, 1964 pat.138- If on a consideration of the evidence as a
whole a reasonable doubt is created in the mind of the court as to the guilt of the accused he would be
entitled to acquittal.
“Rizam v/s State of Chhattisgarh, 2003 Cr LJ 1227- The burden on the accused to prove his defense
stands discharged by showing preponderance of probability in his favor.
Presumption of innocence- In criminal cases, the rule is that the legal burden of proving every
element of the offence and the guilt of the accused, lies from first to last on the prosecution. The
prosecution must disprove any defence or explanation raised by the accused, even if it appears
‘affirmative in nature. (In woolmington v/s DPP 1935 AC 462 at 481, 482.)
‘General exceptions’- The general exceptions here referred to are those applicable to all crimes, and
are laid down in chapter IV of the I.P.C.
This section is a general provision which imposes the burden of bringing himself within an exception
upon the person who relies upon the exception, and there is no distinction between a case in which the
exception is contained in the body of the statute imposing the prohibition in a case in which it is not so
included.
Special exceptions- Special exceptions are those which are restricted to a particular crime.
Section 113A raises a presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman by her husband or
his relatives. Similarly section 114A raises presumption of absence of consent in a rape case.
Several statutes also provide for putting evidential burden on the accused.
S-106- Burden of proving fact specially within knowledge- When any fact is especially within the
knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.
Ex. - A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving that he had a
ticket is on him.
Principle: - Where the knowledge of the subject-matter of an allegation is peculiarly within the
province of one party to a suit the burden of proof must lie there also.
Where a person was found in possession of gold with foreign markings, the S.C. held that burden lay
upon him to account for his possession. State of Maharashtra v/s Natarwarlal Damodardas soni, 1980
2 SCR 340.
Especially- This word means facts that are pre-eminently or exceptionally within the knowledge of
the person.

52

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Burden of proving negligence and res ipsa loquitur- It has been considered by the Privy Council
that the burden of proving negligence always rests with the plaintiff, even when the maxim res ipsa
loquitur applies. Once the initial burden of showing the setting of the mishap is discharged, this maxim
will relieve the plaintiff of showing further evidence of negligence.
Taking away dead body- Ram Gulam Choudhury v/s State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 4632.
Payment of rent- In an eviction proceedings on the ground of default in payment of rent, the burden
lies on the tenant to prove payment.
S-107- Burden of proving death of a person known to have been alive within thirty years- When
the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was alive within thirty year, the
burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms it.
S-108- Burden of proving that a person is alive who has not been heard of for seven yearsprovided that when the question is whether a man is alive od dead, and it is proved that he has not
been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard og him if he had been alive,
the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.
Comment- Section 107 and 108 must be read together because the latter is only a proviso to the rule
contained in the former, and constitute one rule when so read together.
S-109 –Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant,
principal and agent- When the existence of a personal relationship, or a state of things, is once
established by proof, the law presumes that the relationship or the state of things continues to exist as
before till the contrary is shown or till a different presumption is raised, from the nature of the subject
in question.
S-110- Burden of proof as to ownership- This section gives effect to the principle that possession is
prima facie evidence of complete title, anyone who intends to outs the possessor must establish a right
to do so. Longer the possession, stronger the presumption.
S-111- Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active confidenceEx. The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit brought by a
son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father. The principle of law
embodied in this section which was called “the great rule of the court” is “he who bargains in a matter
of advantage with a person placing confidence in him is bound to show, that a reasonable use has been
made of that confidence, a rule applying to trustees, attorneys or anyone else.
S-111A – presumption as to certain offences- under section 121, 121A, 122 or section 123 of the
I.P.C. (criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence u/s 122 or 123 of IPC.) in
an area declared to be disturbed area under any enactment, disturbing public peace.
S-112- Birth during marriage conclusive proof of legitimacy- Evidence that a child is born during
wedlock is sufficient to establish its legitimacy, and the shifts the burden of proof to the party, seeking
to establish the contrary.
Under the section the fact that any person was born(1)
During the continuance of a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or
(2)
Within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried.
S-113- Proof of cessation of territory- This section is now obsolete.

53

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

S-113-A- Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman- When the question is
whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of
her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period of seven years from the
date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband has subjected her to cruelty,
the court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had
been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband. For the purpose of this section
‘cruelty’ shall have the same meaning as in section 498A of the I.P.C.
S-113-B- presumption as to dowry death-When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman
had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any
demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation: - For the purpose of this section,’ dowry death’ shall have the same meaning as in
section 304B of the I.P.C.
Section 113B of the Evidence Act being procedural, it has been held that it is retrospective in
operation. (“Bhoora Singh V/S State of U.P., 1992 Cr LJ 2294 (All).
The Presumption under section 113B shall be raised only on the proof of the following essentials:1.
The presumption can be raised only if the accused is being tried for the offence U/S 304B, I.P.C.
(accused has committed the dowry death of a woman).
2.
The woman was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or his relatives.
3.
Such cruelty or harassment was for or in connection with any demand for dowry.
4.
Such cruelty or harassment was taking place soon before her death.
S-114- court may presume existence of certain facts: - The court may presume the existence of
any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of
natural events, human conduct, and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of
the particular case.
Ex.- That a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon after the theft is either the thief or has
received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession.
That a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or indorsed for good consideration.
Presumption and burden of proof: - Section 104 to 113 direct on whom burden of proof will lie. The
court is bound in every instance to presume against that party on whom the burden of proof is
directed to lie. No option is given to the court as to whether it will presume the fact or not. But there
are various presumptions where room is left for the court to exercise its powers of inference, the court
can throw the burden of proof on whichever side it chooses. A presumption is not evidence or proof. It
only shows on whom the burden of proof lies.
Venkatramiah, J. of the Supreme Court observed: “A presumption is not in itself evidence but only
makes a prima facie case for party in whose favor it exists. It indicates the person on whom the burden
of proof lies.
Presumption may be either of law or fact, and when of law may be either conclusive, or rebuttable, but
when of fact are always rebuttable. Mixed presumptions are those which are partly of law and partly
of fact.
Presumption of law differ from presumptions of fact in the following respects:1.
Presumptions of law derive their force from law. While presumptions of fact derive their force
from logic.
2.
A presumption of law applies to a class, the conditions of which are fixed and uniform, a
presumption of fact applies to individual cases, the conditions of which are inconstant and fluctuating.

54

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

3.
Presumptions of law are drawn by the court, and in the absence of opposing evidence are
conclusive for the party in whose favour they operate, presumptions of fact are drawn by the jury, who
may disregard them however cogent.
In the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, there are three cases where conclusive presumption may be
drawn. They are sections 41,112 and 113.
S-114-A- Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape (Sub-section (2)
of section 376 of the I.P.C. under clause a, b, c, d, e, g of this section)
“Dev kishan v/s State of Rajasthan, 2003 Cr LJ 1118 (Raj) –The accused were punished under
s.376 (2) (g) of I.P.C.

CHAPTER VIII- ESTOPPEL
Doctrine of Estoppel under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
When one person has —
By his
(i) Declaration
(ii) Act, or
(iii) Omission
Intentionally caused or permitted another person
(i) To believe a thing to be true, and
(ii) To act upon such belief,—
Neither (i) he, nor (ii) his representative can be allowed to deny the truth of that thing in a suit or
proceeding between himself and such person or his representative.
Illustration:
A intentionally and falsely leads В to believe that certain land belongs to A, and A seeks to set aside the
sale on the ground that at the time of the sale, he had no title. He must not be allowed to prove his
want to title.
Principle of Section 115:
Estoppel is based on the principle that it would be most inequitable and unjust that if one person, by a
representation, or by conduct amounting to a representation, has induced another to act as he would
not otherwise have done, the person who made the representation should be allowed to deny or
repudiate the effect of his former statement, to the loss and injury of the person who acted on it.
Sir Edward Coke had defined estoppel in these words: An estoppel exists “where a man’s own act or
acceptance stoppeth or closeth up his mouth to allege or plead the truth.” In simpler language, a
person cannot be allowed to say one thing at one time and the contrary at another: He cannot blow
both hot and cold at the same time.
This section is founded upon the doctrine laid down in Pickard v. Sears (1837 6A. & E. 475), namely,
that where a person “by his words or conduct, wilfully causes another to believe the existence of a
certain state of things, and induces him to act on that belief, so as to alter his own previous position,
the former is concluded from averring against the latter, a different state of things as existing at the
same time.” This doctrine precludes a person from denying the truth of some statement previously
made by himself. No cause of action arises upon estoppel itself.
Scope of Section 115:
In order to hold that a case comes within the scope of this section, a Court must find:
1. That A believed a thing to be true.
55

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

2. That in consequence of that belief, he acted in a particular manner.
3. That that belief, and A’s so acting were brought about by some representation by S, either by a
declaration, act, or omission, which representation was made intentionally to produce that result.
If the above three points are established, В is prohibited by law from denying the truth of his
representation in a proceeding by or against A or A’s representative.
It may be noted that it is not necessary to prove any fraudulent intention on B‘s part. He will be
nonetheless estopped if he himself was acting under a mistake or misapprehension.
The section does not apply where the statement relied upon is made to a person who knows the true
facts and is not misled by the untrue statement. There can be no estoppel if true facts are known to
both the parties. Therefore, if A knew the true facts, no estoppel arises.
In Chhaganlal Mehta v. Haribhai Patel, [(1982) 1 S.C.C. 223 ], the Supreme Court analysed the scope of
S. 115 of the Act, and laid down that the following eight conditions must be satisfied to bring a case
within the scope of estoppel, as defined in S. 115.
(i) There must have been a representation by a person (or his authorised agent) to another person.
Such a representation may be in any form — a declaration or an act or an omission.
(ii) Such representation must have been of the existence of a fact, and not of future promises or
intention.
(iii) The representation must have been meant to have been relied upon.
(iv) There must have been belief on the part of the other party in its truth.
(v) There must have been some action on the faith of that declaration, act or omission. In other words,
such declaration, act or omission must have actually caused the other person to act on the faith of it,
and to alter his position to his prejudice or detriment.
(vi) The misrepresentation or conduct or omission must have been the proximate cause of leading the
other party to act to his prejudice.
(vii) The person claiming the benefit of an estoppel must show that he was not aware of the true state
of things. There can be no estoppel if such a person was aware of the true state of affairs or if he had
means of such knowledge.
(viii) Only the person to whom the representation was made or for whom it was designed (or his
representative) can avail of the doctrine.
There are four classes of estoppel to be found in section 116 and 117 of the Act, viz., and
estoppel of—
1. Tenant (Section 116)
No tenant of immovable property (or person claiming through such tenant) can, during the
continuance of the tenancy, be permitted to deny that the land-lord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable property.
2. Licensee of a person in possession (Section 116)
No person who came upon immovable property by the licence of the person in possession thereof can
deny that such person had a title to such possession at the time when such licence was given.
3. Acceptor of a bill of exchange (Section 117)
No acceptor of a bill of exchange can deny that the drawer had authority to draw such bill or to
endorse it; but he may deny that the bill was really drawn by the person by whom it purports to have
been drawn.
4. Bailee or licensee (Section 117):
No Bailee or licensee can deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence
commenced, authority to make such bailment or grant such licence. But, if a bailee delivers the goods
bailed to a person other than the bailor, he may prove that such person had a right to them as against
the bailor.
Estoppels are of seven kinds:
56

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

1. Estoppel by record;
2. Estoppel by deed;
3. Estoppel by conduct;
4. Equitable estoppel;
5. Estoppel by negligence;
6. Estoppel on benami transactions; and
7. Estoppel on a point of law. (Additionally, there is also the concept of promissory estoppel, which is
discussed later.)
1. Estoppel by record:
Under this kind of estoppel, a person is not permitted to dispute the facts upon which a judgment
against him is based. It is dealt with by (i) Ss. 11 to 14 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and (ii) Ss. 40 to
44 of the Indian Evidence Act.
2. Estoppel by deed:
Under this kind of estoppel, where a party has entered into a solemn engagement by deed as to certain
facts, neither he, nor any one claiming through or under him, is permitted to deny such facts.
Problem:
A deed of gift by D in favour of his daughter M for life provided that the property should go to her male
issue, and in default, to D’s sons. One of D’s two sons induced a purchaser to buy his sister’s property,
and the sale deed was attested by the other son. M died without leaving any male issue, and D’s son
filed a suit to recover the property from the purchaser. State, giving reasons, whether the plea of
estoppel would be available to the defendant against the plaintiff.
Ans:
So far as the son who had induced the purchaser is concerned, he is estopped. But, so far as the son
attesting the document is concerned, the plea of estoppel will not be available, if such attesting person
denies the knowledge of the contents of the document. The Privy Council has held in Pandurang
Krishnaji v. Markandeya Tukaram (40 I.A. 60), that the knowledge of the contents of the deed is not to
be inferred from the mere fact of attestation.
In the above problem, there is nothing to show that the attesting son did so attest with the knowledge
of the contents of the document. Therefore, the plea of estoppel will not be available against him.
3. Estoppel by conduct:
Sometimes called estoppel in pais, may arise from agreement, misrepresentation, or negligence.
Estoppel in pais is dealt with in Ss. 115 to 117. (Estoppel in pais means “estoppel in the country” or
“estoppel before the public.”)
If a man, either by words or by conduct, has intimated that he consents to an act which has been done,
and that he will not offer any opposition to it, although it could not have been lawfully done without
his consent, and he thereby induces others to do that from which they otherwise might have abstained
from doing, he cannot question the legality of the act to the prejudice of those who have so given faith
to his words, or to the fair inference to be drawn from his conduct.
If a party has an interest to prevent an act being done, and acquiesces in it, so as to induce a reasonable
belief that he consents to it, and the position of others is altered by their giving credit to his sincerity,
he has no right to challenge the act to their prejudice. (Chand Sing v. Commr., Burdwan, (A.I.R. 1958
Cal. 415).
S. 115 deals with estoppel by representation by act or conduct, and Ss. 116 and 117 deal with estoppel
by agreement or contract,
4. Equitable Estoppel:
57

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The Evidence Act is not exhaustive of the rules of estoppel. Thus, although S. 116 only deals with the
estoppel that arises against a tenant or licensee, a similar estoppel has been held to arise against a
mortgagee, an executor, a legatee, a trustee, or an assignee of property, precluding him from denying
the title of the mortgagor, the testator, the author of the trust, or the assignor, as the case may be.
Further, S. 116 is not exhaustive of all instances of estoppel as between landlord and tenant. Thus,
there are cases of estoppel which, though not within the terms of Ss. 115 to 117 of the Evidence Act,
are recognised instances of estoppel. Estoppels which are not covered by the Evidence Act may be
termed equitable estoppels.
5. Estoppel by Negligence:
This type of estoppel enables a party, as against some other party, to claim a right of property which in
fact he does not possess. Such estoppel is described as estoppel by negligence or by conduct or
representation or by a holding out of ostensible authority. Such estoppel is based on the existence of a
duty which the person estopped is owing to the person led into the wrong belief or to the general
public of whom the person is one. (Mercantile Ваnk. Central Bank, (A.I.R, 1938 Privy Council, 52)
6. Estoppel on benami transactions:
If the owner of property clothes a third person with the apparent ownership and a right of disposition
thereof, not merely by transferring it to him, but also by acknowledging that the transferee has paid
him the consideration for it, he is estopped from asserting his title as against a person to whom such
third party has disposed of the property and who has taken it in good faith and for value. (Li Tse Shi v
Pong Tse Ching, (A.I.R. 1935 P.C. 208)
7. Estoppel on a point of law:
Estoppel refers to a belief in a fact, and not in a proposition of law. A person cannot be estopped for a
misrepresentation on a point of law. An admission on a point of law is not an admission of a “thing” so
as to make the admission matter of estoppel. Where persons merely represent their conclusions of law
as to the validity of an assumed or admitted adoption, there is no representation of a fact to constitute
an estoppel.
The principle of estoppel cannot be invoked to defeat the plain provisions or a statute. There is no
estoppel against an Act of Legislature. Thus, if a minor represents himself to be of the age of majority,
and thereafter enters into an agreement, the agreement is void, and the minor is not estopped from
pleading that the agreement is void ab initio, as he was, in truth, a minor at the date of making the
contract.
Estoppel only applies to a contract inter partes, and it is not open to parties to a contract to estop
themselves or anybody else in the face of an Act. The rule of estoppel is one of evidence. It cannot
prevail against a plain and mandatory provision of law.
The Supreme Court has observed that the doctrine of estoppel does not operate where the mandatory
conditions laid down by law on grounds of public policy are ignored. Thus, estoppel would not apply
against a sanction obtained by fraud or by collusion between the parties. (S.В. Noronah v. Prem
Kumari Khanna, (1980) 1 S.C.C. 52)

58

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Differences between
Limitation and Estoppel
Main Differences between Limitation and Estoppel are as follows:
Limitation:
1. Limitation is a procedural law. It precludes a person claiming a right to sue after the period of
limitation.
2. Limitation does not apply to a matter of defense barring a few exceptions.
3. The defense of limitation is open even when the plaintiff’s delay in instituting the suit is due to the
conduct of the defendant except where it is fraudulent.

Difference between Estoppel and Admission
Difference between Estoppel and Admission are as follows:
1. An admission may, under certain circumstances, bind strangers as well, whereas estoppel binds
only parties and privies thereto. It cannot be taken advantage of by strangers.
2. Estoppel being a rule of evidence, an action cannot be founded on it, whereas an action may be
founded on an admission.
3. An admission of a party is strong evidence against him, but he is at liberty to prove that such
admission was mistaken or untrue. But, if another person has been induced by it to alter his position,
the party is estopped from disputing its truth with respect to that person.
When an admission has been acted upon by another person, the admission is an estoppel, and the
estopped party is required to make good his representation; in other words, the admission is
conclusive. An estoppel differs from an admission in that it cannot be taken advantage of by strangers.
It binds only the parties and privies. An estoppel is only a rule of evidence, for an action cannot be
founded upon it.
Estoppel
1. Estoppel is a rule of evidence. It precludes a person from denying the truth of some statement
previously made by himself.
2. Estoppel may apply to either party.
3. There can be no estoppel against statute. So a person cannot be debarred of the right tc contest the
issue of limitation by any prior; admission.

The Difference between Res Judicata and Estoppel
Res judicata corresponds to the part of the doctrine of estoppel, which is known as estoppel by record.
Estoppel as enunciated in Section 115 of the Indian Evidence Act is by conduct or agreement or
estoppel in pais.
Thus, even though res judicata may be said to be included in the doctrine of estoppel, as understood in
the wider sense of the term, it must be distinguished from estoppel as distinctly provided for in the
Indian Law of Evidence.
The doctrine of res Judicata can be distinguished from estoppel, as generally understood, on the
following grounds:
The rule of res judicata is based on public policy, i.e., it is to the interest of the State that there should
be an end to litigation and belongs to the province of procedure.
59

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Estoppel, on the other hand, is part of the law of evidence and proceeds on the equitable principle of
altered situation, viz., that he who, by his conduct, has induced another to alter his position to his
disadvantage, cannot turn round and take advantage of such alteration of other’s position.
Res judicata precludes a man from avowing the same thing in successive litigations, while estoppel
prevents a party from saying two contradictory things at different times.
Res judicata is reciprocal and binds the parties, while estoppel binds the party who made the previous
statement or showed the previous conduct.
Res judicata, as observed by Mahmud, J. in Sita Ram v. Amir Begum, (8 Allahabad, 324), prohibits the
court from entering into an enquiry as well as to a matter already adjudicated upon; estoppel prohibits
a party, after the inquiry has already been entered upon, from proving anything which would
contradict his own previous declaration or acts to the prejudice of another party who, relying upon
these declarations or acts, has altered his position.
In other words, res judicata prohibits an inquiry in limine, and bars the trial of a suit while estoppel is
only a piece of evidence and emphasizes that a man should not be allowed to retrace the steps already
walked over.
Res judicata ousts the jurisdiction of the court, while estoppel shuts the mouth of a party.
The doctrine of res judicata results from a decision of the court, while estoppel results from the acts of
the parties themselves.

Difference between Estoppel and Waiver
Difference between Estoppel and Waiver are as follows:
Estoppel and waiver are entirely different. Estoppel is not a cause of action. It may, if established,
assist a plaintiff in enforcing a cause of action, by preventing the defendant from denying the existence
of some fact essential to establish the cause of action. It is a rule of evidence which comes into
operation if (a) a statement of the existence of a fact has been made by the defendant (or his
authorised agent) to the plaintiff or someone on his behalf, (b) with the intention that the plaintiff
should act upon the faith of the statement, and (c) the plaintiff does act upon the faith of the statement.
On the other hand, waiver is contractual, and may constitute a cause of action; it is an agreement to
release or not to assert a right. Thus, if an agent with an authority to make such an agreement on
behalf of the principal agrees to waive his principal’s right, then (subject to any other question such as
consideration), the principal will be bound by the contract, not by estoppel. There is no such thing as
estoppel by waiver. (Dawason’s Bank Ltd. v Nippon Menkwa Kabushiki Kaisha, 62 I.A. 100)

Law relating to competence of a witness
Law relating to competence of a witness (sections 118-121) - The modern judicial system is based
on evidence. The knowledge of how an event happened is arrived at by the court through witnesses.
As BENTHAM said, “witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice.” The court gives its finding based on the
evidence given by witnesses. It is important, therefore, to understand who can and who cannot be a
competent witness. Section 118 of the evidence Act, 1872, contains the provisions for determining a
competent witness.
Section 118- who may testify- All persons shall be competent be competent to testify unless the court
considers that they are prevented from understanding the question put to them, or from giving
rational answer to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether by body or
mind, or any other cause of the same kind.

60

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Explanation: - A lunatic is not incompetent to testify, unless he is prevented by his lunancy from
understanding the question put to him and giving rational answers to him.
As is evident from section 118, in general, nobody is barred from being a witness as long as he is able
to understand the questions that are put to him as well as is able to give rational replies to those
questions. There may be several reasons because of which a person may not be able to comprehend
the questions and / or is unable to reply coherently. This section does not attempt to define all such
reasons but gives examples of such reasons such as young age (in case of a child) mental illness, or
extreme old age. It is up to the court to determine whether a person is able to understand the
questions or give rational answers. Thus, competency is a rule, while incompetency is an exception.
Even a lunatic is considered a competent witness if his lunancy does not prevent him from
understanding the questions and giving rational answers.
Child witness: -A young child, if he is able to understand the questions and is able to reply rationally,
is a competent witness even if he is of a tender age. For example:- In the case of “Jai singh v/s State,
1973, Cr LJ, a seven year old girl who was the victim of attempted rape was produced as a witness and
her testimony was held valid
It has been held in several cases that a child under the age of seven years can be a competent witness
if, upon the strict examination of the court, the child is found to understand the nature and
consequence of an oath. “IN Rameshwar Kalyan Singh v/s State of Rajasthan AIR 1952, where the
accused was charged with the offence of rape of a girl of 8 years of age. It was held that omission of
oath only affects the credibility of the witness and not competency of the witness. The competency is
determined by section 118, and the only ground that is given for incompetency is the inability to
comprehend the questions or inability to give rational answers.
The S.C. however has emphasized the need for carefully evaluating the testimony of a child. Adequate
corroboration of his testimony must be looked from other evidence.
Dumb Witness:- Section 119- A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other
manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written
and signs made in open court. Evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral evidence.
Competency of a wife as a witness against her husband: - As per section 120, in all civil
proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party to the suit, shall be competent
witness. Further, in criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of such person,
respectively, shall be a competent witness.
S- 121– Judges and Magistrate as witnesses:Under this section a judge or Magistrate shall not be compelled to answer questions as to –
(a)
His conduct in court as such judge or Magistrate, or
(b)
Anything which came to his knowledge in court as such judge or Magistrate, except upon the
order of a court to which he is subordinate. He may be examined as to other matters which occurred in
his presence while he was so acting.
Illustration:- A, on his trial before the court of session, says that a deposition was improperly taken by
B, the Magistrate, B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except upon the special order
of a supreme court.
Sections 121-132 declare exceptions to the general rules that a witness is bound to tell the
truth, and to produce any document in his possession or power relevant to the matter in issue.
They deal with the privilege of certain classes of witnesses.
A distinction should be drawn between questions which a witness cannot be compelled to answer (Ss. 121,
124 and 125) and those which he cannot be permitted to answer (Ss. 123 and 126).The latter class of
61

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

questions might properly be forbidden but questions of the former class are in no way barred, a witness
has merely the right of refusing to answer such questions, without any hostile inference being drawn from
his refusal. The most that a court can do, in the case of a witness who is ignorant of his privilege, is to
warn him that he need not answer. But if the witness elect to waive his privilege of refusing to answer, his
answer is admissible in evidence.
Judge or Magistrate as a witness: - A judge, before whom the cause is tried, must conceal any fact
within his own knowledge, unless he be first sworn, and, consequently, if he be the sole judge, it seems
that he cannot depose as a witness, though if he be sitting with others, he may then be sworn and give
evidence.
S-122- communications during marriage- This section “Rests on the obvious ground that the
admission of such testimony would leave a powerful tendency to disturb the peace of families to
promote domestic broils, and to weaken, if not to destroy, that feeling of mutual confidence which is
the most endearing solace of married life.
Under this section a married person shall not be compelled to disclose any communication made to
him during marriage by any person to whom he is married and permitted to disclose any such
communication, except(a)
When the person who made it or his representative in interest consents, or
(b)
In suits between married persons, or
(c)
In proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the
other.
The ban of the section is confined to communications only. A wife can testify to the deeds of her
husband of which she was the eye witness. (Ram Bharosey v/s U.P., AIR 1954 SC 704).
The section protects the individuals, and not the communications if it can be proved without putting
into the box for that purpose the husband or the wife to whom the communication was made.
Marital communication can be proved by evidence of the over-hearers. (Appu v/s State, AIR1971
Mad 194).
Confession to the wife in the presence of others were allowed to be proved by others. (Appu v/s State,
AIR1971 Mad 194).
Letters written by husband to wife were held to be provable otherwise than through wife. (A.
Manibhushana Rao v/s A. Surya Kantam, AIR 1981 AP 58).
S- 123- Evidence as to affairs of state- No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of the state, except with the permission of the
officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he
thinks fit.
The only ground sufficient to justify non- production of an official document marked confidential is
that production would not be in the public interest, for example where disclosures would be injurious
to national defence or to good diplomatic relations. care has, however, to be taken to see that interests
other than the interest of the public do not masquerade in the garb of public interest and take undue
advantage of the provisions of this section.
Subject to this reservation the maxim salus populi est suprema lex,which means that regard for public
welfare is the highest law, is the basis of the provisions contained in this section.
S-124- Official communications- No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications
made to him in official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the
disclosure.
This section is confined to public officers and deals with communications made in official confidence.

62

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

S- 125- Information as to commission of offences- On the grounds of public policy, a Magistrate or a
police-officer cannot be compelled to give the source of information received by him as to the
commission of the offence.
S-126- Professional communications- No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall at any time be
permitted, unless with his client’s express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the
course and for the purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader or vakil, by or on behalf of his
client, or to state the contents or condition of any document with which he has become acquainted in
the course and for the purpose of his professional employment, or to disclose any advice given by him
to his client in the course and for the purpose of such employment.
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure(1)
Any such communication made in the furtherance of any illegal purpose,
(2)
Any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of his employment
as such, showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his
employment.
(It is immaterial whether the attention of such barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil was or was not
directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.)
Explanation: - The obligation stated in this section continues after the employment has ceased.
The purpose of a legal professional privilege is to allow a client to make full discloser to a solicitor
without fear that disclosure of their communications might subsequently be made against his will.
Scope:-Sections 126 to 129 deal with the privilege that is attached to professional communications
between the legal adviser and the client. Section 126 and 128 mention the circumstances under which
the legal adviser can give evidence of such professional communications. Section 127 provides that
interpreters, clerks, or servants of legal advisers are restrained similarly. Section 129 says when a
legal adviser can be compelled to disclose the confidential communication which has taken place
between him and his client.
Law officers have been held to be within the scope of the section. Communication between an insurer
and his counsel are also privileged. Notes made by lawyers of statements of witnesses are within the
range of protection.
The protection afforded under this section cannot be availed of againsed an order to produce
documents under section 91 of the Cr. Pc. The documents to be produced and then, under section 162
of evidence Act, it will be for the court, after inspection of the documents, if it deems fit, to consider
and decide any objection about their production or admissibility.
S-127- The provisions of section 126 shall apply to interpreters, clerks or servants of
barristers, pleaders, attorneys and vakils.
S-128- Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.
S-129- No one shall be compelled to disclose to the court any confidential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal professional adviser, unless he offers himself
as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may
appear to the court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence which he has given,
but no others.
S-130- Production of title deeds of witness, not a party- This section is based on the principle that
great inconvenience and mischief would result to witnesses, if they are compelled to disclose their
titles by the production of their title-deeds. The object of the privilege is that the title may not be
disclosed and examined.
S-131- (productions of documents) Subsituted by I.T. Act, 2000 section 92 and second schedule
W.E.F. 17.10. 2000- As per new section no one shall be compelled to produce documents in his
possession or electronic records under his control which any other person would be entitled to refuse
to produce if they were in his control or possession unless he consents to their production.

63

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Persons in possession of documents on behalf of others are generally agents, attorneys,
mortgagees, trustees etc. This section provides the protection to these persons also as provided
to witness who is not party to a suit (section 130).
S-132- Under this section a witness is not excused from answering any question relevant to the matter
in issue on the ground that answer to such question may criminate him or expose him to a penalty or
forfeiture.
S-132- The evidence of an accomplice, though it is uncorroborated, may form the basis for a
conviction.
The word ‘accomplice’ has not been defined by the Act. It is generally understood that an accomplice
means a guilty associate or partner in crime. An accomplice by becoming an approver becomes a
prosecution witness. An approver’s evidence has to satisfy a double test:(1)
His evidence must be reliable and,
(2)
His evidence should be sufficiently corroborated.
S-134- No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact.
Under the Act no particular number of witnesses is required in any case. Of course it is open to a final
court of fact to believe or disbelieve a statement, but simply because the statement is of one witness
that cannot by itself be a ground for not acting upon that testimony.
Neither the number of witnesses, nor the quantity of evidence is material. It is the quality that matters.
There is a general public reluctance in appearing as witnesses. Hence there should be no insistence
that there should be more witnesses than one.
The Supreme Court has been sustaining convictions on the basis of the testimony of a sole witness. In
one of them: - ROHATGI, J. remarked: “There is no computerized rule. Nor are Judges Computers. It
must always depend on the circumstances of each case and the quality of the evidence of the single
witness.

“Examination of witness”
Chapter X containing Sections 135 to 166 of the Evidence act, 1872 lay down the provisions
relating to “Examination of witness”
1.
Section 135 provides for the order in which witnesses ought to be produced and examined.
2.
Section 136 confers on Judge-power to decide as to admissibility of evidence.
3.
Section 137 deals with Examination in Chief and provides for three stages of examination.
4.
Section 138 deals with the order of examination.
5.
Section 139 deals with the cross examination of a person called to produce a document.
6.
Section 140 provides for cross-examination and re-examinations of witnesses to character.
7.
Section 141 to 143 lay down the provisions relating to ‘Leading Questions’.
8.
Section 144 deals with Evidence as to matters in writing.
9.
Section 145 relates to cross-examination as to previous statement in writing.
10.
Section 146 speaks about the questions lawful in cross-examination. (Section 146 to 152
deals with questions which can be put to a witness with a view to shake his credit by damaging
his character.)
11.
Section 147 deals with the situation when witness to be compelled to answer.
12.
Section 148 confers on court power to decide when question shall be asked and when witness
compelled to answer.
13.
Section 149 prescribes questions not to be asked without reasonable grounds.
14.
Section 150 provides for procedure of court in case of question being asked without
reasonable grounds.
15.
Section 151 confers on court power to forbid indecent and scandalous questions.
16.
Section 152 empowers the court to forbid questions intended to insult or annoy.
64

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

17.
Section 153 deals with exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing
veracity.
18.
Section 154 deals with question by party to his own witness or Hostile witness.
19.
Section 155 deals with impeaching credit of witness.
20.
Section 156 deals with questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact, admissible.
21.
Section 157 deals with former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later
testimony as to same fact.
22.
Section 158 deals with what matters may be proved in connection with proved statements
relevant under Sections 32 or 33.
23.
Sections 159 to 161 lay down the rules relating to ‘Refreshing memory’.
24.
Section 162 deals with production of documents.
25.
Section 163 deals with giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.
26.
Section 164 deals with using, as evidence of document, production of which were refused on
notice.
27.
Section 165 confers on judge powers to put questions or order production and finally Section
166 speaks about power of jury or assessors to put questions.
Order of production and Examination of witnesses- Section 135:This section deals with the order in which witnesses are to be examined and not with the quantity or
quality of the proof.
Section 135 provides that the order in which witnesses are to be produced and examined before court.
As per this section the order of the witnesses shall be regulated by the law and practice for time being
relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively, and in the absence of any such law, by the
discretion of the court.
{The relevant legal provisions are enshrined in – Orders XVIII and XLI of the code of civil
procedure,1908 and Chapters XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI and XXIX of the code of criminal
procedure,1973.}
Examination of witness- Stages in examination of witnesses- Section 137:Stages in the examination of witness consists of the following stages:
Examination in chief or chief examination- (The examination of a witness by the party who
calls him shall be called his examination-in-chief).

Cross examination- (The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his
cross-examination).

Re-examination-(The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross examination by the
party who called him, shall be called his re-examination).

Examination in chief
Examination in chief- it means examination of a witness called by the party. If the advocate for the
plaintiff introduces witnesses in support of his case and examines them, it is called’ Examination in
Chief’.
Similarly, in case of the defendant’s side examination is the first stage. It is infect viva voce
examination, where questions are put to the witnesses on either side by their counsels in a
chronological order.
In Chief .examination, no leading questions can be put except in certain special cases. Leading question
is one, which suggests the answer. So in examination in Chief only relevant questions should be asked.

65

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Cross examination
Cross examination: - The examination of a witness by the opposite party is called ‘cross examination’.
Cross examination is considered as the most powerful weapon. According to Philip Wendell, it is
double edged weapon, if you know how to wield, it helps to cut enemy’s neck. Otherwise, it cuts
one’s own hands.
Cross examination must relate to relevant facts and leading questions may be asked. A witness may be
cross examined as to previous statements made by him in writing or reduced in writing.
When a witness is cross examined, he may be asked any question which tends:
To testify his correctness,

To discover, who he is, and what is his position, and

To shake his character.
These questions cannot be asked in examination-in –chief.

Re-Examination
Re-Examination:- After cross-examination is over, the party, who called the witness feels, necessary,
may once again examine the witness. Re-examination cannot be claimed as a matter of right, except
with the permission of the court. The purpose of re -examination is to explain any new matters raised
in cross-examination, but not to prove ant other fact .It refers to matters in cross-examination, and
new matter with permission of the court.
Leading questions should not be asked in re-examination except in the following cases:
If not objected by the opposite party,

With the permission of the court.

Already sufficiently proved matter (undisputed)
The other (Adverse) party may further re-cross examine the witness.

Leading questions
Leading questions (Sections 141-143):Sections 141 to 143 of chapter x deals with ‘Leading questions’.

Section 141- deals and defines leading question- according to it the expression ‘Leading
question’ literally means “a question. Which by itself suggests the answer as expected by the person
asked/ put the same”. Or in another words – any question suggesting the answer which the person
putting it wishes or expects to receive is called a leading question.

Examples:1.
Do you reside in such a place?
2.
Is not your name so and so?
3.
Did you see A enter B’s shop and take a watch?
When leading questions must not be asked-Section 142:According to this section leading questions must not be asked in Examination-in-Chief or in Reexamination except with the permission of the court.
66

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or undisputed, or which
have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
Objection to leading questions is not that they are illegal but that they are unfair. The rule excluding
leading questions is intended to prevent unfairness in the conduct of the inquiry. The Act gives
absolute discretion to court to allow or disallow leading questions.
When leading questions must be asked Section 143:According to section 143 of the Evidence act, leading question may be asked in cross-examination.
The reason why leading questions are allowed to be put to an adverse witness in cross-examination is
that the purpose of a cross-examination is that the purpose of a cross-examination being to test the
accuracy, credibility and general value of the evidence given, and to sift the facts already stated by the
witness, it sometimes becomes necessary for a party to put leading questions in order to elicit facts in
support of his case, even though the facts so elicited may be entirely unconnected with facts testified
to in an examination-in-Chief.
Leading questions can be freely asked in cross-examination:
“First and principally, on the supposition that the witness has a bias in favour of the party bringing
him forward, and hostile to his opponent.
Secondly, that the party galling a witness has an advantage over his adversary, in knowing beforehand
what the witness will prove, or at least is expected to prove, and that, consequently, if he were allowed
to lead, he might interrogate in such a manner as to extract only so much of the knowledge of the
witness as would be favorable to his side, or even put a false gloss upon the whole.

Exclusion of Evidence
Exclusion of Evidence Section 153:This section deals with ‘Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity
(correctness). According to it:- When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which
is relevant to the inquiry only in so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
evidence shall be given to contradict him, but if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be charged with
giving false evidence.
Explanation 1:- If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any crime and denies
it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Explanation 2:- If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality, and answers it
by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustrations:- A claim againsed an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud.
The claimant is asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies
it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim.
The Evidence is inadmissible.
Object: The object of the section is to prevent trials being spun out to an unreasonable length. If
every answer given by a witness upon the additional facts mentioned in section 146 could be made the
subject of fresh inquiry, a trial might never end. These matters are after all not of the first importance,
beyond what is comprised in the exceptions.
Principle:- When a witness deposes to facts which are relevant, evidence may be given in
contradiction of what he has stated. But when what he deposes to affects only his credit, no evidence
to contradict him can be led for the sole purpose of shaking his credit by injuring his character.
However, a witness answering falsely can be proceeded against for giving false evidence under section
193 of the I.P.C. There are two exceptions to this: - 1. Previous conviction when denied can be proved
by section 298 of Cr.P.C. and any fact tending to impeach his impartiality when denied can be proved.
67

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

Hostile witness
Hostile witness Section 154:- Section 154 of the Evidence Act, 1872 speaks about ‘Hostile witnesses.
Section 154 deals with Questions by party to his own witness.
According to this section- The court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to
put any questions to him, which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
Such condition arises where a party calling a witness and examining him discovers that he is either
hostile or unwilling to answer questions put to him, he can obtain permission of the court to put
questions to him which may be put to him by way of cross-examination
The word ‘hostile’ literally means “unfriendly”. A witness is generally expected to give evidence in
favour of the party by whom he is called. But, in certain cases such witness may unexpectedly turn
hostile and gives evidence or makes statements againsed the interest of the party, who has called him.
Such witness is called “hostile witness”. He is also known as “Adverse witness” or “unfavorable
witness”. A hostile witness is one who from the manner in which he gives evidence shows that he is
not desirous of telling the truth to the court.
Where the witness is adverse to the party called him, such party is not entitled as of right to crossexamine the witness. The matter is entirely in the discretion of the court whether to permit the person
calling the witness to put any questions to him, which might be put by the adverse party in crossexamination. Before putting such questions, the party must take permission of the court.
The concept of the hostile witness has been explained by the Apex court in – Sat Paul v/s Delhi
Administration. AIR 1976 SC, 303.
In this case, an officer was charged / tried for taking bribe.
A trap was laid by the anti-corruption department. The office of the accused was raided after the bribe
money was supposed to have been passed on to him. The evidence of the witness and of the inspector,
who participated in the trap, was rejected on the ground that they were interested in the success of
their trap. Two other witnesses, who were supposed to be independent, made contradictory
statements and the prosecution, with the permission of the court cross-examined them. Then, the
question of the value of their evidence arose.
The court said that “a hostile witness is described as one who is not desirous of telling the truth at the
instance of the party calling him and an unfavorable witness is one called by a party to prove a
particular fact, who fails to prove such fact or proves an opposite fact”.
The court also remarked that in view of the uncertain nature of the expressions the draftsman of the
Indian evidence Act have not felt it making necessary that the court shall grant permission to a party
to cross-examine his own witnesses.
The court laid down that even when a witness is cross-examine by the party who called him, his
evidence cannot be treated as washed off from the record altogether. The court can still rely upon that
part of the testimony of the witness, which inspires confidence and credit. On the facts of the case,
however the court found that the credit of the witness was substantially shaken and, therefore, it was
not safe to rely on them.
Impeaching credit of witness Section 155:- The court relies upon the evidence given by the witness
to arrive at the truth or falsity of the claim or charge in the litigation. Sometimes, the witness called by
the party turns hostile and it is not safe to rely upon such evidence. Then, the parties may be provided
with an opportunity to give independent testimony by impeaching the credit of witness.
This section enables the parties to give independent testimony as to the character of a witness in order
to indicate that he is unworthy of belief by the court. Its provisions apply to both criminal and civil
cases.
Section 155 of the Indian Evidence act, 1872 deals with “Impeaching credit of witness”
68

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

According to it:- The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following ways by the adverse party,
or, with the consent of the court, by the party who calls him:1.
By the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of the witness, believe
him to be unworthy of credit;
2.
By proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a bribe, or has received
any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
3.
By proof of former statement inconsistent with any part of his evidence which is liable to be
contradicted.
Explanation: - A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may not, upon his
examination –in –Chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his reasons in crossexamination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted,though,if they are false, he may
afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Illustration:- A is indicted for the murder of B.
C says that B, when dying, declared that A had given B the wound of which died.
Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, C said that the wound was not given by A or
in his presence.
The evidence is admissible.

Refreshing memory
Refreshing memory Sections 159-161:- Sections 159 to 161 of the Evidence Act, 1872 lay down the
provisions relating to “refreshing memory”.
Section 159 provides for use of the material by a witness to refresh his memory.
Section 160 provides for testimony to facts stated in document as mentioned in section 159.
Section 161 deals with “rights of adverse parties as to writing used to refresh memory”.
When a witness is examines, by putting certain questions connected to the case, her may not be able to
answer /reply promptly as he would not recollect the points. Then, the witness is given an opportunity
to ‘refresh his memory’ by referring any writing or document. The refreshing of memory is intended to
enable the witness to recollect the exact facts pertaining to the case, in the interest of the justice.
Generally, there is a long gape between the date of the incident and commencement of legal
proceedings. During this gape, the memory of the witness is likely to fade and its becomes necessary to
refresh their memory. Generally, the doctors, police officers and other professional experts, who deal
with a number of cases regularly, find it difficult to remember the facts unless certain time is given for
the purpose.

Rule of refreshing memory
Rule of refreshing memory (Sections 159-161): Sections 159 to 161 of the Act, provide for certain
rules to enable the witnesses to refresh their memory as follows:
The witness is permitted to refer his own writing at the time of the transaction. The court does
not prescribe any precise time. It may allow even a few weeks, for the purpose (Section 159).

The witness is also permitted to refer the writings made by others. He must read such other
writing within a prescribed time (Section 159).

The court permits the witness to refer to a copy of the document to refresh his memory. The
witness must prove it as a true copy of the original (Section 159).

An expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional treaties.

The witness need not have specific recollection of the facts (Section 160).
69

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

161).

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

The adverse party has a right to inspect the writing and to cross-examine the witness (Section

Other provisions (Section 156) – Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact,
admissible
When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any relevant fact, he may be
questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or near to the time or place at which
such relevant fact occurred, if the court is of the opinion that such circumstances, if proved, would
corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the relevant fact which he testifies.
Principle: - It is well settled law that even where the evidence of the complainant is quite credible, no
conviction can be based on such evidence unless it is corroborated by independent material.
{“M.G. Thatte V/S State Of Maharashtra 1993 Cr.LJ 2878(Bom.)}”This section permits the court to
allow a witness, who is testified to a relevant fact, to corroborate his testimony by deposing to any
circumstances which he observed at or near the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred.
The frame of the section indicates what questions are to be asked in examination-in-chief. In most
cases, it paves the way for cross-examination, which, if successful, brings out contradiction, but which,
if unsuccessful, must inevitably result in corroboration. Like contradiction, corroboration is meant to
test the truthfulness of a witness.
According to Section 157 of the act- Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate
later testimony as to same fact.
Principle: -A witness former statement relating to the same fact made at or about the time when the
fact took place may be proved in order to corroborate his present testimony. There are only two things
which are essential for the section to apply. The first is that a witness should have made a statement
earlier with respect to the same fact at or about the time when the fact took place or before any
authority legally competent to investigate the fact. But in order to make the former statement
admissible it is not necessary that the witness to be corroborated must also say in court in his
testimony that he had made the former statement.
Any former statement- means such statement may be written or verbal, on oath, or in ordinary
conversation. A witness’s accounts books, duly kept in the ordinary course of business, may be used
under this section.
At or about the time when the fact took place- These words mean that the statement must be made
at once or at least shortly after when a reasonable opportunity for making it presents itself. What is
reasonable time is a question of fact in each case. The object of the section is to admit statements made
at a time when the mind of the witness is still so connected with the events as to make it probable that
his description of them then would be accurate. But if time for reflection passes between the event and
the subsequent statement, it not only can be of very little value but may be actually dangerous as such
statements can be easily brought into being. Such delayed statements are inadmissible.
“In Mahabir singh V/S State of Haryana AIR 2001 SC 2503- “The supreme court construed the
words “at or about the time when the fact took place”.
What matters may be proved in connection with proved statement relevant under section 32 or
33 (Section 158)-- Whenever ant statement, relevant under section 32or 33, is proved, all matters
may be proved, either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or confirm the
credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that person had been
called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the matter suggested.
Section 32 and 33 of the Act permit the putting in of statements, oral or written, or statements made
in a judicial proceeding, by a person who cannot be examined as a witness. The legislature intends by
this section to submit such statements to the tests of contradiction and corroboration, in the same way
as if those statements were made by the witness in the box. No sanctity attaches to such statements
70

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

simply because the person is dead or cannot be examined as a witness. His credibility may be
impeached or confirmed in the same manner as in the case of a living witness.

Production of documents
Production of documents (Section 162)—A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is
in his possession or power, bring it to court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its
production or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objections shall be decided upon by the
court.
The court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of state, or take other
evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
Translation of documents:-If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be
translated, the court may, if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence, and if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall be held to
have committed an offence under section 166 of the I.P.C.
Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice (Section 163):- When a party
calls for a document of which he has given the other party notice to produce, and such document is
produced and inspected by the party calling for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the
party producing it requires him to do so.
This section is applicable to criminal trials as well as to civil actions. A party can call for a document
during trial. The court has a discretion whether or not to order disclosure.
Using, as evidence, of document, production of which was refused on notice (Section 164):When a party refuses to produce a document of which he has had notice to produce, he cannot
afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the party or the order of the court.
Illustration:- A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, A calls for the
document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks to produce
the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order to show that the
agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.
Principle:- If a party having a document in his possession refuses to produce it when called upon at the
hearing to do so, he is not at liberty afterwards to give the document in evidence for any purpose
without – the consent of the other party, or the order of the court. This is meant as a penalty for unfair
tactics. The C.P.C.- O XI, r.15, makes a similar provision.
This section does not contemplate the production of a document for inspection. It contemplates that
one party should call upon another party in court to produce a document of which the first party has
given the other party notice to produce.
Judge’s power to put questions or order production (Section 165):- The judge may, in order to
discover or to obtain proper proof of relevant facts, ask any question he pleases, in any form, at any
time, of any witness, or of the parties, about any fact relevant or irrelevant, and may order the
production of any document or thing, and neither the parties nor their agents shall be entitled to make
any objection to any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the court, to cross-examine any
witness upon any answer given in reply to any such question.
Provided that the judgement must be based upon facts declared by this act to be relevant, and duly
proved.
Provided also that this section shall not authorize any judge to compel any witness to answer any
question or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or
produce under sections 121to 131, both inclusive, if the questions were asked or the documents
were called for by the adverse party. Nor shall the judge ask any question which it would be improper

71

Class –LL.B (HONS.) V SEM.

Subject – Indian Evidence Act

for any other person to ask under section 148 or 149, nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of
any document, except in the cases hereinbefore excepted.
Principle- This section is intended to arm the judge with the most extensive power possible for the
purpose of getting at the truth. The effect of this section is that in order to get to the bottom of the
matter before it, the court will be able to look at and enquire into every fact whatever.
Power of jury or assessors to put questions (Section 166):- In cases tried by jury or with assessors,
the jury or assessors may put any questions to the witnesses, through or by leave of the judge, which
the judge himself might put and which he considers proper.

Of Improper Admission and Rejection of Evidence
Of Improper Admission and Rejection of Evidence: - Chapter XI containing section 167 of the
Evidence Act, 1872 deals with improper admission and rejection of evidence.IT says, “No new trial for
improper admission or rejection of evidence” and runs as follows.
The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be a ground of itself for a new trial or
reversal of any decision in any case, if it shall appear to the court before which such objection is raised
that, independently of the evidence objected to and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify
the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the
decision.
Object:- The object of the sectionis that the court of appeal or revision should not disturb a decision
on the ground of improper admission or rejection of evidence, if in spite of such evidence, there are
sufficient materials in the case to justify the decision. In other words, technical objections will not be
allowed to prevail, where substantial justice appears to have been done.
Principle:- The improper (a) admission, or (b) rejection, of evidence is no ground for a new trial, or
reversal, of any decision, if—

In the case of improper admission- there is sufficient evidence to justify the decision,
independently of the evidence objected to and admitted, or

In the case of improper rejection—the decision could not be varied, if the rejected evidence
had been received.
The provisions of this section are made applicable by the clearest possible words to all judicial
proceedings in or before any court. The section applies to civil cases and to criminal cases whether or
not the trial has been had before a jury.

72

