LAW OF EVIDENCE
LIST OF CONTENTS
I: Introduction and Relevancy
a. Evidence and its Relationship with the Substantive and Procedural Laws
b. Definitions: Facts, Facts in Issue, Relevant Fact, Evidence Proved, Disproved, not Proved,
Oral and Documentary Evidence, Factum Probandum and Factum Probans, Proof and
Evidence
c. Theory of Relevancy: i. Logical Relevancy, Legal Relevancy, Admissibility and Reliability
ii. Facts not otherwise Relevant (Plea of Alibi) – Sections 5 to 44
d. Doctrine of Res Gestae
e. Test Identification Parade
f. Conspiracy
II: Statement – Admissions / Confessions and Dying Declarations
a. Admissions – Sections 17 to 23
b. Confessions – Sections 24 to 30
c. Dying Declarations- Section 32
III: Method of proof of facts
a. Presumptions – Sections 79 to 90A
b. Expert Opinion – Sections 45 to 51
c. Oral and Documentary evidence – Sections 59 to 100
d. Burden of Proof – Sections 101 to 114A
e. Estoppel – Sections 115 to 117
f. Privileged Communications - 120, 122, 126 and more
IV: Emerging Areas in the Law of Evidence
a. Evidence by Accomplice – Section 133
b. Definition of Witness, Witness Protection Scheme
c. Examination of Witness, Cross Examination, Leading Questions and Hostile Witness –
Sections 135 to 166
d. Refreshing Memory
e. Impact of Forensic Science: Evidentiary Value in DNA Test, Narco-analysis.

Overview and the Meaning of the Indian Evidence Act
This Act is also referred to as the Indian Evidence Act 1872 and it extends to the whole of
India (except the State of Jammu and Kashmir) and is applicable to all judicial proceedings
and Courts Martial. However, if the court martial is done under- Army Act, the Naval
Discipline Act, the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934, and the Air Force Act, then it will
have no application over these laws. It may also be noted that Evidence Act does not apply on
affidavits presented to any Court or Officer, nor does it apply to any proceedings before an
arbitrator. The Act contains 167 Sections and 11 Chapters
After 15 August 1947 The Indian Evidence Act continued to be in force in India(except
Jammu & Kashmir) and Pakistan. But in 1984, Pakistan annulled this act and replaced it with
‗The Evidence Order‘ also know by the urdu name ―Qanun-e-Shahadat‖. This act is mainly
based on the work of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen who was an English lawyer, judge and a
writer. At times he is called as the ―Father of the Indian Evidence Act‖.
The Indian Evidence Act 1872 makes provisions for rules with respect to evidence in all
judicial proceedings before the court of law. There are two basic principles of trial in all
judicial systems. Firstly, it must ensure that the concerned parties to the case are given full
opportunity to prove their case, and secondly, every dispute must come to an end. These two
rules must be placed side by side in a balanced manner, and this is done by blending of
procedural laws and rules of evidence.
Criminal charges often may lead to serious consequences for the accused. Therefore, in
criminal cases, the level and importance of evidence (proof) required to resolve a case is very
high. It is a strict requirement and the party alleging the crime or the accused must prove the
claim beyond all reasonable doubt. Therefore, a case that goes to trial must be robust in its
legal submissions with respect to these evidence and should be able to prove the claim being
made by the accused party.
A case which goes to trial must be strong in its legal submission and satisfy the Court of the
claims made by producing evidence. To do this, there are certain documents and objects that
are taken into consideration while deciding on a matter of evidence. The Law of Evidence
governs this aspect of criminal proceedings.The law has also established that certain types of
documents and certain articles of evidence have more impact than others, and would prove
the claim convincingly. This can be done by producing relevant documents, or eye-witnesses

to the offending incident or circumstantial evidence that increases the probability
of the incident.
Proof is anything that can make a person believe whether a certain assertion is true or false. It
is different from evidence in a manner that proof is a broad term including everything that
may be illustrated at a trial, whereas evidence is a narrow term describing certain types of
proof that can be admitted at trial. This can be done by producing relevant documents, or eyewitnesses to the offending incident or circumstantial evidence that increases the probability of
the incident.

I. INTRODUCTION AND RELEVANCY
The Indian Evidence Act is divided into three main parts or Scheme of the Act


Relevancy of Facts (what to prove)– Sections 5 to 55



Mode of Proof (how are the relevant facts to be proved) – Sections 56 -117, and



Production and Effect of Evidence (by whom and in what manner must the evidence
be produced) – Sections 118-167

a. Evidence and its relationship with the Substantive and Procedural Law
Laws may be divided into Substantive and Procedural laws. The laws by which rights, duties
and liabilities are defined are known as Substantive Laws. For instance, IPC (which defines
several offences and also lays down certain punishments for such offences). The laws which
prescribe the mode by which the application of the substantive law is regulated are known as
Procedural Laws, e.g. CRPC. The procedural laws are further divided into two parts
Firstly, there are rules for dealing with the various procedures to be followed in a Court of
Law.
Secondly, there are rules about dealing with the mode of the proof of the existence or
otherwise of rights, duties, and liabilities e.g. Evidence Act.
The objective of every judicial investigation is enforcement of some rights and liabilities
which invariably depends on certain facts. Law of evidence is a system of rules for
ascertaining the contradicted questions of facts in judicial inquiries. The substantive law
defines what facts go on to constitute a right or liability. The law of evidence investigates into
these facts and as a procedural law it provides inter alia, how a fact is to be proved.

b. Definitions:
Section 3 in The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 – Interpretation Clause
In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following senses, unless a
contrary intention appears from the context:— ―Court‖. —―Court‖ includes all Judges 1 and
Magistrates, 2 and all persons, except arbitrators, legally authorized to take evidence. ―Fact‖.
—―Fact‖ means and includes—
Section 3(1) any thing, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being perceived by the
senses;
Section 3 (2) any mental condition of which any person is conscious. Illustrations
Section 3 (2) (a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is
a fact.
Section 3 (2) (b) That a man heard or saw something, is a fact.
Section 3 (2) (c) That a man said certain words, is a fact.
Section 3 (2) (d) That a man holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good
faith, or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a specified
time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact.
Section 3 (2) (e) That a man has a certain reputation, is a fact.
―Relevant Fact‖. —One fact is said to be relevant to another when the one is connected with
the other in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Act relating to the relevancy
of facts.
―Facts in issue‖. —The expression ―facts in issue‖ means and includes— any fact from
which, either by itself or in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature,
or extent of any right, liability, or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding,
necessarily follows.
Explanation.— Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in force relating
to Civil Procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be asserted or denied in the
answer to such issue, is a fact in issue.
―Document‖. —―Document‖ means any matter expressed or described upon any substance by
means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used,

or which may be used, for the purpose of recording that matter. A writing is a document;
Words printed, lithographed or photographed are documents; A map or plan is a document;
An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document; A caricature is a document.
―Evidence‖ .— ― Evidence‖ means and includes—
Section 3(2)(e)(1) All statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by
witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry, such statements are called oral
evidence;
Section 3(2)(e)(2) all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of
the Court, such documents are called documentary evidence.
―Evidence Proved‖ .—A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before
it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable that a prudent
man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it
exists.
―Evidence Disproved‖. — A fact is said to be disproved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence so
probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon
the supposition that it does not exist.
―Evidence Not proved‖. — A fact is said not to be proved when it is neither proved nor
disproved.
It is pertinent to mention that in the law of evidence ‗Facts‘ include(i) the factum probandum (i.e. principal fact to be proved) and
ii) the factum probans (i.e. the evidentiary fact from which the principal fact follows
immediately or by inference)
c.Theory of Relevancy – Section 5 to Section 44
The concept of relevance is one criterion that governs the admission and use of evidence in a
judicial inquiry. If the evidence does not relate directly or indirectly to the case at hand, it
should not be regarded or admitted as proof for either the prosecution or the defence.
―Relevant Evidence is evidence that makes a fact more or less likely to be true than it would

be without the evidence.Irrelevant evidence may be excluded for unfair prejudice, confusion,
or waste of time. Relevant evidence is generally admissible and irrelevant evidence is never
admissible. The two leading principles on relevance are:
1) that nothing is to be received which is not logically probative of some matter requiring to
be proved; and
2) that everything which is thus probative should come in, unless a clear ground of policy or
law excludes it. Relevancy exists as a relation between an item of evidence and a proposition
sought to be proved.‖
(i)Logical Relevance V/s Legal Relevance
Statement made by the accused affecting probability of the fact in issue or relevant fact, is
admissible in evidence. Such statement may or may not be relevant under any other section
pertaining to the relevancy of fact. If such statement affects the probability of fact in issue or
relevant fact it is relevant under section 11 of Evidence Act. This section deals with the
theory of logical relevancy. The object is to bring within the sphere of relevancy all facts,
which can throw some light on the fact in issue or relevant fact. It is an exception to other
provision relating to the relevancy of fact. This provision of law can be pressed into service
whenever other sections are not attracted.
A fact is said to be logically relevant to another when it bears such a causal relation with the
other as to render probable the existence or non-existence of the latter. As stated above, all
facts which are logically relevant are not legally relevant. One fact is said to be legally
relevant to another, only when the one is connected with the other in any of the ways referred
to in Sections 5 to 55 of the Evidence Act.
Logical relevancy is broader than legal relevancy. All facts which are legally relevant is
logically relevant, but every fact which is logically relevant may not necessarily be legally
relevant. Thus, a confession made to a police officer may appear to be logically relevant, but
such a confession is not legally relevant, for Section 25 of the Act declares that it cannot be
used as evidence against the person making it.
The Indian Evidence Act lays down, in Sections 5-55, what facts are relevant; but the mere
fact of logical relevancy does not ensure the admissibility of a fact. Thus, all evidence that is

admissible is relevant, but all that is relevant is not necessarily admissible. Thus, oral
statements which are hearsay may be relevant, but if not direct evidences, are not admissible.
Legal relevancy is, for the most part, based upon logical relevancy, but it is not right to say
that all that is logically relevant is necessarily legally relevant and vice versa. Certain classes
of facts which, in ordinary life, are relied upon as logically relevant are rejected by law as
legally irrelevant. Cases of exclusion of logically relevant facts by positive rules of law are:
(i) Exclusion of oral by documentary evidence: Sections 91-99.
(ii) Exclusion of evidence of facts by estoppel: Sections. 115-117.
(iii) Exclusion of privileged communications, such as confidential communications with a
legal adviser, communication during marriage, official communications, etc.: Sections 121130.
Admissibility & Reliability
Admissibility means that facts which are relevant are only admissible by the Court.
According to section 136 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, however, the final discretion on
the admissibility of evidence lies with the judge. Section 136 states that:
―When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask the party
proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if proved, would be relevant;
and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved, would be relevant,
and not otherwise. If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible
only upon proof of some other fact, such last- mentioned fact must be proved before evidence
is given of the fact first- mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact,
and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking. If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends
upon another alleged fact being first proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit
evidence of the first fact to be given before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to
be given of the second fact before evidence is given of the first fact.‖
The essential ingredients of the above section are:
 It is the judge who decides the questions of relevancy and admissibility.


 When a party proposes to adduce evidence of any fact, the judge may ask the party to
clarify ‗in what manner‘ the fact would be relevant.
The judge would ‗admit‘ the particular fact only if he is satisfied with the answer of the party
that it is, indeed, relevant under one or the other provisions of S. 6 to 55. Thus the
consideration of relevancy comes first and of admissibility later and the judge will admit the
fact only if it is relevant.‖
In the case of Ram Bihari Yadav v. State of Bihar1, the Supreme Court observed that ―More
often the expressions ‗relevancy and admissibility‘ are used as synonyms but their legal
implications are distinct and different as facts which are relevant are not admissible; so also
facts which are admissible may not be relevant, for example questions permitted to put in
cross examination to test the credibility of the witnesses, though not relevant are admissible.
The probative value of the evidence is the weight to be given to it which has to be judged
having regards to the fact and circumstances of each case.‖
Section 9 of the Law of Evidence Act, 1872, lists down some facts which can be treated as
relevant.
In the case of LakshmandasChaganlal Bhatia v. State2, the court laid down the following to
be relevant facts:
Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact;
Facts which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or a relevant fact;
Facts which establish the identity of anything or person whose identity is relevant;
Facts which fix the time and place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened;
Facts which show the relation of parties by whom any fact in issue or relevant fact was
transacted.
Another section of the Evidence Act which deals with admissibility is Section 11. Section 11
deals with those facts which are not otherwise relevant but become relevant if they are
consistent with any relevant fact or they make the existence or non-existence of any relevant
fact highly probable or improbable.
1
2

AIR 1998 SC 1850.
AIR 1968 Bom.

In Sheikh Ketab-Uddin v. NagarchandPattak3, it was held, that where the executants of an
archive holding presentations of boundaries of land are alive and don‘t give their evidence,
such archives are not acceptable under this segment.
However, there are limitations to Section 11. According to R. v. Prabhudas, ―the court must
exercise a sound discretion and see that the connection between the fact to be proved and the
fact sought to be given under S.11 to prove it, must be so immediate as to render the coexistence of the two highly probable. The section makes admissible only those facts which
are of great weight in bringing the court to a conclusion one way or the other as regards the
existence or the non-existence of the fact in question. The admissibility under this section
must, in each case, depend on how near is the connection of the facts sought to be proved
with facts in issue and to what degree do they render facts in issue probable or improbable
when taken with the other facts in case. There must always be room for the exercise of
discretion when the relevancy of the testimony rests upon its effect towards making the
affirmative or negative of a proposition ‗highly probable‘, and, with any reasonable use of the
directions, the court ought not to interfere.‖
(i) Exclusion of oral by documentary evidence: Ss. 91-99.
(ii) Exclusion of evidence of facts by estoppel: Ss. 115-117.
(iii) Exclusion of privileged communications, such as confidential communications with a
legal adviser, communication during marriage, official communications, etc.: Ss. 121-130‖
(ii) Facts not otherwise relevant – Plea of alibi
According to Section 11 of the Act—
Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant—
(i) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(ii) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or nonexistence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Explanation
(i) If they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact
3

(1927) AIR 230 (Cal).

If one fact is inconsistent with the other, they cannot co-exist. Under this clause facts are
relevant only because they cannot co-exist with fact in issue or relevant fact.
Alibi
Alibi is a Latin word, which means ―elsewhere‖. It is used when the accused takes the plea
that when the certain incident took place he was elsewhere. In such a situation the
prosecution has to discharge the burden satisfactorily. Once the prosecution is successful in
discharging the burden it is incumbent on the accused who takes the place of alibi to prove it
with absolute certainly. An alibi is a rule of evidence recognized by Section 11 of the
Evidence Act that facts inconsistent with fact in issue are relevant. However, it cannot be the
sole link or sole circumstance to bare conviction. When one fact is necessary to the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, but strikingly absent in the chain of circumstantial
evidence, the prosecution case certainly will fail.
Example:
X is accused of Y's murder on a particular day at Pune. On that day X was at Bombay,
is relevant to prove alibi . He (X) has to prove that it would be impossible for him to
commit murder at Pune as he was in Bombay on the occurrence of the offence.
The Supreme Court in Dudh Nath Pandey v. State of U.P.4, , it was stated that the plea of
alibi postulates the physical impossibility of the presence of the accused at the scene of
offence by reason of his presence at another place. The plea can therefore succeed only if it is
shown that the accused was so far away at the relevant time that he could not be present at the
place where the crime was omitted.
(d) Doctrine of Res Gestae
Section 6 of the Indian Evidence Act states: ―Facts which, though not in issue, are so
connected with a fact in issue as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether
they occurred at the same time and place of at different times and places‖. The principle of
law stated in Section 6 is usually known as the Doctrine of Res Gestae.
Res gestae, was originally used by the Romans to mean ―acts done‖ or ―actus‖. The English
and American writers described it as facts that form the same transaction. Res gestae are
4

(1986) 2 SCC 166.

those facts which automatically or naturally form a part of the same transaction.They are the
acts which speak for themselves. These facts become relevant due to their association with
main transaction which itself is a relevant fact in the nature of fact in issue. Circumstantial
facts are admitted as forming a part of res gestae i.e. it being a part of original proof of what
has taken place. Statements may also accompany physical happenings like gestures. Things
said or acts done in course of transaction amounts to res gestae.
Example
Suppose A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club. Here the transaction
is the crime of murder. That A beat B with a club, that A caused B';s death, that A had
an intention of causing B';s death are all in issue and form parts of the same
transaction, and evidence can always be given of such facts in issue under Section 5. But
the words uttered by A at or about the time of beating, or words uttered by B or by
persons standing by, at or about the time of beating, are not in issue. But they also form
parts of the same transaction. No one beats another silently, nor would the person
beaten be silent while he was being beaten, nor would persons standing by watch
silently. The transaction includes all these utterances and, though not in issue, form part
of the transaction of murder, which is the subject of enquiry, and therefore are relevant
under this section.
The section provides that if a part of the transaction is a fact in issue, then evidence can
be given of every other part of the transaction either because such other part is also in
issue and therefore evidence of it is permissible under S.5, or because such other part is
relevant under S.6, and therefore, under S.5 evidence can be given of it. The question
that arises is how to find out whether a fact forms part of the same transaction as the
fact in issue.
According to Section 6, the facts forming a part of the same transaction may or may not occur
at the same place or same time. For example in the case of Ratten v. Queen5, the victim
(wife) had called the police for help but before operator could connect her to the police, her
call was disconnected. Later the police found her dead body from her house from where the
call was made and the time of death and the time of phone call was almost the same. The call

5

(1972) A.C. 378.

made to the police came under the purview of section 6 and thereby defeated the accused
husband‘s defence that he accidentally fired his wife.
(e ) Test Identification Parade
Section 9 of the Indian Evidence Act states –
Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which support or
rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which establish the identity
of anything or person whose identity is relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in
issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of parties by whom any such fact
was transacted, are relevant in so far as they are necessary for that purpose.
Identification is an important process in the administration of justice. Where the Court has to
know the identity of anything or any person, any fact, which establishes such identity, is
relevant. The identity of person can be established by the evidence of persons, who know
him. Identification parades are held for the purpose of identifying the persons concerned in an
offense or the properties, which are subject matter of an offense.
During the course of investigations, test identification parades are arranged by the police
either in jail or at some other place. Certain individuals are brought to such a place and the
accused person mixed with them. Section 9 Provides for the Identification "parade of
persons" The purpose of Identification test is to test the memory and accuracy of a witness,
who claims to identify an accused person, who is said or belived to have participated in a
crime.
(f) Conspiracy
Section 10 of Evidence Act states that –
Things said or done by conspirator in reference to common design:Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more person have conspired together
to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done, or written by any one of
such person in reference to their common intention, after the time when such intention was
first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against each of the person believed
to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the existence of the conspiracy as for
the purpose of showing that any such person was a party to it.

Section 10 deals with the admissibility of evidence in a conspiracy case. It is based on the
―theory of implied agency.‖ It says that anything said or done or written by any member of
conspiracy is evidence and admissible against the other if it relates to the conspiracy. This
section has to be read with Section 120A of the Indian Penal Code. When any conspirator has
assumed to do any act of conspiracy in furtherance of common design, it is a part of res
gestae. All conspirators must have ―common intention‖ at the time when the thing was said,
done or written. Confessions by accused made after the object of the conspiracy is carried out
are not relevant as the common intention was not then existing.
Essential elements:
1) There must be an agreement between two or more persons who are alleged to conspire,
and
2) The agreement should be to do or cause to be done:
(i) An illegal act, or
(ii) An act which is not illegal but by illegal means.
II: Statement – Admissions/Confessions and Dying declarations
c. Admissions – Section 17 to Section 23
Admission plays a very important role in judicial proceedings. If one party to a suit or any
other proceeding proves that the other party has admitted his case, the work of the court
becomes easier and simpler. An Admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person
making it under certain exceptional circumstances. The Evidence Act, Sections 17 to 23
deals with the Admissions.
Section 17 of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 states that: ―An admission is a statement, oral or
documentary or [contained in electronic form (Amendment w.e.f. 17/10/2000)] which
suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by any of
the persons and under the circumstances hereinafter mentioned."
There are three parts of the definition:
1) It defines term "admission"

2) It says that an admission will be relevant only if it is made by any of the person
specified in the Act.
3) "Admission" is Relevant only in the circumstances mentioned in the Act.
Characteristics of Admission:
To qualify as an admission, the following characteristics are to be present as per definition
stated above.
1) It may be oral or documentary
2) It is a statement to suggest any inference to any fact in issue or relevant fact.
3) It must be made by any person prescribed under the Act; and
4) It must be made under the circumstance prescribed under the Act.
The admission must be clear and unambiguous. Such an admission is admissible because of
the following reasons:
a) Admission as a waiver of proof;
b) Admission as a statement against interest;
c) Admission as evidence of contradictory statement;
d) Admission as evidence of truth.
Admission is the best substantive evidence that an opposite party can rely upon.
Who can make admissions? – Sections 18 to Section 20
Section 18. Admission- by party to proceeding or his agent
―Statements made by party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such party, whom the
Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorized by
him to make them, are admissions.‖
An Admission is relevant if it is made by:
1) A party to the judicial proceeding;
2) An agent authorized by such party.

3) A party suing or being sued in a representative character making admission while holding
such character.
4) A person who has a proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the suit
during the continuance of such interest.
Section 19 - Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as against party to
suit
―Statements made by persons whose position or liability it is necessary to prove as against
any party to the suit are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as against such
persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by or against them, and if
they are made whilst the person making them occupies such position or is subject to such
liability.‖
An admission is also relevant if a person whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove
against any party in a suit; if such statements would be relevant in a suit brought by or against
himself owing to his position or liability during the suit.
Section 20. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit
―Statements made by persons to whom party to the suit has expressly referred for
information in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.‖
Admission is relevant from a person to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred for
information in reference to a matter in Dispute.
In the case of ChekhamKoteshwara Rao v. C. Subbarao, AIR 1981, SC held that

Before the right of a party can be taken to be defeated on the basis of an alleged
admission by him, the implication of the statement must be clear and conclusive.



There should not be any doubt or ambiguity.



Further, it held that it is necessary read all of his statements together and hence, stray
elements elicited in cross examination cannot be taken as admission.

Uses of Admission
Section 21. Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf

―Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes them, or his
representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the person who makes
them or by his representative in interest, except in the following cases:
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it is of such a
nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as between third persons
under section 32.
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when it consists of a
statement of the existence of any state of mind of body, relevant or in issue, made at or about
the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by conduct rendering
its falsehood improbable.
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is relevant
otherwise than as an admission.
Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person Who makes them or
 His representative in interest and
 Not by or on behalf of the person
 Who makes them or by his representative in interest
Except in following cases:


It is of a nature that the person making it, if were dead, it would be as relevant as
between third persons u/s 32 of the code



It consists of a statement of existence of any state of mind or body,



It is relevant otherwise than as an admission

Section 22. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.
―Oral admissions as to thecontents of a document are not relevant, unless and until the party
proposing to prove them shows that heis entitled to give secondary evidence of the contents of
such document under the rules hereinaftercontained, or unless the genuineness of a document
produced is in question.‖
Section 22A. When oral admission as to contents of electronic records are relevant.

―Oral admissions as to the contents of electronic records are not relevant, unless the
genuineness of the electronic record produced is in question.‖
Section 23. Admissions in civil cases when relevant.
―In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition that
evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer that
the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.‖
Explanation. –Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any barrister, pleader, attorney
orvakil from giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence
undersection 126.
b. Confessions – Sections 24 to Section 30
The law relating to confession is to be found generally in sections 24 to 30 of the Indian
Evidence Act and section 162 and 164 of code of Criminal Procedure. Since ―Confession‖ is
a type of Admission‖, it is dealt with in sections 24 to 30. These sections directs towards the
circumstances when a confession is made by a person, which can be used against him or
against some other person or just cannot be used at all. The dictionary meaning of the word
―Confession‖ is ―an acknowledgement ofoffence.‖
Confession means a statement made by an accused admitting his guilt or crime. It is an
admission as to the commission of an offence. If a person accused of an offence makes a
statement against himself, it is called confession or confessional statement. Confessions are
the special form of admissions. Thus it is popularly said that "All Confessions are
admissions, but all Admissions are not confessions.
Section 24- Confession caused by inducement, threat or promise, when irrelevant in
criminalproceeding.
―A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if
themaking of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat or promisehaving reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from
a person in authority andsufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person
grounds which would appear to himreasonable for supposing that by making it he would gain

any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against
him.‖
In State of Haryana v. Rajinder Singh6, it was held that a confession must be true and
voluntary. Where the statement though recorded by a magistrate merely stated about the
assault on the deceased that it was a mistake and did not admit his guilt, it was not a
confession that could be used against its maker.
A confessional statement must be looked as a whole and it would not be right to take isolated
portions of it, and to consider whether any of them amounts to an admission of guilt or not. It
is true that the confessional statement is found to be voluntary and free from pressure, it can
be accepted. But it all depends on the facts and circumstances of each case and no hard and
fast rule can be laid down in this connection whether a particular alleged confessional
statement should be accepted.
In Palvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab & Haryana7, the Supreme Court has also held that
confession and admission must either be admitted as a whole or rejected as a whole and the
Court is not competent to accept only the inculpatory part while rejecting the exculpatory part
as inherently incredible.
Inculpatory Evidence: Any evidence favourable to the prosecution is inculpatory. It is the
evidence that establishes the guilt of an accused. It indicates that a defendant committed a
crime. Inculpatory evidence shows, or tends to show, a defendant's involvement in an act. For
example, if a man is stabbed to death by a knife and if such knife is found in possession of
such wife then that knife will be considered as inculpatory evidence against the wife.
Exculpatory Evidence: Any evidence that is favourable to the defendant in a criminal trial is
considered exculpatory. If, during the police investigation preceding trial, a witness was
interviewed who claimed that another person, not the defendant, committed the crime, that
witness interview is exculpatory evidence. Another example of exculpatory evidence would
be DNA evidence on a knife in a murder case that links another individual to a crime.
Essential conditions for Confessions:

6
7

396 1996 SCALE (2)488.
1953 SCR 94.

From the above discussions a statement of an accused will amount to a confession if it fulfils
the following conditions:
(1) The accused must admit that he had committed the crime.
(2) From the statements of the accused some positive inferences must be drawn about his
implication in the offence where the accused in so many words admits to have committed the
offence.
(3) If the exculpatory part of the statement given by the accused is inherently improbable it
may be rejected and inculpatory part may be admitted.
(4) The confession must be voluntary, true and trustworthy.
(5) The confession must not be prompted by inducement, threat or promise. A statement
could not be said to be result of any threat, coercion or inducement by police or any other
person.
Section 25 Confession to police-officer not to be proved.
No confession made to a police-officer, shall be proved as against a person accused of any
offence.
Section 26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against
him.
No confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be
made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such person.
Explanation.
In this section ―Magistrate‖ does not include the head of a village dischargingmagisterial
functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 5*** or elsewhere, unless such headman is
aMagistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal
Procedure,18826 (10 of 1882).]
Section 27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.
Provided that, when anyfact is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information
received from a person accused of anyoffence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of

such information, whether it amounts to aconfession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact
thereby discovered, may be proved.
Section 28. Confession made after removal of impression caused by inducement, threat
or promise,relevant.
If such a confession as is referred to in section 24 is made after the impression caused by
anysuch inducement, threat or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed, it
is relevant.
Section 29. Confession otherwise relevant not to become irrelevant because of promise
of secrecy,etc.
If such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become irrelevant merely because it
wasmade under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a deception practiced on the
accused person forthe purpose of obtaining it, or when he was drunk, or because it was made
in answer to questions whichhe need not have answered, whatever may have been the form of
those questions, or because he was notwarned that he was not bound to make such
confession, and that evidence of it might be given againsthim.
Section 30 - Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others
jointly under trial for same offence.
When more persons than one are being tried jointly for the same offence, and a confession
made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the
Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other person as well as
against the person who makes such confession.
Explanation. –―Offence‖ as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or attempt to
commit,the offence.
Kinds of Confession
There are four kinds of Confession, are as follows:
1) Judicial confession
2) Extra-Judicial Confession
3) Retracted Confession

4) Confession by co-accused
1) Judicial confession: A Judicial Confession is that which is made before Magistrate or in a
court in the due course of judicial proceeding. Judicial Confession is relevant and is used as
an evidence against the maker provided it is recorded in accordance with provisions of
Section 164 of Cr.P.C.The magistrate who records a confession under Section 164, Criminal
Procedure Code, must, therefore, warn the accused who is about to confess that he may or
may not be taken as an approval. After warning the accused he must give time to think over
the matter and then only record the confession. Such a confession is called judicial
confession.
2) Extra-Judicial Confession: Extra-Judicial Confession is made not before a Magistrate or
any Court in due course of judicial proceeding, but is made either to police during the
investigation or into police custody or made otherwise than to the police. Extra-Judicial
confession is not relevant.
3) Retracted Confession: The Accused person who confessed earlier and later denied it, such
confession does not destroy the evidentiary value of the confession as originally recorded.
The Supreme Court has stated that a Retracted confession may form the basis of a conviction
if it receives some general corroboration from other independent evidence. But if the court
finds that the confession originally recorded was voluntary, it should be acted upon.
4) Confession by co-accused:Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it
and others jointly under trial for the same offense (Section 30). When more than one persons
are being tried jointly for the same offense, and a confession made by one of such persons
affecting himself and some other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into
consideration such confession as against such other person as well as against the person who
makes such confession.
c. Dying Declarations - Section 32
A Dying Declaration means the statement of a person who has died explaining the
circumstances of his death. It can be said to be a statement made by a mortally injured
person, indicating who has injured them and/or the circumstances surrounding their injury.
The injured is aware that he/she is about to die and while the declaration is hearsay, it is
admissible since it is believed that the dying person does not have any reason to lie.

Such a statement can be proved when it is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as
to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death. The statement will
be relevant in every case or proceeding in which the cause of that person‘s death comes into
question.
Clause (1) of Section 32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person who is
dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant.
Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot
be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be
procured without an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case,
appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the following cases:
1) When it relates to cause of death- When the statement is made by a person as to the cause
of his death, or as to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death,
in cases in which the cause of that person’s death comes into question.
(2) Or is made in course of business:
When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course of business, and in
particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him in books kept in the
ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional duty; or of an
acknowledgment written or signed by him of the receipt of money, goods, securities or
property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce written or signed by him; or of the
date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or signed by him.
(3) Or against interest of maker:
When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making it,
or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to a criminal prosecution or
to a suit for damages.
(4) Or gives opinion as to public right or custom, or matters of general interest:
When the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public
right or custom or matter of public or general interest, of the existence of which, if it existed
he would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement was made before any
controversy as to such right, custom or matter had arisen.

(5) Or relates to existence of relationship:
When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship [by blood, marriage or
adoption] between persons as to whose relationship [by blood, marriage or adoption] the
person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and when the statement was
made before the question in dispute was raised.
(6) Or is made in will or deed relating to family affairs:
When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship [by blood, marriage or
adoption] between persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed relating to the affairs
of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in any family pedigree, or upon
any tombstone, family portrait, or other thing on which such statements are usually made,
and when such statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(7) Or in document relating to transaction mentioned in section 13, clause (a):
When the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which relates to any
such transaction as is mentioned in section 13, clause (a).
(8) Or is made by several persons, and expresses feelings relevant to matter in question:
When the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed feelings or impressions
on their part relevant to the matter in question.
Sharad Birdi ChandSarda v. State of Maharashtra8– Under Indian law it is not necessary that
the declarant should be under any expectation of death i.e. apprehension of death is not
necessary nor it is important that statement shall be made to a magistrate. If the declarant has
infact died and the statements explains the circumstances surrounding the cause of his death
the statement will be relevant even if no cause of death had arisen at the time of making of
the statement.
In the case of Kans Raj v. State of Punjab9, the Apex Court stated that Section 32 (a) of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 does not require that the statement sought to be admitted in
evidence should have been made in immediate expectation of death.

8
9

AIR 1984 SC 1622.
2000 5 SCC 207.

In the case of Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab10, statement made to Police when
injured was making good recovery was treated as dying declaration when he died.
Some other important cases pertaining to Dying declarations:
Corroboration of a dying declaration
There is neither a rule of law nor of prudence that dying declaration cannot be acted upon
without corroboration. If the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and voluntary,
it can base conviction on it, without corroboration. However, where dying declaration is
suspicious it should not be acted upon without corroborative evidence.
In the case of Ram Manorath v. State of U.P.11, the Supreme Court observed that a dying
declaration that suffers from infirmity cannot form the basis of conviction.
Can a brief dying declaration be considered evidence?
The Court has to scrutinize the dying declaration carefully and must ensure that the
declaration is not the result of tottering prompting of imagination and the deceased had
opportunity to observe and identify the assailants and was in a fit state to make the
declaration.
In the case of SurajdeoOza v. State of Bihar12, SC answered this question in the negative and
held that merely because dying declaration is a brief statement it is not to be discarded. On
the contrary, the shortness of the statement itself guarantees the truth.
Eye witness prevails over and above medical opinion
In the case of Nanuhau Ram v. State of Madhya Pradesh13, the Supreme Court was of the
opinion that normally the Court in order to satisfy whether deceased was in a fit mental
condition to make the dying declaration looks up to the medical opinion. But where the
eyewitness has said that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make this dying
declaration, the medical opinion cannot prevail.
Time factor between statement of dying declaration and death
There has be a proximate relationship between the statement and the circumstance of death

10

1983 3 SCC 470.
1981 SCC (Cri) 581.
12
1980 Supp SCC 769.
13
AIR 1988 SC 912.
11

In the case of Sharad Birdi ChandSarda v. State of Maharashtra14 the declarant i.e. a married
woman had been speaking to her parents and other relatives and also writing to them
expressing the danger to her life. She lost her life three or four months after that. The Court
held that the statement and time of death were not too remote in time from the point of death.
In this case, the Court also held that Section 32 (a) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is
applicable to cases of suicide also.
Dying declaration would not lose its value on the ground that the deceased survived long
after making dying declaration
Dying declaration as a substantive evidence
In the case of Ram Bihari Yadav v. State of Bihar15, recognized dying declaration as a
substantial piece of evidence while opining that though dying declaration is an indirect
evidence being a specie of hearsay evidence, yet it is an exception to the rule against
admissibility of hearsay evidence. The Court stated that it is a substantive evidence and like
any other substantive evidence requires no corroboration for forming basis of conviction of
an accused.
III: Method of Proof of Facts
a. Presumptions as to Documents – Section 79 to Section 90A
Meaning of Presumptions.
"Presumption is an inference of fact drawn from other known or proved facts. It is a rule
which treats an unknown fact as proved on proof or admission of certain other facts. It means
a rule of law that courts shall draw a particular inference from a particular fact or from
particular evidence, unless and until the truth of such inference is disapproved.
There are two kinds of presumptions:
1. May Presume - Presumptions of fact are permissive in the sense that the court
hasdiscretion to draw or not to draw them. They are also rebuttable as their evidentiary
valuemay be negated by contrary proof. Thus these presumptions afford a provisional
proof.That a person found in possession of stolen property soon after the theft is either the

14
15

AIR 1984 SC 1622.
(1998) SCC (Cri) 1085.

thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen is a presumption is a presumption
of this type.
2. Shall presume -They are always obligatory; and a judge cannot refuse to draw such
presumption. Such presumptions are either (i) rebuttable, or (ii) irrebuttable. Rebuttable
presumptions of law are indicated by the expression ―shall presume‖. They hold goodunless
and until there is contrary evidence, e.g., the court shall presume the genuinenessof every
Government publication. (section 84).
Section 79 - Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies
The Court shall presume to be genuine every document purporting to be a certificate,
certified copy, or other document, which is by law declared to be admissible as evidence of
any particular fact, and which purports to be duly certified by any officer of the Central
Government or of a State Government, or by any officer in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
who is duly authorized there to by the Central Government:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed in the
manner directed by law in that behalf. The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom
any such document purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed, the official
character which he claims in such paper.
When a certifiedcopy of a document is produced before the court as evidence of the original
in circumstances inwhich secondary evidence is admissible the law presumes that the copy is
a genuine reproduction of the original. This presumption is raised by section 80. The effect of
the presumption is that if anybody alleges that the certified copy is not genuine, the burden of
proving that fact lies on him,for the court presumes genuineness. For this presumption to
arise, it is necessary that the copyshould haven certified by an officer of the Central or State
Govt. or by an officer in the State of J&K, who is duly authorized by the Central
Government. Secondly, the document should besubsequently in the form, if any, prescribed
by law and should also purport to be executed in thatmanner.
Section 80 - Presumption as to documents produced as records of evidence
Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record or
memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a judicial

proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take such evidence or to be statement
or confession by any prisoner or accused person taken in accordance with law, and
purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid, the
Court shall presume that the document is genuine; that any statements as to the
circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are
true, and that such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
It is necessary for this presumption to arise that a person shouldhave recorded his evidence
before a court of law before any officer authorized by law to ta1esuch evidence, or that a
person accused of any officer authori7ed by law to ta1e such evidence, or that a person
accused of any crime has recorded his confession in accordance with the law, and acopy of
the statement has been signs by the judge, magistrate or other officer before whom
thestatement was recorded.
Section 81 - Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, private Acts of Parliament and
other documents.
The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be the London
Gazette, or any official Gazette or the Government Gazette of any colony, dependency or
possession of the British Crown, or to be a newspaper or journal, or to be a copy of private
Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom printed by the Queen’s Printer and of every
document purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such
document is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper
custody.
Every document which purports to be a newspaper or journal. In spite of this presumption, it
has been held by the Supreme Court that newspaper reportsdo not constitute admissible
evidence of their truth. The presumption, of genuinenessattached under Section 81 to a
newspaper report cannot be treated as a proof of the facts reportedtherein. A newspaper
report cannot be the basis of filing a writ petition. The statement of afact contained in
newspaper is merely a hearsay and therefore inadmissible in evidence
There is the new amendment added in this Section in the form of Section 81(A), which
reads:

The Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic record purporting to be the
Official Gazette or purporting to be electronic record directed by any law to be kept by any
person, if such electronic record is kept substantially in the form required by law and is
produced from proper custody.
This section mainly says that the court has to presume the genuineness of any
electronicrecord purporting to be the official Gazette or purporting to be the electronic record
directed bylaw to be kept in accordance with the form required by the law and is produced
from proper custody.
Section 82. Presumption as to document admissible in England without proof of seal or
signature.
When any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a document which, by
the law in force for the time being in England or Ireland, would be admissible in proof of any
particular in any Court of Justice in England or Ireland, without proof of the seal or stamp
or signature authenticating it, or of the judicial or official character claimed by the person by
whom it purports to be signed, the Court shall presume that such seal, stamp or signature is
genuine and that the person signing it held at the time when he signed it, the judicial or
official character which he claims; and the document shall be admissible for the same
purpose for which it would be admissible in England or Ireland.
Section 83. Presumption as to Maps or Plans made by authority of Governmentsums up
as the following:
Maps or plans purportingto be made with the authority of the central or any State
Government are presumed to beaccurate. Maps or plans made for the purpose of any cause
must, of course, be proved to beaccurate. 3here the site plan and inventory prepared on behalf
of a former ruler was not produced in its original state, the Supreme Court did not allow any
objections to be raised aboutthe matter in the Supreme Court.
Section 84. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisionsdeduces that
The court presumes the genuineness of every boo1 purportedto be printed or published under
the authority of the government of any country, and whichcontains any of the laws of that

country. The same presumption is raised in reference to boo1s published by the State which
contains report of decided cases.
Section 85. Presumption as to powers of attorney.
The Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a power-of-attorney, and to
have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary Public, or any Court, Judge,
Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central Government, was
so executed and authenticated.
Section 85A. Presumption as to electronic agreements.
The Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement
containing the electronic signatures of the parties was so concluded by affixing the electronic
signature of the parties.
Section 85B. Presumption as to electronic records and digital signatures.
(1)In any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume unless
contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been altered since the specific
point of time to which the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure electronic signature, the Court shall presume unless
the contrary is proved that(a) the secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of signing or
approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature, nothing
in this section shall create any presumption, relating to authenticity and integrity of the
electronic record or any electronic signature.

Section 85C. Presumption as to Digital Signature Certificates.
The Court shall presume, unless contrary is proved, that the information listed ina Electronic
Signature Certificate is correct, except for information specified as subscriber information
which has not been verified, if the certificate was accepted by the subscriber.

Section 86. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.
The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of any judicial
record of any country not forming part of India or of Her Majesty’s dominions is genuine and
accurate, if the document purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any
representative of the Central Government in or for such country to be the manner commonly
in use in that country for the certification of copies of judicial records.
Section 87. Presumption as to Books, Maps and Charts.
The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on matters of
public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the statements of which are
relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and published by the
person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been written or
published.
Section 88. Presumption as to Telegraphic Messages.
The Court may presume that a message, forwarded from a telegraph office to the person to
whom such message purports to be addressed, corresponds with a message delivered for
transmission at the office from which the message purports to be sent; but the Court shall not
make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was delivered for
transmission.
Section 88A. Presumption as to electronic messages.
The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator through an
electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to be addressed
corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the Court shall
not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.
ExplanationFor the purposes of this section, the expressions ―addressee‖ and ―originator‖ shall have the
same meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (b) and (za) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Section 89. Presumption as to due execution etc., of documents not produced

The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after notice to
produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.
Section 90. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.
Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced from any
custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may presume that
the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in the handwriting
of any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting, and, in the case of a document
executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by whom it
purports to be executed and attested.

ExplanationDocuments are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and under the
care of the person with whom, they would naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is
proved to have had a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case are such
as to render such an origin probable.
This Explanation applies also to section 81.
Section 90A - Presumption as to electronic records five years old.
Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced from any
custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may presume that
the digital signature which purports to be the digital signature of any particular person was
so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in this behalf.
ExplanationElectronic records are said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and under
the care of the person with whom, they naturally be; but no custody is improper if it is proved
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to
render such an origin probable.
b. Expert Opinion – Sections 45 to Section 51
OPINIONS OF THIRD PERSON WHEN RELEVANT

Section 45 - Opinions of experts.
When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law, or of science, or art, or
as to identity of hand writing or finger-impressions, the opinions upon that point of persons
specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or in questions as to identity of
handwriting or finger impressions, are relevant facts.
Such person called experts.16
Section 45A–Opinion of Examiner of electronic evidence
When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to any
information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or digital
form, the opinion of the examiner of electronic evidence referred to in section 79A of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 is relevant fact.
Section 46 - Facts bearing upon opinions of experts
Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent with the opinion
of experts when such opinions are relevant.
Section 47- Opinions as to handwriting when relevant.
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom document was written or
signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the person by whom it
is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not written or signed by that person, is
a relevant fact.
Section 47A - Opinion as to electronic signature when relevant.
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any person, the
opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the electronic Signature Certificate is a
relevant fact.
Section 48. Opinion as to existence of right or custom when relevant.
When the Court has to form an opinion as to existence of any general custom or right, the
opinions as to the existence of such custom or rights, of persons who would be likely to know
of its existence if it existed, are relevant.

16

Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab., A I R 1996 SC 755

Section 49 - Opinion as to usages, tenants etc when relevant.
When the Court has to form an opinion as to –
the usage’s and tenants of any body of men or family, the constitution and government of any
religious or charitable foundation, or the meaning of words or terms used in particular
districts or by particular classes of people, the opinions of persons having special means of
knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
Section 50 - Opinion on relationship when relevant.
When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to another, the
opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, or any person who, as
a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the subject, is a
relevant fact.17
Section 51 - Grounds of opinion when relevant.
Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on which such opinion is
based are also relevant.
c. Oral and Documentary Evidence – Sections 59 to Section 100
OF ORAL EVIDENCE
Section 59 - Proof of facts by oral evidence.
All facts, except the contents of documents or electronic records may be proved by oral
evidence.
Section 60 - Oral evidence must be direct.
Oral evidence must, in all cases, whatever, be direct; that is to say –
-if it refers to a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw
it;
-if it refers to a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
heard it;

17

Gourhari Das v. Smt. Santilata Singh reported in 1999 Orissa 61.

-if it refers to a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it
must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner; if
it refers to an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds.
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for sale,
and thegrounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production of such
treatises if theauthor is dead or cannot be found; or has become incapable of giving
evidence, or cannot be called asa witness without an amount of delay or expense which the
Court regards as unreasonable:

Provided also that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any material thing
otherthan a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of such material
thing or itsinspection.
Explanation
this section enacts the general 5nglish rule that hearsay is no evidence. Itembodies the second
important rule about oral evidence, vi7., that it must in all cases be directand not hearsay. The
section sets out the scope of the expression and direct evidence. It is true thathearsay
evidence is excluded by this section. However, this is subject to well- recognizedexceptions
(e.g., sections 17 to 39)
HEARSAY EVIDENCE AND ITS EXCLUSION
The term hearsay is ambiguous and misleading as it is used in more than one scene. In its
more generally accepted since the term hearsay is used to indicate that evidence which does
not derive its value from the credit given to the witness himself, but which rests also on the
veracity and competence of some other person. It is thus used in contradiction to ―direct
evidence‖. It is derivative evidence.
OF DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
Section 61 –Proof of contents of documents

The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary evidence.18
Law of evidence requires the best evidence must be givenin proof of the facts in issue or the
other relevant facts. Primary evidence is the best evidence.The best evidence rule is to
produce the original and secondary evidence is not admissible unlessthe original is proved to
be lost, etc, as required under Section 65.
Section 62 – Primary Evidence
Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the Court.
Explanation 1Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary evidence of the
document.
Where a document is executed in counterparts, each counterpart being executed by one or
some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as against the parties executing
it.
Explanation 2Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process, as in the case of
printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the contents of the rest; but,
where they are all copies of a common original, they are not primary evidence of the contents
of the original.
PRINCIPLE
this section defines primary evidence as the document itself produced for theinspection of the
court. Primary evidence is evidence which the law requires to be given first.The general rule
requiring primary evidence to be given of the litigated documents is based onthe best
evidence rule. (n original document is the first permanent record of a transaction. It isfirsthand evidence and presumptively the most reliable. 6esides, documents are often interlinedor
altered. Therefore, it is desirable to have the original to see if alterations are part of
thedocument or are made subsequently.
Section 63 –Secondary Evidence
18

Afzauddin Ansari v. State of West Bengal, 1997 (2) Crimes 53 Cal.

Secondary evidence means and includes1. Certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained.
2. Copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves insure the
accuracy of the copy and copies compared with such copies.
3. Copies made from or compared with the original.
4. Counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them.
5. Oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it.
The most remarkable among the types of secondary evidence by the section is the oralor
parolevidence of the contents of a document. Thus, it follows that the oral evidence of
thecontents of a document can be given. There are two conditions of a relevancy of such
evidence. Firstly, party offering oral evidence must be entitled to give secondary evidence of
suchdocument. The circumstances in which secondary evidence can be given and listed in
section 65 should exist so as to enable the party to give secondary evidence of a document in
question. Thesecond condition is that the oral account of the contents of a document must be
that of a personwho has himself seen it. Once these conditions are satisfied, the party can give
oral evidence of the contents of the document even if he has attested copy in his possession.
Section 64 - Proof of documents by primary evidence.
Documents must be proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.
This section embodies one of theunderlying principles which states that a document must be
proved by its primary evidence. Themeaning of the expression ―primary evidence‖ has been
explained in sec 62. But lest technicalconsiderations should defeat substantial justice, the
following section, namely, sec 65, embodiessituations which would sanctify secondary
evidence
Section 65 - Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.
Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition or contents of a document in the
following cases(a) When the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power–
of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved, or of any person out of
reach of, or not subject to, the process of the Court, or

of any person legally bound to produce it, and when, after the notice mentioned in Section 66,
such person does not produce it;
(b) When the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved to be admitted
in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his representative in interest;
(c) When the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering evidence of its
contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default or neglect, produce it
in reasonable time;
(d) When the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) When the original is a public document within the meaning of Section 74;
(f) When the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this Act, or by
any other law in force in India to be given in evidence;
(g) When the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot
conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general result of the
whole collections.
In cases (a), (c) and (d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the documents is
admissible.
In case (b), the written admission is admissible.
In case (e) or (f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of secondary evidence, is
admissible.
In case (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents by any person
who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
Certified copy of Will
Certified copy of will is not admissible per se in evidence. It cannot be presumed to be
primary document which could be adduced in evidence and same could be proved only by
leading secondary evidence.19
When attesting witness not necessary
19

Sampat Singh v. Bhagwanti, (2010) 5 RCR (Civil) 74 Law Herald 1186 (P&H).

Is case the document is registered then except in the case of a will it is not necessary to call
an attesting witness, unless the execution has been specifically denied by the person by whom
it purports to have been executed.
Section 65A - Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record.
The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the provisions of
section 65B.
Section 65B – Admissibility of electronic records
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any information contained in an
electronic record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or
magnetic media produced by a computer (hereinafter referred to as the computer output)
shall be deemed to be also a document, if the conditions mentioned in this section are
satisfied in relation to the information and computer in question and shall be admissible in
any proceedings, without further proof or production of the original, as evidence of any
contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which direct evidence would be
admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall be the
following, namely(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the computer during the
period over which the computer was used regularly to store or process information for the
purposes of any activities regularly carried on over that period by the person having lawful
control over the use of the computer;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic record or of the
kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly fed into the computer
in the ordinary course of the said activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer was operating properly or,
if not, then in respect of any period in which it was not operating properly or was out of
operation during that part of the period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the
accuracy of its contents;

(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived from such
information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of storing or processing information for the purposes
of any activities regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in clause (a) of subsection (2) was regularly performed by computers, whether(a) by a combination of computers operating over that period; or
(b) by different computers operating in succession over that period; or
(c) by different combinations of computers operating in succession over that period; or
(d) in any other manner involving the successive operation over that period, in whatever
order, of one or more computers and one or more combinations of computers, all the
computers used for that purpose during that period shall be treated for the purposes of this
section as constituting a single computer; and references in this section to a computer shall
be construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of this
section, a certificate doing any of the following things, that is to say,
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing the manner in
which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that electronic record
as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic record was produced by
a computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in sub- section (2)
relate, and purporting to be signed by a person occupying a responsible official position in
relation to the operation of the relevant device or the management of the relevant activities
(whichever is appropriate) shall be evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for
the purposes of this sub- section it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of
the knowledge and belief of the person stating it.
(5) For the purposes of this section,

(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer if it is supplied thereto in any
appropriate form and whether it is so supplied directly or (with or without human
intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment;
(b) whether in the course of activities carried on by any official information is supplied with a
view to its being stored or processed for the purposes of those activities by a computer
operated otherwise than in the course of those activities, that information, if duly supplied to
that computer, shall be taken to be supplied to it in the course of those activities;
(c) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer whether it was
produced by it directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment.
Section 66 - Rules as to notice to produce
Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred to in Section 65, Clause (a),
shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence has previously
given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his attorney or pleader
such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed by law, then
such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the circumstances of the case;
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to
dispense with it1. When the document to be proved is itself a notice;
2. When from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will be required to
produce it;
3. When it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession of the original
by fraud or force;
4. When the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
5. When the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
6. When the person in possession of the document is out of reach, or not subject to, thee
process of the Court.

Section 67 - Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or
written document produced.
If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by any person,
the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be in that
person’s handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
*Admissibility- Non-examination of executants of receipt admissibility of receipts not
proper.20
Section 67A - Proof as to electronic signature.
Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of any
subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record the fact that such electronic
signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.
The party, who produces a document which he alleges is executed, signed or written by
acertain person, has to prove that fact. This section merely requires proof of signature
andhandwriting of the person alleged to have signed or written the document produced.
Section 68 - Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.
If a document is required by law to be attested it shall not be sued as evidence until one
attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution if there be
an attesting witness alive, and subject to he process of the Court and capable of giving
evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of
any document, not being a will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions
of the Indian Registration Act,1908 (16 of 1908), unless its execution by the person by whom
it purports to have been executed is specially denied.

Section 69 - Proof where no attesting witness found.

20

Ramkrishna Girishchandra Dode v. Anand Govind Kelkar, 1991 (1) Bombay C.R. 63.

If no such attesting witness can be found, or if the document purports to have been executed
in the United Kingdom, it must be proved that the attestation of one attesting witness at least
is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person executing the document is in the
hand writing of that person.
Section 70 - Admission of execution by party to attested document.
The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself shall be
sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document required by law to be
attested.
If the attesting witness denies or does not remember the execution of the document, its
execution should be proved by other evidence. Where theattester was an illiterate person and
he attested by putting his thumb impression, and though it was

a conveyance by his

predecessor-in-interest, he was not bound by the document unless it could be shown that the
document was read out to him and he understood it. The Calcutta and the Allahabad High
Courts have held that the word ―admission‖ relates only to the admission of a partyin the
course of the trial of a suit, and not to the attestation of a document by the admission of the
party executing it. In other words, it has no relation to any admission of execution made
before an attesting witness without reference to any suit or proceeding.
Section 71 - Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.
If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document its
execution may be proved by other evidence.
Object


Section 71 is in the nature of a safeguard to the mandatory provisions of section 68, to
meet a situation where it is not possible to prove the execution of the will by calling
attesting witnesses though alive. Aid of section 71 can be taken only when the
attesting witnesses who have been called, deny or fail to re-collect the execution of
the document to prove it by other evidence.



Section 71 is meant to lend assistance and come to the rescue of a party who had done
his best but driven to a state of helplessness and impossibility cannot be left down
without any other means of proving due execution by other evidence as well.

If a document not required by the law to be attested has in fact been attested, its execution
may be proved as if it were not an attested document. In a case beforeMadras High Court, the
question related to the validity of a will alleged to have been madeand signed by a lady
before her death. Of the attesting witnesses only one was alive and hedenied having attested
any such will. There were two other witnesses only one was alive and hedenied having
attested any such will. There were two witnesses only. One of them was theregistrar who did
remember the woman executrix. The other witness was able to identify thesignature of her
head father who was one of the attesting witnesses. In these circumstances thecourt held that
the execution the execution of the will could not be said to have been duly proved. A
combined reading of sec 68 of the Evidence Act and Section 63 of the succession Actwould,
therefore, suggest that at least one attesting witness should be examined and he shouldspeak
not only of the testator‘s signature but also that the other witnesses signed thewill in his
presence. Where this is not done, the will cannot be said to have been proved.
A will which have not been proved in accordance with the requirements of Section 68 cannot
be used even for somerelationship or for the existence or absence of some other rights in the
property.
Where the attesting witness of a will was not produced for the fear that he might go against
the claimant‘s interest, the Allahabad High Court held that it could not be said that the
witness had denied knowledge so as to attract provisions of section 71. The section is
attracted when the attesting witness, who is available, denies attestation. Other evidence then
becomes permissible. The scribe testified as to the scribing of the ―will‖ by him and
attestation by two witnesses. This statement was held to be coming under Section 71. A
subsequent will executed by the testator made specific mention of theexecution of the will in
question. The execution of the will by the other evidence was taken to be proved.
Section 72 - Proof of document not required by law to be attested.
An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it was unattested.
Section 73 - Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.
In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing or seal is that of the person by whom it
purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing or seal admitted or proved to
the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may be compared

with the one which s to be proved, although that signature, writing, or seal has not been
produced or proved for any other purpose. The Court may direct any person present in Court
to write any words or figures for the purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or
figures so written with any words or figures alleged to have been written by such person.
This section applies also with any necessary modifications, to finger-impressions.
Power of Court
(i) The court is entitled to make a comparison of disputed and admitted signature for just
conclusion as a rule of prudence expert opinion can be obtained. Reasons necessary to reach
conclusion.
(ii) It is within jurisdiction of court to instruct a party to submit his writing or signature
enabling court to compare and decide the case, if the instructions are not followed court is
free to presume what is most closer to justice.
(iii) It is not open for court to compare handwriting and or a signature of its own. Services of
experts are liable to be taken for this purpose.
(iv) Under the law the court has power to compare signatures or handwriting strengthening its
findings based on other cogent material and evidence on record.
When the court has to satisfy itself whether thesignature or whether the signature or seal on a
document is genuinely that of a person whosesignature or seal it purports to be, the court may
compare the same with another signature or sealwhich is admitted or proved to be that of the
person concerned. This principle is laid down in Section 73. In so doing the court does not act
as an expert. Modes of proving handwriting havealready been considered before. Comparison
by the court of the handwriting with a proved or admitted handwriting is one of those
methods which are recognized by this section. It isnecessary that the writing to be used as a
standard should be properly proved to the satisfactionof the judge to be the handwriting of the
person concerned. An application for appointment of an expert for verification of signature
should be rejected where the application is disputing his signature. An application for this
purpose can be made at any stage of the trial.This section enables thecourt to require the
person concerned to write any words or figures to enable the court tocompare them with

words or figures in question. The principle of the section also applies tofinger
impressions.Ordinarily the court should in such cases ta1e the help of an expert.
Section 73A - Proof as to verification of digital signature.
In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it purports to
have been affixed, the Court may direct(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the Digital Signature
Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate and
verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that person.
Section 74 - Public documents.
The following documents are public documents(1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the acts(i) of the sovereign authority,
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive, [of any part of India or of the
Commonwealth], or of a foreign country;
(2) Public records kept in any State of private documents.
Sections 75 - Private documents.
All other documents are private.
A private document, such as, for example, an application for a licence, which is filed in
government office and is produced there from does not become a public document so as to
dispense with the necessity of proof by primary evidence. A post-mortem report is not public
document so as to amount to proof of identity of the deed without producing the doctor in
evidence.
A private sale deed which is recorded in the office of the sub-registrar is a public document.
This should be compared with a decisionof the GauhatiHigh Court where it was held that a

private sale deed registered under the Indian Registration Act is not a public document and,
therefore, a certified copy is not admissible inevidence under Section 77 of the Evidence Act.
Explaining the meaning of public records, the courtsaid - ―Public records are those records
which a government unit is required by law to keep, or which it is necessary to keep in
discharge of duties imposed by law. The court overruled itsown earlier decision and followed
the Privy Council decision in Gopal Das v. Thakurji,21 where their Lordships held that the
original receipt executed by any individual andregistered under the Indian Registration Act is
not ―a public record of public document, withinthe meaning of Section 74(2), as the original
has to be returned to the party under Section 61(2) of the Registration Act.
Section 76 - Certified copies of Public Documents.
Every public officer having the custody of a public document, which any person has a right to
inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the legal fees therefor
together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such
document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officers with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed whenever
such officer is authorised by law to make use of a seal, and such copies so certified shall be
called certified copies.
Section 77 - Proof of documents by production of certified copies.
Such certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public documents or
parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.
Section 78 - Proof of other official documents.
The following public documents may be proved as follows(1) Acts, orders or notifications of the General Government in any of its departments, or of
the Crown Representative or of any State Government or any department of any State
GovernmentBy the records of the departments, certified by the heads of those departments respectively, or

21

AIR 1943 PC 83 @ 87.

By any document purporting to be printed by order of any such Government or as the case
may be, of the Crown Representative.
(2) The proceedings of the LegislaturesBy the journals of those bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies
purporting The Orient Tavern be printed by order of the Government concerned.
(3) Proclamations, orders or regulations issued by Her Majesty or by the privy Council, or
by any department of Her Majesty’s GovernmentBy copies or extracts contained in the London Gazette, or purporting to be printed by the
Queen’s Printer.
(4) The Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign countryBy journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country as such, or by
a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a recognition thereof in
some Central Act.
(5) The proceedings of a municipal body in a StateBy a copy of such proceedings certified by the legal keeper thereof of by a printed book
purporting to be published by the authority of such body.
(6) Public documents of any other class in a foreign countryBy the original, or by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof with a certificate under the
seal of a notary public, or of an Indian consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer having the legal custody of the original and upon proof of the
character of the document according to the law of the foreign country.
Section 91 deals with the Evidence of terms of Contracts, grants, and other dispositions
of property reduced to form of document, which reads:
When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property have been
reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is required by law to
be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof of the terms of such
contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter, except the document itself,

or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary evidence is admissible
under the provisions herein before contained.
Exception 1When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing, and when it is shown that
any particular person had acted as such officer, the writing by which he is appointed need
not be proved.
Exception 2Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants or dispositions of
property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which they are contained
in more documents than one.
Explanation 2Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be proved.
Explanation 3The statement, in any document whatever of a fact other than the facts referred to in this
section shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the same fact.
Where the fact to be proved is embodied in a document, the document is the best evidence of
the fact. Such fact should, therefore, be proved by the document itself, that is, by the primary
or secondary evidence of the document. According to the High Court of Delhi, itdid not
permit oral evidence of the contents of a partition deed which was inadmissible being not
registered.Once it is shown that the original document is not admissible in evidence because
of insufficiency of stamps, secondary evidence by way of oral statement or Xerox copycannot
be allowed. Allowing the party to confront the witnesses with Xerox copy of suchevidence
was held to be not permissible.The section forbids the proof of the contents of awriting
otherwise than by the writing itself. The section embodies the best evidence rule,
thusdeclaring a doctrine of substantive law. Even a third party, who is see1ing to prove a
written contract, can prove it only by producing in writing. In this respect Sections 91 and 92

complement each other. They are both based on the ―best evidence rule‖, though they differ
in some material particulars also.
The Supreme Court held in Jahuri Sah & Ors v. Dwarka Prasad Jhunjhunwala & Ors22, that
a deed of the adoption of child is not a contract within the meaning of section 91 and,
therefore, the fact of adoption can be proved by any evidence apart from the deed. So is true
of a will. Further, the principle of exclusion of all other evidence applies only to the terms
happens to be mentionedin a contract, the same can be proved by any other evidence than by
producing the document. Where both oral as well as documentary evidence are admissible on
their own merits andhave been admitted, the court may go by the evidence which seems to be
more reliable. There isnothing in the act requiring that the documentary evidence should
prevail over the oral evidence.
Section 92 – Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement
The principle laid down in Section 92 suggests that when the terms of any such document
have been proved by the primary or secondary evidence of the document, no evidence of any
oral agreement or statement shall be admitted, as between the parties to the document or their
representatives, for the purposes of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from the
terms of the document. In other words, no oral evidence can be given to qualify the terms of
the document and their representatives-in-interest from giving oral evidence concerning the
contents of the document. Other parties left free to give such evidence. The amount which
appeared due on a promissory note was not allowed to be contradicted by showing that the
promise had only agreed it need not be paid.
The court followed Bai Hira Devi v. Official Assignee of Bombay,23 where it was held that
―in the case of a conveyance, it would not be open to either of the parties to the document to
provethat, if the consideration was mentioned as Rs.10,000, in fact the consideration was less
or more.
Patent Defects (Sections 93 and 94)
Patent ambiguity is dealt with in Sections 93 and 94. A patent ambiguity means adefect
which is apparent on the face of the document. The document is apparently defective. Any
22
23

1967 AIR 109.
AIR 1958 SC 448.

person reading the document with ordinary intelligence would at once observe the defect. In
suchcases the principle is that oral evidence is not allowed to remove the defect. The reason
for therule is that the document being clearly or apparently defective, this fact must be or
could have been 1nown to the parties and if they did not care to remove it then it is too late to
remove itwhen a dispute has arisen.
Section 93 summarizes it as - if the documenthad mentioned no price at all, oral evidence of
the price would have been allowed under Section 92 asto a matter of the fact on which the
document is silent but not when the document mentions priceof ambiguous nature. So
extrinsic evidence can be given to remove patent defect. Where alease deed left blanks at the
place where the date of commencement should have beenmentioned, but in another part it
said that the first instalment of rent would be paid on a certaindate, the Allahabad High Court
held that the date of the payment of the first instalment couldreasonably be fixed as the date
of commencement. A contract for the sale of a part of theland of 5 acres, described the part to
be sold as ―one acre of a front land‖. It was held that whatconstituted the ―front land‖ for this
purpose was ascertainable. There was no confusion about thelanguage used and, therefore,
Section 93 was not attracted.
Section 94 deals with the Exclusion of evidence against application of document of existing
fact and explains as below:
When the execution of the document has been admitted and no vitiating fact has been proved
against it. Where the document in question was a record of the proceeding of the board and
contained an admission under signature of the parties, it was held that an admission could be
explained by the maker of it and, therefore, oral evidence of explanatory nature was
admissible.
Latent Defects – Section 95 to Section 97
Meaning of Latent Defects:
Latent defect means a defect which is not apparent on the face of the record. The document
makes a plain reading. There is nothing apparently wrong with its language. But when an
attempt is made to apply it to the facts stated in it, it comes out that it does not accurately
apply to those facts. Thus the defect is not in language used in the document, but in the

application of the language to the facts stated in it, such a hidden defect is known as a latent
defect.
Section 95 deals with the Evidence as to document unmeaning in reference to existing
fact and reads asWhen language used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference to existing
facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
When the language of a document is plain but in its application to the existing facts it is
meaningless, evidence can be given to show how it was intended to apply to those facts.
Where for example, a house isagreed to sell by a written deed. The house is described to be
located at a particular place or in particular city. It turns out that the seller has no house at that
place or in that city, but has a house in a nearby place and that has also been in the occupation
of the buyer. Evidence can be given toshow that such a house was meant to be sold.
Section 96 deals with the Evidence as to application of languages which can apply to one
only of several persons, and states:
When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply to any one,
and could not have been meant to apply to more than one of several persons or things
evidence may be given of facts which show of those persons or things it was intended to apply
to.
Where a promissory note mentioned a date according to the local calendar and also according
to the international calendar, but the two dates turned out to be different, it was held that
evidence could be offered to show which date was meant.
Section 97deals with the Evidence as to application of languages to one of two sets of facts
to neither of which the whole correctly applies to, and states:
When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts and, partly to another set of
existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence may be given to
show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
The principle of the section is that where the language of a document applies toone set of
facts and partly to another, but does not apply accurately to either, evidence can begiven to
show to which facts the document was meant to apply.

Section 98 deals with the Evidence as to meaning of illegible character, etc. and states:
Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly intelligible
characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical, local or provincial expressions, of abbreviations
and of words used in a peculiar sense.
This section permits evidence to be given of the meaning of words or marks of illegible
character or words which are not commonly of intelligible character, foreign words, obsolete
words, technical, local and provincial expressions, abbreviations words used in a peculiar
sense. For instance, an artist agrees to sell ―all his models‖. Evidence can be given to show
whether he, meant to sell all his models or modelling tools. Oral evidence is admissible for
the purpose of explaining artistic words and symbols used in a document(7).
Section 99 states Who may give evidence of agreement varying term of document.
Person who are not parties to document, or their representatives in interest may give
evidence of any fact tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the terms of the
document.
The parties to a document or their representative-in-interest cannot give evidence of a
contemporary agreement varying the terms of the document. This disability is quite clearly
contained in Section 92. But this provision is modified by Section 99 in this extent that
evidence of such anoral agreement can be given by a third party if he is affected by it.
Section 100 - Saving of provisions of India Succession Act relating to wills.
Nothing in this Chapter contained shall be taken to affect any of the provisions of the
Succession Act (X of 1865) as to the construction to wills.
d. Burden of Proof - Sections 101 to Section 114A
In simple terms, Burden of Proof is the responsibility to prove the fact in a case. Each party
must provide a fact that will either stand for or against the case.
The term Burden of Proof is used to explain two major facts or burdens. The first is the
Burden ofproduction of the burden of ―going forward with the evidence‖ and the burden of
plea orpersuasion.The burden of plea or persuasion is the responsibility that rests on the
single party through the period of the court sittings. The party carrying the burden can only
succeed in its claims once it has absolutely satisfied the ―tier of fact‖.

For one to be presumed innocent in the court of law over a criminal case, the prosecution is
faced with the burden to prove elements of the offense and disprove all defences excluding
defences with affirmation which constitutionally are not required in the prosecution of the
case. The evidential burden should not be confused with the burden of persuasion. Evidential
Burden can change hands between parties during the court proceedings. The evidential
burden is only raised to provide enough evidence against a case in the court.
Section 101 states,
Whoever wants the court to proffer judgment to a legal case or right based on the availability
of facts, must prove those facts beyond any reasonable doubt.
When a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof
lies on that person.
Supreme Court in a case between Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab.24stated that in allcriminal
case, the responsibility of proving if the accused had committed the crime beyond
allreasonable doubt rests on the prosecution and if it fails to establish concrete evidence to
shed off the burden, it cannot depend on the evidence brought by the accused on defence in
the case. The prosecution does not rely on the evidence of the accused to convict the
defendant.
Section 102 says,
In a case brought before the court, the burden of proof lies who has the tendency to fail if no
evidence is supplied before the court from either of the parties.
In a case between Triro v.Dev Raj25, because of the delay in constructing the suit, the
defendant had prayed the court over a limitation of the period. The position of the plaintiff
was to know the cause of the delay and the burden of proving if the case was within the given
period was on the plaintiff.
Section 103 – Burden as to a fact

24
25

A I R 1996 SC 755
A I R 1993 J&K 14

The burden of proof to a fact rests on that person who desires the court to believe in the
existence of such fact unless a law authorizes the proof of the fact to be established by any
particular individual.
The principle of this section states that once a party desires the court to accept and act based
on the existence of a fact, he must prove that fact. This principle is called ―rule of
convenience of the burden of proof‖‘ and is contained in sections, 104, 113, 113a and 114a.
Section 104 – Burden of proving the fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.
This is a burden of proving a fact that is necessary to be proved to allow any person to
establish evidence of any fact and is on the person who intends to establish such an evidence.
Section 105 – Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions
When a person is accused of an offense, the fact required to establish the circumstances
surrounding the case excluding General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code 45 of 1860, or
in any regulations defining it, is upon him while the court will presume the absence of such a
circumstance.
Section 106 – Burden of proving fact specially within the knowledge
When any fact confined to the knowledge of a person, the burden of proving that fact is on the
person.
Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act , which defines the burden of proving a fact, played a
key role in the conviction of controversial preacher Rampal and his followers in two murder
cases. According to this section, the burden was on the accused to prove how and in what
circumstances five innocent women and one child died inside Satlok Ashram in Barwala in
Hisar District. Though the defence tried to put the blame on police officials and the
administration, the judge observed that the statements of defence witnesses couldn‘t be relied
upon for various reasons.
Section 107 – Burden of proving the death of a person known to have beenalive within
thirty years.

In a situation of a controversy whether a person is dead or alive, and it is established that he
had been alive for the last thirty years, the burden of proving that he is not alive is on the
person who states it.
Section 108- Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been heard of for seven
years. [Provided that when] the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved
that he has not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him
if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is 2[shifted to] the person who
affirms it.
Section 109- Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and
tenant, principal and agent.
When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal and
agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving that
they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships respectively,
is on the person who affirms it.
Section 110 -Burden of proof as to ownership.
When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is shown to be in
possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person who affirms that
he is not the owner.
Section 111 - Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active
confidence. Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties,
one of whom stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the
good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Section 112 - Birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.
The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage between his
mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution, the mother
remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate son of that man,
unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any
time when he could have been begotten.
Section 113 - Proof of cession of territory.

A notification in the Official Gazette that any portion of British territory has 1[before the
commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 (26 Geo. 5, c. 2)] been ceded
to any Native State, Prince or Ruler, shall be conclusive proof that a valid cession of such
territory took place at the date mentioned in such notification.
Section 113A. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her
husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within
a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative
of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume, having regard to all the
other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by
such relative of her husband.
Explanation.
For the purposes of this section, cruelty shall have the same meaning as in section 498A of
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Section 113B. Presumption as to dowry death.
When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is
shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty
or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that
such person had caused the dowry death.
Section 114 - Court may presume existence of certain facts.
The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened,
regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and
private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
2013 AMENDMENT OF THE BURDEN OF PROOFACT
Section 114A. Presumption as to the absence of consent in certain prosecutions of rape
In a prosecution for rape subject to section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, where sexual
intercourse is proved against the accused, if the woman asserts that it was non-consensual
sex,then the court will honor the claims of the woman.

In a case between Nawabkhan and Ors. v. The State26, the court held that the person with
which the sexual intercourse is committed tells the court it was a non-consensual sex, then the
court will assume there was no consent. If the accused claims that there was a consent, then
the burden of proof lies with the accused.
The rule governing the burden of proof is that whoever lays a claim must present evidence or
proof. This rule is subject to the principles that the burden of proof rests on the party that
either asserts a claim or denies it. This implies that whoever brings a case against another to
the court must prove the fact he claims. In criminal cases, the burden of proof on defendants
is based on the evidence that is established before the court which states the fact that he
committed the crime as adduced. An accused can only be presumed guilty based on the fact
established by the plaintiff to the court in accordance with the Burden of Proof that rules the
case.
e. Estoppel – Section 115 to Sections 117S
Estoppel is based on the maxim, Alleganscontraria non estaudiendus (a person alleging
contradictory facts should not be heard) and is that kind of proesumptio juris et de jure,
where the fact presumed is taken to be true, not as against all the world, but as against a
particular party, and that only by reason of some act done, it is in truth a kind of argumentum
ad hominern.
The law for estoppel is the rule of exclusion of certain evidence under certain circumstances,
like between tenant and landlord, licensee or person in possession and licensor (Section 116),
or as between acceptor and drawer of a bill of exchange, as between Bailee and bailor and
licensor and license (Section 117). Estoppel is a procedure of ascertaining liability.
In respect of estoppels, the case of ‗Shammim Beg v. Najmunnissa Begum (AIR 2007 N.O.C.
2085 Mumbai) is quotable. In this case, a document was executed between the husband and
wife an intention that the wife has begotten before the marriage with the husband. The
husband had accepted the fact of knowing the child. The wife gave birth to a child on the day
of marriage. The husband could not challenge the legitimacy of this child. He is bounded by
his previous statements.

26

1990 CriLJ 1179.

The principle of estoppel is recognized in India as a rule of evidence incorporated under the
purview of Section 115 of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The section reads as follows:
―When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused or permitted
another person to believe such a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither he nor
his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and such
person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.‖
In the landmark judgment of Ganges Manufacturing. Co. v. Sourujmull27, the appellants, in
this case, contended that sections from 115 to 117 as given in Chapter VIII of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 lay down the only rules of estoppel which are now implemented under
the force of law in the then existing India under the British rule. They further contended that
by virtue of Section of the aforementioned Act, all rules, and doctrines of the Evidence Law
shall be repealed except those that are in the Act itself. They held that the argument becomes
an erroneous assumption that all rules of estoppel are also rules of evidence. But still, the
Court recognized the principle of estoppel being a part of the Law of Evidence, by holding
that ―Where a man has made a representation to another of a particular fact or state of
circumstances and has thereby wilfully induced that other to act upon that representation and
to alter his own previous position, he is estopped as against that person from proving that the
fact or state of circumstances was not true. In such a case the rule of estoppel becomes so far
a rule of evidence, that evidence is not admissible to disprove the fact or state of
circumstances which was represented to exist.‖
CONDITIONS FOR ESTOPPEL
1. Estoppels must be reciprocal or mutual. It must bind both parties to the litigation.
2. Estoppels cannot circumvent the Law. Hence the contractual incapacity of a minor cannot
be evaded by any estoppel against asserting his Infancy, even though he has obtained a loan
by a false representation that he was an adult. And a tenant, who fails to raise a defence that
his rent is in excess of the standard rent permitted by statute, is not estopped from making a
subsequent application to determine the lawful rent.
3. The statement that an estoppel must be clear, precise or unambiguous primarily refers to
the representation on which an estoppel by conduct may be founded.
27

ILR 1880 5 Cal 669,678 (ILR at p. 678).

4. Conflicting Estoppels cancel each other out.
5. The doctrine of promissory estoppel is an equitable doctrine and the petitioners cannot ask
the Court to apply the same to compel something which is inequitable, one who seeks equity
must do equity. In our society, the larger public must get precedence over individual interest
or interest of a comparatively smaller section of society
KINDS OF ESTOPPEL
Estoppel by record: Under this kind of estoppel, a person is not permitted to dispute the facts
upon which a judgment against him is based.
Estoppel by deed: Under this kind of estoppel, where a party has entered into a solemn
engagement by deed as to certain facts, neither he nor anyone claiming through or under him,
is permitted to deny such facts.
Estoppel by conduct:Sometimes called estoppel in pais, may arise from agreement,
misrepresentation, or negligence.
Equitable Estoppel:The Evidence Act is not exhaustive of the rules of estoppel. Thus,
although S. 116 only deals with the estoppel that arises against a tenant or licensee, a similar
estoppel has been held to arise against a mortgagee, an executor, a legatee, a trustee, or an
assignee of property, precluding him from denying the title of the mortgagor, the testator, the
author of the trust, or the assignor, as the case may be.

Estoppel by Negligence:This type of estoppel enables a party, as against some other party, to
claim a right of property which in fact he does not possess. Such estoppel is described as
estoppel by negligence or by conduct or representation or by a holding out of ostensible
authority. Such estoppel is based on the existence of a duty which the person stopped is
owing to the person led into the wrong belief or to the general public of whom the person is
one.
Estoppel on benami transactions:If the owner of property clothes a third person with the
apparent ownership and a right of disposition thereof, not merely by transferring it to him, but
also by acknowledging that the transferee has paid him the consideration for it, he is estopped

from asserting his title as against a person to whom such third party has disposed of the
property and who has taken it in good faith and for value.
Estoppel on a point of law:Estoppel refers to a belief in a fact, and not in a proposition of law.
A person cannot be stopped for a misrepresentation on a point of law. An admission on a
point of law is not an admission of a ―thing‖ so as to make the admission matter of estoppel.
Where persons merely represent their conclusions of law as to the validity of an assumed or
admitted adoption, there is no representation of a fact to constitute an estoppel.
The Supreme Court has observed that the doctrine of estoppel does not operate where the
mandatory conditions laid down by law on grounds of public policy are ignored. Thus,
estoppel would not apply against a sanction obtained by fraud or by collusion between the
parties.28
f. Privileged Communication – Section 120, 122, 126 and moreThe privilege of a witness means the right of a witness to withhold evidence to disclose
certain matters. There are certain circumstances in which certain persons are not compelled to
testify (to give evidence). The right is based on the convenience and public policy. Section
122 to Section 132 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 provide for privileged Communications.
Privileged communication, in law, is the communication between persons who have a special
duty of fidelity and secrecy toward each other. Communications between attorney and client
are privileged and do not have to be disclosed to the court. Similarly, The right of privileged
communication exists between husbands and wives in that they are not required to testify
against each other.
A privileged communication is a private statement that must be kept in confidence by the
recipient for the benefit of the communicator. Even if it is relevant to a case, a privileged
communication cannot be used as evidence in court. Privileged communications are
controversial because they exclude relevant facts from the truth-seeking process.
Generally, the laws that guide civil and criminal trials are designed to allow the admission of
relevant evidence. Parties generally have access to all information that will help yield a just
result in the case. Privileged communications are an exception to this rule.

28

S.B. Noronah v. Prem Kumari Khanna, (1980) 1 SCC 52.

Privileged communications exist because society values the privacy or purpose of certain
relationships. The established privileged communications are those between wife and
husband, clergy and communicant, psychotherapist and patient, physician and patient, and
attorney and client.
The Bombay High Court has held that a salaried employee who advises his employer on legal
matters is entitled to the same protection as other advisers like a barrister, attorney or pleader,
under Sections 126 and 129 of the Act. Therefore, any communication made in confidence to
him by his employer seeking his legal advice would be protected under Ss. 126 and 129,
provided that such communication is not made in furtherance of any illegal purpose.
(Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Vijay Metal Works, A.I.R. 1982 Bom
Section 120-Parties to civil suit, and their wives or husbands. Husband or wife of person
undercriminal trial.
In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any party tothe suit,
shall be competent witnesses. In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband
orwife ofsuch person, respectively, shall be a competent witness.
Section 122 - Communications during marriage.
No person who is or has been married, shall be compelled to disclose any communication
made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been married; nor shall he
be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person who made it, or his
representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married persons, or proceedings
in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed against the other.
Section 126. - Professional communications.
No barrister, attorney, pleader or vakil shall at any time bepermitted, unless with his client’
sex press consent, to disclose any communication made to him in thecourse and for the
purpose of his employment as such barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, by or on behalfof his
client, or to state the contents or condition of any document with which he has become
acquainted in the course and for the purpose of his professional employment or to disclose
any advice given by him to his client in the course and for the purpose of such employment:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure ––

(1) any such communication made in furtherance of any 2[illegal] purpose,
(2) any fact observed by any barrister, pleader, attorney or vakil, in the course of his
employment
as such, showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of
hisemployment.It is immaterial whether the attention of such barrister, 3[pleader], attorney
or vakil was or was notdirected to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
IV – EMERGING AREAS IN THE LAW OF EVIDENCE
a. Evidence by Accomplice – Section 133
An accomplice means a person who has taken part in the commission of a crime. When an
offence is committed by more than one person in concert, every one participating in its
commission is an accomplice. Conspirators lay their plot in secret; they execute it ruthlessly
and do not leave much evidence behind. Often, therefore, the police have to select one of
them for the purpose of being converted into a witness. He is pardoned subject to the
condition that he will give evidence against his former partners in the crime. He is then
known as an accomplice, turned witness or an approver. He appears as a witness for the
prosecution against the accused person with whom he acted together in the commission of the
crime. The question is to what extent his evidence or testimony can be relied upon to convict
his former associates. What is the value of evidence of a former criminal turned witness?
Two provisions in the Act touch this problem. Section 133 categorically declares that an
accomplice is a competent witness and the Court may convict on the basis of such evidence
and the conviction will not be illegal simply because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice. The other dealing with the matter is in the illustration (b) to
section 114, which says that the court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit
unless corroborated in material particulars. These provisions should first be reproduced.
Section 133 Accomplice
An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a conviction is
not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
Categories of Accomplices—

In order to be an accomplice, a person must participate in the commission of the same crime.
This participation may be done in various ways. The modes of taking part with a crime are
treated under the head of :(1) Principals in the first and second degree — A principal of the first degree is one who
actually commits the crime. A principal of the second degree is a person who is present and
assists in the perpetration of the crime. These persons are undoubtedly under all the
circumstances accomplice.
(2) Accessories before the facts — An accessory before the fact is one who counsels, incites,
connives at, encourages or procures the commission of the crime. Of these persons, those
who counsel, incite, encourage or procure the commission of the crime are certainly
accomplices.
(3) Accessories after the fact — Every person is an accessory after the fact to a felony, who
knowing that a felony has been committed by another person receives, comforts or assists
him in order to escape from punishment; or rescues him from arrest, or having him in custody
for the felony, intentionally and voluntarily allows him to escape, or opposes his arrest. Three
conditions must unite to render one an accessory after the fact:
(1) the felony must be complete;
(2) the accessory must have the knowledge that the felony has been committed;
(3) the accessory must harbour or assist the principal felon.
b. Definition of Witness, Witness Protection Scheme
All persons are competent to testify, unless the Court considers that, by reason of tender age,
extreme old age, disease, or infirmity, they are incapable of understanding the questions put
to them and of giving rational answers. Even a lunatic is competent to testify, provided he is
not prevented by his lunacy from understanding the questions put to him and giving rational
answers to them.
Husbands and wives are, in all civil and criminal cases, competent witnesses against each
other, subject to the qualification that communications between the spouses made during
marriage are protected from disclosure.

In all civil proceedings, the parties to the suit are competent witnesses. Therefore,
a party to a suit can call as his witness any of the defendants to the suit. And although an
accused person is incompetent to testify in proceedings in which he is an accused, an
accomplice is a competent witness against an accused person.
All persons are competent to testify, unless prevented from.
(a) Understanding the questions, or
(b) Giving rational answers
By reason of(i) Tender years,
(ii) Extreme old age,
(iii) Disease of body or mind, or
WITNESS PROTECTION
It is imperative that we come up with a better justice system, one that provides adequate
safeguards to the witness. There is no law for the protection of witness in India barring few
sections of Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Section 151 and Section 152 protects the witnesses
from being asked indecent, scandalous, offensive questions, and questions which intend to
annoy or insult them. Apart from these sections, there is no provision for the protection of
witnesses in India. This fact was acknowledged by Supreme Court in the case of NHRC v.
State of Gujarat where it said that no law has yet been enacted, not even a scheme has been
framed by the Union of India or by the State Government for giving protection to the
witnesses. It is high time that India introduced a witness protection programme. In fact the
Law Commission recognised the need for the same and came up with a consultation paper on
witness protection on 13, August, 2004 .
There are two broad aspects to the need of witness protection in India.
a) To ensure that the evidence of witnesses is protected from the danger of them turning
hostile.
b) To relieve the physical and mental vulnerability of the witnesses.
Therefore, any law for witness protection must take into account both the points.

c. Examination of Witness, Cross Examination, Leading Questions and
Hostile Witness – Sections 135 to Section 166
This chapter deals with the examination of evidence. Further the chapter also deals with how
the evidence is presented and witnesses lay their testimony in the court as well as the powers
of the judges in such matters.
Section 135 talks about Order of production and examination of witnesses. It reads that the
order in which witness are produced and examined shall be regulated by the law and practice
for the time being relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively, and, in the absence of
any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
The order in which the witnesses are to be presented for examination is to be decided by the
party leading the evidence and the court is very slow in interfering with the order. However,
the court has the discretion to do so as long as it is fairly exercised.
Section 136 says that it is up to the Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.
Section 137 says that examination in-chief is the examination of a witness by the party who
calls him and the examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his crossexamination. The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.
Examination in Chief is the first examination after the witness has been sworn or affirmed. It
is the prerogative of the party by who the witness has been called to examine him in chief so
as to get all the material facts within his knowledge to prove such a party‘s case.
Cross- Examination is a powerful tool to test the veracity of a witness and the accuracy or
completeness of what he has stated. Cross- examination can at times take form of intensive
questioning with the expected answers hinted to in such questions itself.
Further Section 140 says that witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
This is an important basic concept of the law of evidence. We have to know about Leading
questions. Section 141 says that any question suggesting the answer which the person putting
it wishes or expects to receive is called a leading question.
Sections 144 to 146 talk about cross-examination of witnesses, and admissible questions in
cross-examinations.

The chapter also talks about when questions should be asked and which questions are not to
be asked without reasonable ground in Sections 148-153.
d. Refreshing Memory
Section 159 – Refreshing Memory
Section 159 lays down that when a witness is examined in the witness- box, he may be given
opportunity to refresh his memory by referring to any writing or document. To permit a
witness to refresh his memory is another way of rolling him to corroborate his testimony. For
refreshing memory it is always advisable that he looks into records before answering the
question.
The following things can be used to refresh memory:
1. Any writing made by himself at the time of transaction concerning which he is questioned
or soon afterwards that the court considers it likely that transaction was fresh in his memory;
2. Any such writing made by any other person and read by witness within the time aforesaid;
3. Professional treatise, if the witness is an expert.
According to section there are two kinds of recollection of memory, viz.,
(a) Present recollection, and (b) past recollection. Section 159 deals with present recollection
whereas Section 160 refers to past recollection.
In order to avail the opportunity of the section for purpose of refreshing memory it has to be
proved that:
(i) The writing must have been made by the witness himself at the time of transaction or soon
afterwards that the facts were fresh in his memory. A witness can refresh memory regarding
the facts stated by him if the writing was made either at the time of the transaction or shortly
after the transaction.
(ii) If the writing was made by someone else, it must have been read by the witness, he will
be permitted to refer any such writing within proper time enabling him to know it to be
correct. ―A document not produced in court within proper time and in consequence, rejected,
may be referred to, to refresh memory if it comes within the preview of this section.‖

(iii) The expert witnesses are permitted to refresh memory by consulting professional books.
An investigating officer was allowed to refresh his memory by looking at the
contemporaneous records made by him. An objection to check records or entries by him is
not legal and liable to be rejected.
e. Impact of forensic science: Evidentiary value in DNA Test, Narco-Analysis
Forensic science is when science is used in the application or service of law. Sciences used in
forensics include any discipline concerns the collection, preservation and analysis of evidence
such as chemistry (for the identification of explosives), engineering (for examination of
structural design) or biology (for DNA identification or matching).
Analysis of forensic evidence is used in the investigation and prosecution of civil and
criminal proceedings. In many cases it can help in establishing the guilt or innocence of
possible suspects. Forensic evidence is also used to link crimes that are thought to be related
to one another. For example, DNA evidence can link one offender to several different crimes
or crime scenes. This helps law enforcement authorities to narrow the number of possible
suspects and to establish patterns of crimes, which are useful in identifying and prosecuting
suspects.
DNA Test
Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) is an organic substance which is found in every living cell
and gives an individual a personal genetic blue print. It can be extracted from a whole variety
of different materials like,. Blood, saliva, semen, hair, urine, body fluids, bones, body organs
etc. DNA is unique to every person (except for twins), and hence an analysis of DNA helps in
establishing the accused‘s involvement or non-involvement in a crime or criminal
proceeding.DNA tests can also be used to establish parentage of a child, and identify
mutilated dead corpses. They are of immense help in criminal justice administration and in
some civil disputes like succession, inheritance etc.
In the case of Vasu v.Santha and Others,29 and Gautam Kundu v.State of West Bengal30, the
court has laid down certain guidelines regarding DNA tests and their admissibility to prove
parentage.

29
30

1975 KLT 533.
AIR 1993 SC 2295.

(1) That courts in India cannot order blood test as a matter of course;
(2) Wherever applications are made for such prayers in order to have roving inquiry, the
prayer for blood test cannot be entertained.
(3) There must be a strong prima facie case in that the husband must establish non-access in
order to dispel the presumption arising under Section 112 of the Evidence Act.
(4) The court must carefully examine as to what would be the consequence of ordering the
blood test; whether it will have the effect of branding a child as a bastard and the mother as
an unchaste woman.
(5) No one can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis.
Further the court said Blood-grouping test is a useful test to determine the question of
disputed paternity. It can be relied upon by courts as a circumstantial evidence, which
ultimately excludes a certain individual as a father of the child. However, it requires to be
carefully noted no person can be compelled to give sample of blood for analysis against
his/her will and no adverse inference can be drawn against him/her for this refusal.
Narco-Analysis
Narco-Analysis is a used to describe a diagnostic and psychotherapeutic technique that uses
psychotropic drugs, particularly barbiturates, to induce a stupor in which mental elements
with strong associated affects come to the surface, where they can be exploited by the
therapist. The drugs administered during the procedure lowers the subject‘s inhibitions by
interfering with his nervous system at a molecular level. The procedure counts on the fact that
may be the subject will divulge more information and lie less under the influence of these
drugs.
It was first used in 2002, in the Godhra carnage probe. Later, during the Telgi scam, the use
of narcoanalysis came under the scanner, and then it was used in the Arushi murder
investigation. The scientific validity of the test has been questioned by medical professionals,
and the legal validity has also been debated in several international and national cases.

-

Surbhi Aggarwal
(Founder & CEO, School of Legal Education)

Thankyou

